
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01395/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 March 2015                               |On 24 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                            mr abdullatif mohamed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Thomas, instructed by Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born  on  29  December  1983.  He
    entered the United Kingdom unlawfully in  1995,  with  his  mother  and
    three siblings.  Shortly  thereafter  the  appellant's  mother  claimed
    asylum - the appellant  and  his  siblings  being  dependants  on  such
    application.  This application was refused in 1996; however, the family
    were granted exceptional leave to remain until February 1997, which was
    subsequently extended until February 2000. The  appellant  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 12 July 2002.

 2. Between 1999 and 2008 the appellant was convicted of 23  offences.   In
    January 2009 he was convicted of dangerous driving and was sentenced to
    ten months' imprisonment and on  7  April  2009  he  was  convicted  of
    possession of class A and B controlled drugs and sentenced to a further
    three months' imprisonment.

 3. As a consequence of this offending behaviour  the  Secretary  of  State
    decided to make a deportation order against the appellant and  informed
    him of such by way of a decision of 9 June 2009. The appellant appealed
    this decision  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  and,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 21 August 2009,  a  panel,  comprising  of
    Immigration Judge Cooper and Mr P Bompas ("the 2009 Panel"),  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum grounds but allowed it on Article 3 ECHR  grounds.



 4. Of particular  relevance  to  the  instant  appeal  are  the  following
    passages from the 2009 Panel's determination:

        "[8.15]   (164)[1]: "We accept that  as  compared  with  the  early
               1990s clan protection is no longer as effective as it was...
               We think the preponderance of evidence  is  crystallised  in
               the words of Matt Bryden (see Nairobi evidence) as  follows:
               "Clans remain important but are no longer  able  to  provide
               the level of protection or  support  that  they  used  to"".
               These  findings  contribute  to  our  conclusion  that   the
               prospects of the  Appellant  securing  protection  from  the
               Marehan clan are slim.

          [8.16]  (178)[2]: This paragraph makes it clear that an individual
               such as the Appellant returning to  Mogadishu,  without  any
               close connections with powerful actors in  the  city,  would
               face a real risk of persecution or serious harm.

           ...

          [8.21]:  Looking at all the  Appellant's  circumstances,  we  find
               that there is no obvious part of Somalia to which  he  could
               relocate, having no  family  or  other  connections  in  the
               country as a whole.  He is a young man who has  never  lived
               in that country as an adult, who has a  limited  command  of
               the language, and who  will  be  perceived  as  a  potential
               target for robbery or abduction as someone recently returned
               from Europe.  We also find that he is at  risk  of  forcible
               conscription into one of the various militias.  We find that
               on being returned to Mogadishu the  Appellant  would  be  at
               real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3,  and  that  it
               would be unduly harsh to require the Appellant  to  relocate
               to another part of the  country.   We  therefore  allow  his
               appeal on Article 3 grounds."

 5. The appellant was convicted  of  yet  a  further  criminal  offence  at
    Kingston-upon-Thames Crown Court on 20 April 2012; this  time  for  for
    attempted  robbery.   He  was  subsequently  sentenced  to  38  months'
    imprisonment.  The Secretary of State informed  the  appellant  of  his
    liability to deportation on 5 July 2012,  and  the  appellant  made  an
    asylum claim on 28 August 2013.  On 15 July 2014 the Secretary of State
    informed the appellant that Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007
    applies to him and served him with a deportation order, dated  30  June
    2014, on the following day.

 6. In a determination promulgated on 30 December 2014 First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Miles dismissed, on  all  grounds,  the  appeal  brought  by  the
    appellant to the First-tier Tribunal; however, on 19 January 2015 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted the appellant permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal. Thus the matter came before me.

Error of Law - Discussion and Conclusions

 7. The appellant's grounds of challenge to the decision of Judge Miles can
    be summarised thus:

      i)  Judge  Miles  either  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons   for
         departing, or perversely departed, from the decision  of  the  2009
         Panel, when concluding that the appellant; (a) had not  established
         that he would be unable to seek assistance from members of his clan
         upon his return to Mogadishu and/or (b) "will have no difficulty in
         communicating because of his command of a Somali language".

     ii) Judge Miles unlawfully concluded "that it is reasonably likely that
         the appellant would receive financial support in the form of  money
         transfer remittances from the United Kingdom if deported" from  his
         mother, in circumstances where his mother's  only  income  is  from
         receipt of disability benefit.

 8. Before turning to a consideration of the specific  challenges  made  by
    the appellant it is prudent to set out the binding  guidance  given  by
    the Tribunal in the starred determination of  Devaseelan  [2004]  UKIAT
    00282; a decision which has been widely approved of  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

 9. Devaseelan concerned a second appeal made on human rights grounds by an
    asylum seeker whose asylum appeal had previously been  dismissed.   The
    IAT gave guidance as to the weight to be attached to  the  findings  of
    the Adjudicator who had rejected the  asylum  appeal.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that this guidance is of application  in  the  instant  appeal.
    Insofar as it is relevant, the IAT said as follows in paragraphs 39  to
    42 of its decision:

          1) The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
             starting point.  It is the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
             Appellant's status at the  time  it  was  made.  In  principle
             issues such as whether the Appellant was properly represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

          2) Facts happening since the  first  Adjudicator's  determination
             can always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.

          3) Facts happening before the first  Adjudicator's  determination
             but having no relevance to the issues before him can always be
             taken into account by the second Adjudicator.

          4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought  to  the
             attention  of  the  first  Adjudicator,  although  they   were
             relevant to the issues before him, should be  treated  by  the
             second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest  circumspection.   An
             Appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to add  the  available
             facts in an effort to obtain  a  more  favourable  outcome  is
             properly regarded with suspicion from the  point  of  view  of
             credibility ... for this reason, the adduction of  such  facts
             should  not  usually  lead  to  any  reconsideration  of   the
             conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.

          5) Evidence of other facts - for example country guidance  -  may
             not suffer from the  same  concerns  as  to  credibility,  but
             should be treated with caution.

          6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on facts
             that are not materially different from those put to the  first
             Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by what  is  in
             essence the same evidence as available  to  the  Appellant  at
             that time, the second Adjudicator should regard the issues  as
             settled by the first Adjudicator's determination and make  his
             findings in line with that determination rather than  allowing
             the matter to be re-litigated ...

          7) The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4)  and  (6)
             is greatly reduced if there is some very good reason  why  the
             Appellant's failure to adduce  relevant  evidence  before  the
             first Adjudicator should not be as it were held  against  him.
             We think such reasons will be rare."

10. Moving on to a consideration of the first of the appellant's grounds of
    challenge i.e. that Judge Miles erred in  his  conclusions  as  to  the
    ability of the appellant to secure assistance from his clan members  in
    Mogadishu.

11. In his determination, at [10] & [11], Judge Miles accurately summarises
    the findings of the 2009 Panel, including its  conclusions  as  to  the
    prospects of the appellant securing the protection from members of  his
    clan in Mogadishu - such conclusions being set out at [4] above.

12. Having set out both the evidence before him and  the  entirety  of  the
    headnote to the most recent country guidance decision on Somalia -  MOJ
    & Others (Somalia) CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) - Judge  Miles  concluded
    as follows [24]:

         "I must apply that guidance in the light of the  findings  which  I
         have set out above.  I accept that the  appellant  has  no  nuclear
         family to whom he can return in  Mogadishu.   However,  I  am  also
         satisfied he could look to members of the Darod clan for assistance
         if need be.  That is a majority clan and the appellant is  part  of
         one of its sub-clans and the fact that he has no  interest  in  his
         clan identity at the moment does not, in my judgment, mean that  he
         would not be able to seek assistance from that quarter if minded so
         to do."

13. Ms Thomas asserts that the aforementioned  conclusion  is  inconsistent
    with the decision of the 2009 Panel and, in particular,  the  following
    findings therein:

          "[8.11] The Appellant is a member of the Marehan clan by virtue of
         his parentage, but knows nothing of their heritage or customs,  and
         has no connection with any members of the clan in Somalia."

    and

          "[8.15] ...the prospects of the Appellant securing protection from
         the Marehan clan are slim."

14. The background situation that pertained in Mogadishu at the time of the
    2009 Panel made its decision were very different to those in  existence
    when Judge  Miles  considered  the  appellant's  appeal  in  2014.  The
    circumstances  in  Mogadishu  that  the  2009  Panel  were  faced  with
    considering were  comprehensively  set  out  in  the  country  guidance
    decision of AM & AM; the head note to which materially reads at [6(i)]:

         "There is now an internal armed  conflict  within  the  meaning  of
         international humanitarian law and Article  15(c)  of  the  Refugee
         Qualification Directive throughout central  and  southern  Somalia,
         not just in and around Mogadishu.  The armed conflict taking  place
         in Mogadishu currently amount to indiscriminate violence at such  a
         level of severity as to place the great majority of the  population
         at risk of a consistent pattern of indiscriminate violence.  On the
         present evidence Mogadishu is no longer safe as a place to live  in
         for the great majority of returnees whose home area is Mogadishu."

15. The 2009 Panel's  conclusions  at  [8.15]  of  its  determination  flow
    directly from its citation of the relevant passages of the decision  in
    AM & AM, such passages identifying that whilst clan membership remained
    important, clans were no longer able to provide the level of protection
    and support that had previously been the case.  It followed,  concluded
    the 2009 Panel, that the prospects  of  the  appellant  being  able  to
    obtain  protection  from  his  fellow  majority   clan   members   from
    indiscriminate violence in Mogadishu were slim.

16. By the time Judge Miles considered the appellant's appeal in 2014 there
    had been a significant change in the circumstances in  Mogadishu  -  as
    identified in the country guidance decision of  MOJ;  the  headnote  to
    which states at [vii] to [viii] :

         "A person returning to Mogadishu after a  period  of  absence  will
         look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,  for
         assistance in re-establishing himself and  securing  a  livelihood.
         Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan  members
         who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
         forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may  have
         little to offer.

         The significance of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a  protection
         function than previously.  There are no clan militias in Mogadishu,
         no clan violence and no clan-based discriminatory  treatment,  even
         for minority clan members."

17. It was in this context that Judge Miles concluded  that  the  appellant
    could look to members of his majority clan for assistance, if required.
     It cannot be said, in my view, that Judge Miles was  not  entitled  to
    find as he did, given the  extent  of  the  change  in  the  background
    circumstances in Mogadishu between 2009 and 2014. The finding that  the
    appellant would be able to seek assistance in Mogadishu from members of
    the majority clan  he  belongs  to  is  entirely  consistent  with  the
    conclusions set out in MOJ - both as set out in the Tribunal's  general
    guidance and in its application of that guidance to the  cases  of  the
    individual appellants[3].

18. Turning to the second of the appellant's grounds, i.e. that Judge Miles
    erred in concluding that the appellant  would  have  no  difficulty  in
    communicating in Mogadishu: this has at its  foundation  the  following
    paragraphs from 2009 Panel's decision:

        "[8.9]:  He is a 25 year old Somali male in good  health.   He  has
        spent more than half his life in the United Kingdom, having arrived
        here at the age of 11.  Despite his claim  to  speak  'very  little
        Somali' we are satisfied that he does speak that language, it being
        the main  means  of  communication  between  him  and  his  mother.
        However, we accept that his command of a language is likely  to  be
        considerably less than a person who has spent his life in  Somalia,
        particularly as his education has been in English.

        ...

        [8.21]:  Looking at all the appellant's circumstances, we find that
        there is no obvious part of Somalia to  which  he  could  relocate,
        having no family or other connections in the country  as  a  whole.
        He is a young man who has never lived in that country as an  adult,
        who has limited command of the language, and who will be  perceived
        as a potential target..."

19. In her submissions Ms  Thomas  focused  on  the  latter  of  these  two
    paragraphs, but it is important  that  one  considers  the  finding  at
    [8.21] in its proper context. Paragraphs  8.9  and  8.21  of  the  2009
    Panel's determination must be read together in order to garner  a  full
    understanding of both  the  2009  Panel's  reasoning  process  and  its
    conclusions. When identifying in [8.21] of its determination  that  the
    appellant had a "limited command of  the  [English]  language",  it  is
    clear that the 2009 Panel were simply using that  phrase  as  shorthand
    for its more detailed conclusion on this very issue set out earlier  in
    its determination at [8.9].

20. It was Ms Thomas' case that the finding in paragraph 29 of Judge Miles'
    determination i.e. that "he [the appellant] will have no difficulty  in
    communicating because of  his  command  of  the  Somali  language."  is
    inconsistent with the conclusions of the 2009 Panel and was, therefore,
    a finding that breached the Devaseelan principles.   I  do  not  accept
    that this is so.

21. In paragraph 19 of his determination Judge Miles stated as follows:

         "In terms of his language skills, he [the appellant] claimed at his
         previous appeal that he spoke very little Somali but  the  Tribunal
         was satisfied that he did speak the language,  it  being  the  main
         means of communication between him and his mother.  However, it was
         accepted that  his  command  of  the  language  was  likely  to  be
         considerably less than a person who had spent his life in  Somalia,
         particularly as his education has been in English (paragraph  8.9).
         In this appeal the appellant again asserted that he does not  speak
         Somali anymore and, indeed, that he had forgotten that language and
         Arabic.  In my judgment that was contradicted to some extent by the
         submissions of his Counsel who referred to him  as  a  person  with
         limited command of the language.  In answer to questions from me he
         stated that he continued to speak Somali until he was aged 15 or 16
         years, i.e. some four years  after  his  entry.   In  his  previous
         appeal  the  panel  noted  that  Somali  was  the  main  means   of
         communication between him and his mother.  Although his mother  did
         not give evidence in this appeal she submitted a letter/document in
         English language on his behalf and reference to her as  a  possible
         witness was made in the reply filed on the appellant's  behalf  for
         the case management review.  That  document  was  received  by  the
         tribunal administration  on  14  August  2014  and  refers  to  the
         appellant's  mother  as  a  witness  who  would  require  a  Somali
         interpreter.  I find that the appellant can  speak  Somali  to  the
         point where  he  can  communicate  effectively  with  other  Somali
         speakers because that is the language he uses with his mother.   In
         my judgment a person does not forget completely a language which he
         spoke exclusively for the first sixteen years of his life,  and  he
         was found to be a Somali speaker by  the  previous  Tribunal  which
         noted that that was  the  main  means  of  communication  with  his
         mother.  When  she  was  identified  as  a  potential  witness  his
         representative stated unequivocally that she would  need  a  Somali
         interpreter, and in her letter  of  support  she  stated  that  she
         speaks to the appellant every day by telephone.  In my judgment  he
         would not be at a disadvantage through inability to communicate  in
         Somalia if deported.  He is also fluent in, and has a high level of
         understanding of English."

22. I find that Judge Miles had well in mind, and used as a starting point,
    the findings made by the 2009 Panel as to the appellant's abilities  in
    the Somali language. Although 2009 Panel accepted that as a consequence
    of the time the appellant had spent in the United  Kingdom  his  Somali
    language abilities would be considerably less than those of someone who
    had lived their entire lives in Somalia, it did not conclude  that  the
    appellant could not communicate effectively with other Somali  speakers
    - indeed it found that  it  was  the  main  language  of  communication
    between him and his mother.

23. Judge Miles took full account of this finding and thereafter considered
    the up-to-date position insofar as the evidence allowed him to  do  so.
    Judge Miles gave clear and cogent reasons for rejecting the appellant's
    assertions  that  he  no  longer  speaks  Somali  and  I  can  find  no
    contradiction between his conclusions on this issue and the conclusions
    of the 2009 Panel. Neither do I accept that Judge Miles failed to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence in this  regard
    or that such conclusion is perverse.

24. Turning finally then  to  the  third  of  the  grounds  raised  by  the
    appellant.  The issue to be determined centres on paragraph 21 of Judge
    Miles' determination, which reads:

         "In terms of his clan, the appellant states that he has no interest
         in clan affiliation in Somalia, but that does not  alter  the  fact
         that he is from the Marehan, a sub clan of the Darod,  which  is  a
         major clan.  That was accepted on his behalf at his previous appeal
         and the appellant has never sought to move away from that position.
          I accept that he has  no  immediate  or  extended  family  members
         living in Somalia.  In terms of the prospect of  financial  support
         if deported the appellant stated that his mother was in receipt  of
         benefits because of the serious back condition which I am  prepared
         to accept.  However, he also stated that one of his brothers is  in
         employment, but when asked if that brother  could  support  him  he
         stated that he could not be dependent on him  because  he  was  the
         older brother and should be the head and leader of the family.   He
         'doubted' if his brother would support him.  In  my  judgment  that
         response clearly did not state that his brother would  not  support
         him and his brother made no witness statement and therefore has not
         provided any evidence that he would not provide financial  support.
         Furthermore, and despite the fact that his mother is in receipt  of
         benefits it is not uncommon for persons in receipt of that type  of
         income to provide financial support for other close  relatives  who
         need it.  In those circumstances I find on this evidence that it is
         reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  would  receive  financial
         support in the form of money transfer remittances from  the  United
         Kingdom if deported."

25. In the written grounds Ms Thomas asserts that  the  approach  taken  by
    Judge Miles is inconsistent with the legal principle established in  MN
    (Pakistan) [2002] UKIAT 0139, that; "when benefits are paid to a person
    in respect of a disability, it is simply improper to conclude,  without
    more, that that person would be maintained adequately if he or she made
    the benefits available to someone else."

26. I accept as a matter of legal principle, although not  necessarily  one
    which can be derived from the decision in MN (Pakistan), that it is not
    reasonable to expect or require an individual whose income  is  derived
    solely from public funds in the United  Kingdom  to  provide  financial
    assistance to a person such as the appellant - who is to be deported.

27. However, in my conclusion Judge Miles was not,  in  his  determination,
    considering  whether  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  or  require  the
    appellant's mother to provide financial assistance to the appellant  if
    he were to be deported, but rather whether she would  in  fact  provide
    such support if he were to be deported.

28. It cannot be sensibly be argued that if,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
    appellant's mother were to send monies to the  appellant  in  Mogadishu
    (whether it was reasonable to expect her to do so or not)  the  receipt
    of such monies by the appellant would be an irrelevant consideration in
    the assessment of whether his deportation would lead  to  a  breach  of
    Article 3 ECHR.  The question of whether  the  appellant's  deportation
    would breach Article 3 must be considered on the basis  of  the  actual
    circumstances that he would be faced with in Mogadishu. In  particular,
    the assessment of whether the appellant would be destitute  and  forced
    to live in a camp upon return to Mogadishu  must  be  informed  by  the
    appellant's actual financial circumstances there.

29. As I read paragraph 21 of the Judge Miles' determination, the judge was
    saying no more than that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that  his
    mother would not provide him with financial assistance if he were to be
    removed to Mogadishu.  That, in my conclusion, is  a  finding  of  fact
    that Judge Miles was entitled reach on the available evidence.

30. If I am wrong about this and  Judge  Miles  treated  the  appellant  as
    though he would have access to monies from his mother - not because his
    mother would, as a matter of fact, send such monies to him, but  rather
    because it is reasonable to expect her to do so, I find that such error
    is not capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

31. Irrespective of the  possibility  of  remittances  being  made  by  the
    appellant's mother, Judge Miles also found,  as  he  was  entitled  to,
    that; (i) the appellant's brother would provide  financial  support  to
    the appellant upon his return to Mogadishu, (ii)  the  appellant  could
    seek assistance from clan members there and (iii)  in  any  event,  the
    appellant's  skills  are  such  that  he  would  obtain  employment  in
    Mogadishu.

32. In particular, Judge Miles found in paragraph 26 of  his  determination
    that:

         "While the appellant  may  well  not  have  access  immediately  to
         financial resources on return I find that the skills  that  he  has
         obtained and used in the United Kingdom, particularly in  the  area
         of  computer  repairs,  would  be  of  significant  advantage   and
         assistance in improving his chances of security  a  livelihood  and
         that there is a reasonable likelihood that he could achieve  either
         employment  or  self-employment  within  a  reasonable  period   of
         arrival.  I am also satisfied that it is  reasonably  likely  there
         would be remittances sent to him from the United  Kingdom  for  the
         reasons which I have given.  I reiterate that I am  satisfied  that
         he can speak Somali  and  would  therefore  have  no  communication
         problems in terms of language on return."

33. This is a significant finding when viewed in the context of the country
    guidance decision of MOJ, the Tribunal  stating  therein  in  its  head
    note:

         "(x) Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away.

         (xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms."

34. For all of these reasons  I  reject  Ms  Thomas'  submissions  made  in
    relation to the third of the appellant's grounds.

35. When the First-tier Tribunal's determination is considered as a  whole,
    I find that it discloses  clear  and  cogent  reasons  as  to  why  the
    appellant would not face a real risk of being the subject of  treatment
    contrary to Article  3  ECHR  if  removed  to  Mogadishu,  despite  the
    conclusions of the 2009 Panel to the contrary which  Judge  Miles  paid
    proper regard to. The conclusions reached by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were in my view entirely open to it on the available evidence.





Notice of Decision

For all of the reasons given above, I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
determination should remain standing and this appeal is dismissed.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 12 March 2015


-----------------------
[1] This being reference to paragraph 164 of the country guidance decision
of AM & AM (armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091
[2] This being reference to paragraph 178 of the decision of AM & AM
[3] See, for example, at [476] to [481] in  which  the  tribunal  considered
the application of its guidance to appellant SMM, who had left Somalia  when
he was aged 12,  had lived in the United Kingdom for 17 years  and  who  had
no connections to Somalia.

