
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01334/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR DANIEL WILLIAMS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Fripp, Counsel instructed by TM Legal Services


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Nigeria born on 24  December  1970.   He
    appealed the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 3 July 2014,  to
    deport him  by  virtue  of  Regulation  19  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 with reference to the criteria found at Regulation 21.
     The respondent had been convicted, in the Inner London Crown Court  of
    four counts of possession/control of an article for the  use  in  fraud
    and sentenced to fourteen months' imprisonment on 3 December 2013.

2.   The respondent's  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nightingale.  The Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal
    the judge's decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge J  M  Holmes  on  the
    following grounds:

         "2.  The Applicant is not an EEA  national,  and  so  his  disputed
             claim to have acquired a permanent right  of  residence  under
             the EEA Regulations was the  preliminary  issue.   His  1.7.14
             application for the issue of a permanent  residence  card  had
             been refused by the Respondent on  9.1.15.   That  application
             had depended upon the Appellant's marriage to a French citizen
             on 15.9.08,  which  had  ended  in  divorce  on  4.6.14.   The
             application was refused because the  Respondent  decided  that
             the Appellant could not show residence in the UK with the  EEA
             national in accordance with the Regulations for  a  continuous
             period of five years; requirements 15(1)(b),  and,  could  not
             show residence in the UK in accordance  with  the  Regulations
             for a continuous period of five years  at  the  end  of  which
             period he was a family member who had retained  the  right  of
             residence; requirements 15(1)(f).

         3.   As to the first  ground,  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge's
             approach to the credibility of the Appellant's disputed  claim
             that he met the requirements of Reg.15  was  flawed,  or  even
             irrational.  The Judge  appears  to  have  accepted  that  the
             Appellant lied to the Family Court about  the  length  of  his
             cohabitation with the EEA national sponsor [19, 47].   On  his
             current partner's evidence, he had been cohabiting  with  her,
             and not his EEA spouse, for at least the last four years [19].
              Thus the Appellant's account  of  a  subsisting  marriage  in
             which he cohabited with his EEA spouse, and that did not begin
             to break down until 2013 could not also have been  true  [39].
             Arguably  Reg.15(1)(b)  could  not  be  satisfied   in   those
             circumstances.  The Judge also appears to have  accepted  that
             the Appellant could not produce independent evidence  to  show
             that the EEA national had been a 'qualified  person'  for  the
             whole of the period  relied  upon,  so  arguably  Reg.15(1)(f)
             could not be satisfied either.  In these circumstances it  was
             arguably perverse to accept  the  Appellant's  bald  assertion
             that the EEA national sponsor had been  a  'qualified  person'
             for the whole of the requisite period.

         4.   As to the second ground, it is difficult to see how the  Judge
             could accept and  place  the  weight  that  he  did  upon  the
             Appellant's expressions of remorse given the finding that  the
             Appellant had lied to the Family Court,  and,  the  sentencing
             judge's comment that the Appellant had  not  co-operated  with
             the police and the length of time  over  which  his  offending
             behaviour had taken place, and its  sophistication.   Arguably
             there  were  inadequate  reasons  offered  to   justify   that
             approach.  Moreover the Judge's approach to the seriousness of
             the offending behaviour was arguably at odds with that of  the
             sentencing judge, and it is arguable that it was not  open  to
             the Judge to go behind the basis on which  the  Appellant  had
             been sentenced, since it was  the  sentencing  judge  who  had
             access to all of the prosecution material, and the  Judge  did
             not."

3.   The facts in this case are that the respondent married an EEA  national
    on 15 September 2008.  The judge held that at that time he  became  the
    family member of an EEA national.  The judge held  that  any  right  of
    residence would run from the time that he became the family member of a
    qualified person and not, in fact from the time he applied for, or  was
    issued with the residence documentation.  The judge found that  it  was
    not in issue that the respondent was issued with an EEA residence  card
    n 11 December 2009.  She had regard to the decree absolute which is the
    legal end of the marriage and this was on  4  June  2014  and  not,  as
    stated in the Secretary of State's letter, 9 January  2013.   Therefore
    the marriage existed from 15 September 2008 up until  4  June  2014,  a
    period of five years and nine months.

4.   The judge noted that the respondent went to  prison  in  December  2013
    and may not rely on any such period as residence for  the  purposes  of
    the EEA Regulations.  The five years would have been  completed  by  15
    September 2013 and it is that period she had to have regard to.

5.   The judge noted from the Secretary of State's letter  dated  9  January
    2015, that the Secretary of State accepted that the respondent's former
    wife was employed at MacDonald's from September 2008 until  July  2009.
    The judge was fully satisfied that at the time the couple married,  the
    EEA national was exercising  treaty  rights.  The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted from  2008  until  2009  the  EEA  national  had  income  from
    employment and self-employment and that during 2009  to  2010  she  had
    PAYE income.  It also appears to be accepted that during 2010/2011  the
    EEA national spouse had  an  income  from  both  employment  and  self-
    employment.  The Secretary of State accepted that  the  sponsor  was  a
    qualified person during the tax years 2008 up to 2011,  therefore  from
    the respondent's marriage in September 2008 up until the end of the tax
    year ending April 2011.  The Secretary of State accepted that  the  EEA
    national was a qualified person.  This was a period of around 2� years.

6.    The  respondent  produced  a  number  of  documents  which  were   not
    challenged in the course  of  cross-examination  by  Mr  Williams,  who
    represented the Secretary of State, the records for  the  EEA  national
    run up to the tax year from April 2011 to April 2013.  The judge  noted
    however that they did not run on until September 2013 which would  have
    amounted to five years in the course  of  their  marriage.   There  was
    therefore a gap of five months  in  the  documentary  evidence  on  the
    exercise of treaty rights.

7.   Dealing with the five month gap, the judge said there  was  nothing  in
    the Regulations or the Directive which indicated that only  documentary
    evidence was capable of establishing permanent residence.   Whilst  she
    had borne in mind that the respondent had  convictions  for  fraud  and
    consequently was a person who was not adverse to the use of  deception,
    she found no reason to suspect that his  former  wife  would  not  have
    continued in her business after April 2013 when she had, quite clearly,
    been in both employment and self-employment  for  four  or  five  years
    prior to their date.

8.   The judge noted that it was the respondent's  case  that  his  marriage
    began to break down by 2013 and, indeed, that his wife was staying with
    him less and less and only "coming and going".  His  description  of  a
    dysfunctional  situation  which,  it  appears  that  he  was   in   two
    relationships at the same time was a credible reason for  the  marriage
    breakdown.  He was also facing criminal prosecution and  was  sentenced
    to prison at the end of the year.  Despite  the  respondent's  somewhat
    vague manner of answering questions, the judge was prepared  to  accept
    that he retained some contact with his former wife until very recently,
    and that he was aware that she was  continuing  with  her  longstanding
    business as a self-employed hairdresser.

9.   The judge noted that there had never been any allegation that this  was
    a marriage of convenience.  Indeed the Secretary of  State  issued  the
    respondent with a residence card.  That was never  revoked,  and  there
    has been no allegation that this was improperly issued to him.  He was,
    therefore, the family member of an EEA national up until  the  date  of
    his divorce.  The marriage lasted for five years and nine  months,  and
    she was satisfied that the HMRC records, and other evidence,  that  the
    couple lived in the United Kingdom for the whole of that marriage.  She
    was therefore satisfied that the  EEA  national's  exercise  of  treaty
    rights had been evidenced by way of documents  for  a  period  of  four
    years and seven months.  Taking all this evidence  before  her  in  the
    round, reminding herself that the burden was  on  the  respondent,  the
    standard was the balance of probabilities,  the  judge  found  it  more
    likely than not that in the period between  April  2013  and  September
    2013 the EEA national continued to be a  qualified  person  by  way  of
    employment or self-employment in the United Kingdom.

10.  From the evidence the judge concluded that the respondent had  achieved
    permanent residence in September 2013.  Consequently, she did not go on
    to consider whether or not a right of residence was retained.

11.  The judge was satisfied that the respondent attracted the higher  level
    of protection from removal under Regulation 21(3).  While she  did  not
    wish to play down the seriousness of the offending here, the judge held
    that this was not an offence involving  drugs,  violence  or  firearms,
    neither was it a sexual offence.

12.  The respondent accepted that he had been convicted of  four  counts  of
    use of false instruments.  He was  sentenced  to  fourteen  months  and
    three further sentences of nine months to run concurrently.  His laptop
    was  confiscated.   She  noted  from  Regulation  21  that  a  criminal
    conviction may not of itself justify a decision under Regulation 19.

13.  The judge considered the judge's sentencing remarks  that  the  offence
    was a skilled and planned fraud which the respondent was ready to bring
    into action.  The sentencing judge found it of note that the respondent
    refused to co-operate with the authorities to identify  others  engaged
    in this fraud.   The  respondent's  involvement  was  not  regarded  as
    peripheral, but of the highest level of  culpability.   The  respondent
    had a responsible job working in the NHS as a  care  assistant  at  the
    time and so it was unclear to the sentencing judge as  it  was  to  the
    First-tier Judge why the respondent, a man of hitherto  good  character
    and in a  responsible  job  would  involve  himself  in  this  type  of
    activity.  She held that his criminal conduct  appeared  to  have  been
    motivated by greed rather than need.

14.  Notwithstanding the sentencing judge's remarks, the judge bore in  mind
    the case of Vassallo which held that the applicant must pose a  present
    threat on serious grounds of public policy or public security,  and  it
    is not permissible to deport an EEA claimant on the basis  of  criminal
    offending in order to deter others from becoming involved.   She  noted
    that the Upper Tribunal  held  in  cases  such  as  this  that  an  EEA
    national, or their family member, facing deportation must  represent  a
    present threat by reason of a propensity to re-offend.

15.  The judge considered the National Offender Management  Service  Report.
    The  offender  management  professionals  regarded  the  respondent  as
    presenting a low risk of re-offending and a low risk of  serious  harm.
    He has not been convicted of any further offences since December  2013,
    and has now been released from prison for two years.

16.  The judge also noted that the respondent had become involved in  taking
    qualifications whilst in prison and there was a glowing report from the
    "Bad Boys Bakery" about his enthusiasm and involvement doing  his  time
    in prison.  He appears to  have  taken  such  opportunities  that  were
    offered to him by way of training and education.  The  respondent  said
    in his statement that he was remorseful for his conduct, and the  judge
    found that this reflected in the fact that he had not  offended  before
    and has not offended since the offences in question.

17.  The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the  respondent's  particular
    circumstances.  He is still a reasonably young man and appears to be in
    generally good health.  He has a partner in the  UK,  but  she  too  is
    fighting deportation.  The couple have  a  child  born  here,  but  his
    partner has also an older child from a  previous  relationship.   While
    the respondent appears to have been given  parental  responsibility  by
    the family court for the child AH, the judge  had  concerns  about  the
    claim that the respondent had been living with AH and his  partner  for
    four years.  She  said  he  clearly  has  not.   Nevertheless  she  was
    satisfied on the balance of probabilities that he  is  now  established
    with his partner and her two children.  He is the father of the younger
    of these two children and that the elder child is  a  British  citizen.
    While she was unpersuaded by his account to have cared for AH for  many
    years, she was persuaded that he has some role in  her  life  presently
    and that this is likely  to  have  been  since  the  breakdown  of  his
    marriage.

18.  The judge found that there was no evidence to  support  the  contention
    that the respondent  represents  a  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

19.  The judge held that Mr Williams did not seek to persuade  her  that  if
    she  found  that  five  years'  residence  under  Regulation   15   was
    established, then the respondent's conduct would amount  to  a  serious
    ground of public policy or public security.   She  found  this  was  an
    entirely correct  analysis.   She  found  little  in  the  reasons  for
    decision letter which went to the applicable criteria,  Regulation  21,
    for the expulsion of a person with permanent residence.   She  did  not
    find that the criteria  in  paragraph  21  applied  so  as  to  justify
    exclusion here under Regulation  19.   She  therefore  found  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law.

20.  I note that the grant of permission raised other issues which  had  not
    been challenged by  the  appellant.   The  appellant  raised  only  two
    grounds.  The first was  that  the  judge  made  a  material  error  in
    accepting, despite the five month gap, that  the  respondent  had  been
    living in accordance with the Regulations for a period over five  years
    and therefore should be considered under the serious grounds test.  The
    grounds argued that the judge simply accepted the respondent's evidence
    that his ex-partner may have been exercising treaty rights.   This  was
    wholly incorrect because  the  respondent  had  been  convicted  of  an
    offence for fraud and therefore could not be called a credible witness.
     It was further argued that the respondent was not entirely truthful in
    the evidence he gave to the family court and the sentencing  judge  had
    found that he had not been living  with  AH  for  four  years,  despite
    claiming he had done so.  It was therefore unclear why the judge  found
    the respondent's  oral  evidence  compelling  enough  to  outweigh  the
    concerns raised by the appellant, especially since the judge noted that
    he was a vague witness.  Even if it could be said that  the  respondent
    was a credible witness,  the  evidence  taken  about  the  ex-partner's
    employment should be treated with caution.  It was the respondent's own
    evidence that towards the end of  the  relationship  they  were  barely
    talking and not living together, therefore  the  respondent  cannot  be
    entirely sure if  his  ex-partner  was  definitely  in  employment  and
    exercising treaty rights.  The  judge  should  have  taken  a  holistic
    approach and considered everything in the round rather than taking  his
    oral evidence at its highest.

21.   The  second  ground  was  that  the  judge  sought  to  minimise   the
    respondent's offending behaviour by stating that the  offence  did  not
    involve violence, drugs or firearms nor was it a  sexual  offence.   It
    was submitted that this was incorrect because fraud is not a victimless
    crime and the judge noted that the respondent was heavily  involved  in
    the offence.

22.  Mr Whitwell whilst relying on the second ground did not  pursue  it  to
    any great extent because he noted that Mr Williams, the HOPO below, did
    not push this argument forcefully.  He relied principally on the  first
    ground.

23.  I was persuaded by Mr Fripp's argument that the  appellant's  challenge
    was a disagreement with the conclusion reached by the  judge  that  the
    EEA national spouse had worked  for  five  years  from  April  2008  to
    September 2013.

24.  The judge's dealt with this issue at paragraph 39:

         "39. I have considered whether the  lack  of  documentary  evidence
             covering what is,  in  effect,  a  five  month  period  should
             prevent  the  achieving  of  permanent  residence.   There  is
             nothing in the regulations or the  directive  which  indicates
             that only documentary  evidence  is  capable  of  establishing
             permanent residence.  Whilst I have borne  in  mind  that  the
             appellant has convictions for fraud and,  consequently,  is  a
             person who is not adverse to the use of deception, I  find  no
             reason  to  suspect  that  his  former  wife  would  not  have
             continued in her business after April 2013 when she had, quite
             clearly, been in both employment  and  self-employment  for  a
             full five years prior to that date.   It  is  the  appellant's
             case that his marriage had begun to break down  by  2013  and,
             indeed, that his wife was staying with him less and  less  and
             only 'coming' and 'going'.  His description of a dysfunctional
             situation  in  which,  it  appears,  that  he   was   in   two
             relationships at the same time is a credible  reason  for  the
             marriage breakdown.  He was also facing  criminal  prosecution
             and was sentenced to prison at the end of the  year.   Despite
             the appellant's somewhat vague manner of answering  questions,
             I am prepared to accept that he retained some contact with his
             former wife until very recently, and that he  was  aware  that
             she was continuing with her long standing business as a  self-
             employed hairdresser."

25.  It can be seen from this paragraph that the judge did not  solely  rely
    on the respondent's oral evidence. In reaching her decision, the  judge
    considered that the respondent had convictions  for  fraud  and  was  a
    person who was not adverse to using deception.  Nevertheless  following
    consideration of the evidence that was before her, she found no  reason
    to suspect that his  former  wife  would  not  have  continued  in  her
    business after April 2013 when she had clearly been in both  employment
    and self-employment for a full five years prior to that date.  I  found
    that this conclusion was not perverse. The judge's acceptance that  the
    respondent had retained some contact with his former  wife  until  very
    recently and that he was aware  that  she  was  continuing  with  their
    longstanding business as a  self-employed  hairdresser,  was  also  not
    perverse or irrational following her assessment of the evidence.

26.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose an error of law.

Notice of Decision

27.  The judge's decision allowing the respondent's appeal shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
