
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01374/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 April 2014                              |                             |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|On 30th May 2014             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                robert ochen

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Watterson, Counsel instructed by Graceland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who is a Ugandan national, was born in Uganda on 6  June
    1982.  He arrived in this country on 7 August 1989  and  has  lived  in
    this country ever since.  He has appealed against  the  decision  of  a
    panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge S
    Taylor and Mr D R Bremmer JP, lay  member,  which  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 31 December 2013 had dismissed his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to deport  him.   It  was  said  in  the  panel's
    determination that the decision to make a deportation  order  was  made
    under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, which  is  a  provision
    requiring the Secretary of State to make a deportation order in respect
    of foreign criminals under the "automatic  deportation"  provisions  of
    Section 32 of  that  Act,  although  it  is  clear  in  fact  that  the
    deportation decision had been made pursuant  to  Sections  3(5)(a)  and
    (5)(1) of the  Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The appellant's immigration history was  set  out  at  page  7  of  the
    panel's determination.  In summary,  the  panel  recorded  that  on  17
    January 2000 the appellant, his mother and siblings  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain but that a subsequent  application  made  by
    the appellant on 23 August 2006 for naturalisation was refused  due  to
    his criminality.  It is also recorded that he has had children  by  his
    partner in this country, Ms Gray, who is a UK citizen and  that  on  12
    February 2013 the appellant applied for no time limit to his indefinite
    leave to remain.  On  2  May  2013,  following  consideration  of  this
    application, the appellant was served with a  notice  of  liability  to
    deportation and a questionnaire which was completed on 13 May 2013.

 3. The appellant has been convicted of a total of 31 offences on  nineteen
    different occasions at various courts, his first conviction being on  6
    December 1996 and his most recent conviction being on  28  March  2011.
    These  convictions  include  offences  of  violence,  theft,   robbery,
    burglary, possession of drugs, handling stolen goods, driving offences,
    driving whilst disqualified and possession of a class A  drug  (heroin)
    with intent to supply.  In respect of this latter offence, on  21  June
    2003 at Inner London Crown Court he was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  21
    months'  imprisonment.   There  are  other  serious  offences  recorded
    against him but it is sufficient for the purposes of this determination
    if I record that although the appellant has been convicted of  numerous
    serious offences,  on  no  occasion  has  he  received  a  sentence  of
    imprisonment greater than the 21 months imprisonment to  which  he  was
    sentenced in 2003.

 4. As already noted above the appellant appealed against the  respondent's
    decision to deport him but that appeal was dismissed by the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant appealed against this decision and following a
    hearing before me on 20 February 2014 I found that the panel's decision
    had contained a material error of law for reasons which I  gave  within
    my decision.  I shall not repeat everything which I stated within  this
    decision but essentially I found that the  panel  had  failed  to  give
    proper consideration to the provisions of paragraphs 398  and  399A  of
    the Immigration Rules which now set out a basis upon which, in  certain
    circumstances, the Secretary of State will consider that removal  of  a
    foreign criminal  even  though  conducive  to  the  public  good,  will
    nonetheless be disproportionate for Article 8 purposes.   The  relevant
    paragraphs of the Immigration Rules which I set out at paragraph 15  of
    my earlier decision provide as follows:

         "398.    Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  will  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of at least four years;

             (b)  the deportation of a person from the UK is  conducive  to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of less than four years but at  least  twelve
                  months; or

             (c)  the deportation of a person from the UK is  conducive  to
                  the public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of
                  State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
                  a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                  the law, the Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim
                  will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
                  if  it  does  not,  it  will  only   be   in   exceptional
                  circumstances that the public interest in deportation will
                  be outweighed by other factors...

         399A.This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
             if -

             (a)  the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                  twenty  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration   decision   (discounting   any   period    of
                  imprisonment)  and  he  has  no  ties  (including  social,
                  cultural or family) with the country  to  which  he  would
                  have to go if required to leave the UK..."

 5. As I found in the earlier hearing before me,  although  the  panel  had
    wrongly considered that this appellant  came  within  the  category  of
    persons whose deportation would be conducive to the public  good  under
    paragraph 398(b) because he had been convicted of an offence for  which
    he had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less  than  four
    years but at least twelve months (which, had he  been  subject  to  the
    automatic deportation provisions set out within Section 32  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 could not have been contested) rather than that  of  a
    person whose deportation would be conducive to the  public  good  under
    paragraph 398(c) because in the view of  the  Secretary  of  State  his
    offending had caused serious harm or he is a  persistent  offender  who
    shows particular disregard  for  the  law,  this  distinction  was  not
    material in this case.  I found  that  in  light  of  this  appellant's
    appalling criminal record and also in light of what the panel found was
    his disregard to the truth  (for  reasons  which  it  gave)  it  cannot
    realistically be argued that he is not a persistent offender who  shows
    a particular disregard for the  law.   I  gave  an  example  within  my
    earlier decision of why the panel could not rely on the appellant as  a
    witness of truth which was that one of the more  extraordinary  factors
    in this case was that the appellant had claimed that he could not  move
    in to live with his partner because he had a tenancy in  his  own  name
    and had to look after his two younger brothers who lived at  that  home
    with him but that this claim was as the  panel  noted  "not  consistent
    with his council tax bill from April  2013  in  which  he  claimed  25%
    discount for single occupancy".

 6. Whether or not paragraph 399A(b) or (c) was the relevant provision  was
    immaterial to the decision because it has at all  times  been  accepted
    that even after discounting the various periods of  imprisonment  which
    this appellant had served, by the date of the decision to deport him he
    had been living continuously in this country for at least twenty  years
    immediately preceding  the  date  of  that  decision.   Accordingly  it
    followed that the key issue which ought to be determinative of  whether
    or not paragraph 399A applies (and thus whether or not the  deportation
    of this appellant would be contrary  to  his  rights  under  Article  8
    pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 398)  was  whether  or  not  it
    could be said that  the  appellant  "had  no  ties  (including  social,
    cultural and family) with the country to which he would have to  go  if
    required to leave the UK".

 7. As I noted in my earlier decision the Court of Appeal had made it clear
    in its decision in  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192,  that  when
    considering whether a deportation  decision  should  be  set  aside,  a
    Tribunal is obliged first to consider  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    appellant by reference to paragraph 398, 399 and 399A of the Rules.  As
    I also noted in the decision which I made it was acknowledged on behalf
    of the respondent by Mr Deller and I found that beyond  recording  that
    the appellant had stated in evidence that "he had no family or  friends
    in Uganda" there did not appear to have been any specific consideration
    by the panel of whether or not the appellant could properly be said  to
    have any "ties" within Uganda.  The panel's consideration  appeared  to
    be limited to whether or not he would be  able  to  adapt  to  life  on
    return to Uganda as set out at paragraph 27 of  its  determination,  as
    follows:

         "The appellant failed to explain why he could not return to Uganda,
         he  was  an  able  bodied  adult,  he   spoke   English   and   had
         qualifications, the appellant stated that he had found  work  as  a
         labourer in the UK and he advanced no reason why he could not  find
         similar work in Uganda."

    At paragraph 22 of my decision I stated as follows:

         "The test as to whether or not somebody has 'ties' with  a  country
         is not simply whether that person would be able  to  find  work  in
         that country.  While certainly the fact that  English  is  commonly
         spoken in Uganda cannot be discounted when consideration  is  given
         to whether the appellant has ties (including  social,  cultural  or
         family) the panel was  obliged  to  consider  this  aspect  of  the
         appellant's case properly, which (as Mr Deller accepted  on  behalf
         of the respondent) it did not do.  It follows  that  this  Tribunal
         will now have to carry out this exercise."

 8. I made directions with regard to the resumed hearing which  included  a
    direction that this  hearing  would  be  limited  to  consideration  of
    whether or not this appellant still had ties in Uganda.  I also invited
    the appellant to submit further evidence with regard to this aspect  of
    his appeal  and  if  she  felt  it  appropriate  I  directed  that  the
    respondent should make further investigations as to whether or not  the
    appellant had any relatives still living in Uganda.  I  should  however
    for the  avoidance  of  doubt  make  it  clear  that  by  inviting  the
    respondent to carry  out  such  investigations  if  she  considered  it
    appropriate, I was not suggesting that the primary burden of  proof  to
    establish whether or not an applicant in a case such as this  had  ties
    with their home country fell on the respondent.  My concern was that in
    a case such as this where the only evidence  appeared  to  be  that  an
    applicant did not have such ties and had been in this country for  over
    twenty years  since  a  very  young  age,  the  burden  might  in  such
    circumstances have shifted.



The Hearing

 9. I heard submissions on behalf of both parties which I have recorded  in
    the Record of Proceedings.  Accordingly  I  shall  not  set  out  these
    submissions in full but  shall  set  out  only  those  parts  of  those
    submissions as are necessary for the purposes of this determination.  I
    have however had regard to everything which was said to me  during  the
    course of the hearing as well as to all the documents contained  within
    the file.  I also heard evidence from the appellant and  a  cousin,  Ms
    Vanessa McCain  who  both  relied  upon  witness  statements  which  in
    accordance with the directions I had given following the hearing on  20
    February 2014 had been provided to  the  Tribunal  and  served  on  the
    respondent.  Neither witness was cross-examined but Ms McCain was asked
    some supplementary questions, which again are recorded in the Record of
    Proceedings.



Submissions

10. On behalf of the respondent Mr Deller accepted that in a case  such  as
    this which was a rare case, if the appellant came within the provisions
    of the Rules then his appeal would have to be  allowed.   The  Tribunal
    would only consider the wider aspects of  Article  8  in  circumstances
    where the appellant could not be said to satisfy  the  requirements  of
    the Rules.  This was because the Rules set out the Secretary of State's
    policy and the policy was that in the case of a  person  who  had  been
    here for over twenty years and who had not been sentenced to a term  of
    imprisonment of four years or more, if that person had no ties with his
    or her home country then "that is the end  of  the  game"  because  the
    Secretary of State's policy was that in those circumstances the removal
    of such a person would  be  disproportionate.   I  have  summarised  Mr
    Deller's arguments in a way which I trust has not been unfair  to  him.
    He put his arguments in a rather less truncated fashion.

11. On behalf of the appellant Ms Watterson relied on the decision of  this
    Tribunal in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  00060
    and in particular on the summary of the judgment contained in head note
    4:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties'  in  paragraph
         399A of the Immigration Rules imports a concept involving something
         more than merely  remote  or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of
         proposed  deportation  or  removal.  It  involves  there  being   a
         connection to life in that  country.  Consideration  of  whether  a
         person has 'no ties' to such  a  country  must  involve  a  rounded
         assessment of all of the relevant circumstances and is  not  to  be
         limited to 'social, cultural and family' circumstances."



Discussion

12. I am very grateful to both Mr Deller and Ms Watterson for  the  concise
    but cogent way in which the respective  parties'  cases  were  advanced
    before this Tribunal.  This is an unusual case because as I made  clear
    following the earlier hearing before me, but for the  new  Rules  there
    would have been  little  prospect  of  this  appellant  persuading  any
    Tribunal  that  his  removal  was  disproportionate.   It  is   clearly
    conducive to the public good that somebody with a  criminal  record  as
    appalling as that  of  this  appellant  should  be  removed  from  this
    country.  He has been convicted of so many serious offences over such a
    long period of time that it is barely arguable that his  removal  would
    not benefit potential victims of the crimes  he  is  likely  to  go  on
    committing.   That  is  such  a  weighty  factor  that  under  existing
    Strasbourg jurisprudence it would have been very difficult to  come  to
    any conclusion other than  that  this  factor  was  so  weighty  as  to
    outweigh any  compassionate  factors  militating  against  deportation.
    However as Mr Deller quite  rightly  accepted  we  are  now  no  longer
    governed merely by the existing Strasbourg  jurisprudence  because  the
    Secretary of State has seen fit to incorporate  within  the  new  Rules
    provisions as to the circumstances in  which  she  will  consider  that
    removal is disproportionate notwithstanding that it would be  conducive
    to the public good.  As Mr Deller accepted and as is  also  clear  from
    the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  if  a  foreign
    criminal (which this appellant  is)  comes  within  the  provisions  of
    paragraphs 398, 399  and  399A(a)  of  the  Rules  then  he  cannot  be
    deported.  In this case this appellant has been present in this country
    for over twenty years, even excluding periods spent  in  prison,  since
    the age of 7 and he has not been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
    at least four years so that his deportation  could  only  be  justified
    under paragraph 398(b) or (c) of the Rules (as I have already indicated
    in this case the deportation can  only  be  justified  under  paragraph
    398(c) because the sentence of imprisonment which he received  of  more
    than twelve months was imposed before the 2007 Act came into effect).

13. Accordingly, by virtue of paragraph 399A(a) of the Rules the removal of
    this appellant will be considered by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  be
    disproportionate if it can properly  be  said  that  "he  has  no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family) with the  country  to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK".  It was for this  reason
    that this hearing was convened for the specific purpose of  considering
    whether or not the appellant could be said to have no such ties.

14. I consider first (although in the circumstances of this case  this  may
    be academic) who has the burden of  establishing  whether  or  not  the
    appellant has "no ties", bearing in mind of course that great care  has
    to be taken in any  event  when  considering  how  a  negative  can  be
    established.  In my judgment, and as accepted by Ms Watterson on behalf
    of the appellant, because we would be dealing in  this  case  with  the
    Secretary of State's policy as set out in the Rules the  burden  is  on
    the appellant to establish that he has no ties to Uganda.  The standard
    of proof is the balance of probabilities.

15. As I have already  noted,  my  suggestion  that  the  respondent  might
    consider making enquires as to whether or not  the  appellant  had  any
    family members in Uganda was not made on the basis  that  she  had  the
    primary responsibility of establishing that  there  were  no  ties  but
    rather because these enquiries might allow her to rebut evidence  which
    would be given to the effect that the appellant had no such ties.   The
    only evidence I heard with regard to whether or not the  appellant  has
    any ties in Uganda was from the appellant himself and  his  cousin,  Ms
    McCain.  Clearly the appellant's evidence would have to  be  considered
    in light of the First-tier Tribunal's panel's findings that he was  not
    a witness of truth and also in light of his criminal record which would
    cause the Tribunal to have doubt that anything he says  can  be  relied
    upon.  The Tribunal also takes note of the obvious  fact  that  it  was
    very much in this appellant's interest to tell the Tribunal that he had
    no ties in Uganda.  However, Ms McCain's evidence is not subject to any
    such qualification.  She is a lady who has no convictions and works for
    a firm of solicitors and I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of
    anything she says.  She does not have a very  close  relationship  with
    her cousin and certainly does not approve  of  his  criminality  and  I
    accept that her sole purpose in coming to this  Tribunal  has  been  to
    give a truthful account, as she understands it, of  whatever  ties  she
    and her cousin have with Uganda.  The evidence from these witnesses  is
    all one way and is that neither of them have any ties in Uganda at all.
     They had not visited that country since coming here more  than  twenty
    years ago.  They have no family remaining in Uganda and  they  have  no
    cultural ties to that country either.  In my judgment, bearing in  mind
    the observations of this Tribunal in Ogundimu there is simply no  basis
    upon which  this  Tribunal  can  properly  find  other  than  that  the
    appellant has no ties with the country to which he would  be  returned.
    To make it entirely clear I consider that the appellant  has  satisfied
    the burden of proof which is on him to establish that he  has  no  ties
    with Uganda.  I would  however  add  the  following  observations  with
    regard to this aspect of this case.

16. In the first place this is an appellant who came to this  country  when
    he was only 7 years old and has remained here for  over  twenty  years.
    This is very different from cases where applicants have been  here  for
    shorter periods or had left their countries of origin  when  they  were
    older and it should  not  be  assumed  that  in  every  case  where  an
    applicant has been in this country a long  time  it  would  necessarily
    follow that he or  she  would  have  lost  their  ties  to  their  home
    countries.

17. The next observation I would make is  that  because  of  the  automatic
    deportation provisions which were brought in following the  passage  of
    the UK Borders Act, it is unlikely that  the  sort  of  situation  with
    which this Tribunal has been confronted today will re-occur very often.
     Had the automatic deportation provisions been in force  in  2003  when
    this appellant received his  sentence  of  imprisonment  of  more  than
    twelve months, at that time he would not have been able to  claim  that
    he should be entitled to stay because of the provisions set out  within
    paragraph 399A of the Rules   because  he  would  not  then  have  been
    present in this country for over twenty years.  Be that as it  may,  by
    reason of the finding which I have made that the appellant has  in  the
    words of paragraph 399A(a) "lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
    twenty years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
    (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties  (including
    social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would have  to
    go if required to leave the UK", as  the  deportation  is  pursuant  to
    paragraph 398(c) it follows that  his  deportation  would  be  unlawful
    because the Secretary of State's policy as set out within the Rules  is
    that  in  these  circumstances  deportation  would  be  deemed  to   be
    disproportionate.

18. As those representing the respondent frequently remind  this  Tribunal,
    where Parliament has expressed its will that the  Rules  should  apply,
    they should and this appeal must accordingly be allowed.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed  under  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
Immigration Rules.



Fee Award

As this appeal has been allowed the appellant  is  allowed  the  appropriate
fee.



Signed:                                 Date: 27 May 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
