
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 March 2015                     |On 1 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                           markland kareem newell
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih, Counsel instructed by Rodman Pearce
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 7 July 1995.   The  brief
    details of his immigration history are that he is said to have  arrived
    in the UK on 8 December 2001 with the person  who  claimed  to  be  his
    mother, but who was not.  Ultimately, discretionary leave  was  granted
    to the appellant on 29 February 2012 until 28 February 2015.

 2. What brought the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal was an appeal
    against the respondent's decision to make a deportation  order  against
    him under the automatic deportation provisions of the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  That decision was in response to his having been convicted on 16
    September 2013 of an offence of possession of a firearm with intent  to
    endanger life.  That description of the offence comes from  the  'Trial
    Record Sheet' at K3 of the respondent's bundle.   The  decision  letter
    describes the offence as possession of a firearm with intent  to  cause
    fear of violence.  For present purposes the precise description of  the
    offence is not material.  Suffice it to say that the appellant received
    a sentence of four and a half years' imprisonment.

 3. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    T R P Hollingworth and Mrs  S  E  Singer,  a  non-legal  member  on  20
    November 2014.  They dismissed the appeal.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

 4. As originally formulated, there were three grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, although two of them are described as  ground  2.   The
    first of the grounds was abandoned at the hearing before me and nothing
    more need be said about it.  The second ground relates to  the  Panel's
    refusal to adjourn the hearing and the third  ground  is  expressed  as
    "Wrong assessment of proportionality".

 5. Although not raised in  the  grounds,  the  judge  granting  permission
    identified an additional arguable error of law in terms of the  Panel's
    failure to take into consideration Sections 117A-C of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  That  was  a  matter
    that was part of the amended grounds.

 6. A further amendment to the grounds was sought before me in relation  to
    certain factual matters which featured  in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I  granted  permission  for  the  grounds  to  be
    amended.

 7. At the hearing Ms Masih adopted the original and amended  grounds,  and
    relied on her skeleton argument.  The submissions of the parties can be
    summarised as follows.  Ms Masih  submitted  that  the  Panel  had  not
    applied the correct test when refusing  to  adjourn  the  hearing,  the
    application for an adjournment having been made to allow a  witness  to
    attend and give evidence.  The Panel was wrong to state at [12] of  the
    determination that  there  was  no  likelihood  that  the  position  in
    relation to the witness would be any  different  next  time  given  her
    indication that she was willing to attend and give evidence.   Although
    the Panel did state at [42] that her evidence was  accepted,  that  was
    not a matter that is reflected in their  findings.   Her  evidence  was
    potentially relevant to the risk of re-offending.

 8. So far as the failure to take into account Sections 117A-C of the  2002
    Act is concerned, one of the  matters  which  was  in  the  appellant's
    favour was that he could speak English, a matter that is not  reflected
    in the determination.  Similarly, there are a number of  matters  which
    were relevant to the question of whether there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances" over and  above  the  Exceptions  within  Section  117C.
    These include the matters set out in the original  grounds,  and  which
    include  factors  such  as  what  is  said  to   be   the   appellant's
    vulnerability, that he did not live with or was not cared  for  by  his
    sister in Jamaica prior to his arrival in the UK in 2001, that  he  has
    no family ties to Jamaica, his mother's health and the length  of  time
    he has been in the UK.  The OASys Report and  the  Pre-Sentence  Report
    ("PSR") refer to his lacking assertiveness and having low self  esteem.
    There is evidence that he had engaged with the  youth  offending  team,
    for example, and  those  matters  are  not  reflected  in  the  Panel's
    determination.  Reference was also  made  to  the  decision  in  Maslov
    [2008] ECHR 546.

 9.  Similarly,  the  Panel  placed  undue  emphasis  on  the   appellant's
    immigration history.

10. There had been a factual error in the determination  in  terms  of  the
    conclusion that the appellant had still been using  cannabis  in  2014,
    whereas it is clear from the OASys Report at  paragraph  8.9  that  his
    drug use related to a period prior to his being  remanded  in  custody.
    In addition, it was not open to the Panel to conclude that  because  of
    the adjudications during the appellant's detention, the assessment of a
    medium risk of re-offending may be susceptible to variation.

11. Mr Mills submitted that in relation to the  complaint  in  the  grounds
    about the refusal to adjourn,  the  chronology  of  events  was  highly
    relevant.  There had been a previous adjournment which was in  part  in
    relation to that witness.  Although the chronology was not decisive, it
    was significant.  Despite the upcoming hearing  the  witness  booked  a
    trip to the USA.  In any event, there is nothing to indicate  that  the
    evidence from the witness  could  have  affected  the  outcome  of  the
    hearing.  Even if she does have qualifications as an expert, there were
    expert assessments before the First-tier Tribunal in the  form  of  the
    PSR and  the  OASys  Report.   Her  evidence  could  not  have  made  a
    difference to the assessment of the risk of re-offending.

12. In any event, even if there was no evidence  as  to  the  risk  of  re-
    offending, the seriousness of the offence was such that the Panel would
    have come to the same view.

13. It is true that the Panel did not refer  to  the  factors  set  out  in
    ss.117A-D but at [74] of the determination there is  reference  to  the
    appropriate test or an expression so close to the relevant test as  not
    to be significantly different.  The Panel there said that  to  override
    the  public  interest  element  requiring  removal,  "very   compelling
    domestic and family circumstances indeed would be required."  Any error
    of law therefore, in relation to ss.117A-C is not material.

14.  So  far  as  the  decision  in  Maslov  is  concerned   the   relevant
    considerations are in any event contained within ss.117A-C,  as  argued
    in the 'rule 24' response.  It is to be remembered that s117B(4) states
    that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life  that  is
    established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.

15. In addition, the offence which resulted  in  the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order took place when the appellant was an adult so  Maslov
    has no application.

16. In relation to the ground alleging a factual  error  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's cannabis use, that error could not  possibly  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome even if it could be said that in late 2013 he
    was still using cannabis but not in 2014.

17. In reply Ms Masih pointed out that the index offence was committed  not
    long after the appellant had just turned 18.

    My assessment

18. In terms of the grounds that  were  pursued,  I  deal  first  with  the
    question of the adjournment.  In advance of the hearing that took place
    on 20 November 2014 an application had been  made  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors for an adjournment in part on the basis that it was proposed
    to call a witness, Gwen Madden.  The application was renewed before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Madden had written a letter which is at page 9
    of the appellant's bundle.  Although it has a typed name at the bottom,
    it was not signed and was undated, matters referred to  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The letter, so far as material, stated that the  author
    was a youth worker and community development worker, a Youth Pastor  at
    the Mansfield Christian Fellowship.  She refers to having  had  contact
    with the appellant over recent  months  since  his  detention  and  she
    states  that  during  the  course  of  visits  she  has   developed   a
    professionally based relationship with him.  She describes him as young
    and ambitious and displaying characteristics of a reformed person.   In
    essence, she refers to his having expressed regret  for  his  offences.
    The letter states that he  has  a  job  with  his  mother  when  he  is
    released.  She concludes that experience within  the  criminal  justice
    system has proven to be beneficial to him and that:

         "Deporting him away from family  and  support  after  he  has  been
         punished and reformed would not fulfil the purpose of  the  justice
         system.  We have the opportunity to see were (sic) the penal system
         can be truly successful by restoring a reformed character back into
         the community he once held no respect for.   I  believe  that  [the
         appellant's] influence would be far more beneficial in the  UK  and
         with training and support [the appellant] has the opening of  being
         a model citizen."

19. In dealing with the application for an adjournment at  [10]  the  Panel
    stated that it had indicated to Counsel that  they  did  not  find  the
    letter "impressive".  It was pointed  out  that  it  did  not  bear  an
    official letterhead, was not signed and was not  dated.   Nevertheless,
    the  Panel  adjourned  for  a  short  time  to  allow  the  appellant's
    representative to make further enquires.  As recorded at [11] the Panel
    was then told that Ms Madden was not in fact involved in a professional
    capacity with the appellant but that she attended the same Church.  The
    Panel was informed that she was a qualified "development worker".   The
    Panel also noted however, that there was no indication of the number of
    visits that had taken place by Ms Madden to the appellant.   There  was
    no explanation as to why no witness statement had been taken from  her.
    The Panel was told that it was Counsel's  belief  that  the  solicitors
    only became aware of her non-availability within the previous two  days
    and that she had gone to America for a reason no one knew.   A  further
    short adjournment was allowed for instructions to  be  taken  from  the
    appellant.

20. At [12] the Panel stated that it had considered the decision in Nwaigwe
    (adjournment-fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and had  considered  the
    representations made by both parties.  It  was  stated  that  the  only
    basis of the application for an adjournment was that there "may or  may
    not be a witness statement from the  witness  Ms  Madden".   There  the
    Panel stated that it was prepared to proceed on the basis that whatever
    evidence came from her would be supportive.  However, in  view  of  the
    "unsatisfactory circumstances" regarding  the  witness,  the  ambiguity
    with regard to any qualifications and her absence without warning, that
    led to the application being refused.  The Panel added that  there  was
    no likelihood of the position being any different next time.

21. I am not satisfied that there is  any  error  of  law  in  the  Panel's
    refusal of the adjournment.  Although it is  true  that  there  was  no
    reference to the applicable Procedure Rules, incidentally a matter  not
    specifically raised on behalf of the appellant in the  grounds,  it  is
    clear that the Panel did consider  the  question  of  fairness  to  the
    appellant and whether refusing the adjournment would have any impact on
    the fairness  of  the  proceedings.   As  Mr  Mills  pointed  out,  the
    chronology is relevant.  It is apparent that there had previously  been
    an application for an adjournment of a hearing on 25 September 2014, in
    part because of the stated intention of calling Ms Madden as a witness.
     That application had been granted and the hearing was then  fixed  for
    20 November 2014.  The application for an  adjournment  was  originally
    made on paper two days before the hearing and renewed  at  the  hearing
    itself.  Even though the potential for the witness to give evidence was
    identified at the time of the earlier application for an adjournment in
    September 2014, there was no witness  statement  from  her  beyond  the
    unsigned and undated letter to which I have referred.

22. Furthermore, there was no explanation as to why Ms Madden had  arranged
    to visit the USA when there was a hearing in the case in which she  was
    expected potentially to give evidence.  Although there was evidence  in
    the form of the itinerary and purchase of air tickets, those  documents
    indicate that tickets were booked on 21 October 2014.   Notice  of  the
    hearing was sent on 30 September 2014.  Therefore, at the time  of  the
    trip being arranged, it was known that the appellant's hearing had been
    fixed.

23. In any event, as I pointed out to Ms Masih at the hearing, at  [42]  of
    the  determination  the  Panel  stated  that  it  had  considered  with
    particular care the observations of Ms Madden which is in her letter in
    the bundle.  The Panel went on to state  that  although  they  regarded
    whatever she said as "supportive" it could not render the  decision  to
    remove the appellant disproportionate.

24. Thus, in my judgement the Panel was entitled to take into  account  the
    absence of a witness statement, the fact that the letter from Ms Madden
    did not set out any particular expertise beyond identifying herself  as
    a youth worker and community development worker, the  fact  that  there
    was no witness statement from her and no explanation as to why  it  was
    apparently  at  such  short  notice  that  she  was  unavailable.   The
    overriding objective in Rule 2 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  includes  a
    requirement to deal with cases expeditiously.

25. Furthermore, I do not accept that what  is  contained  in  Ms  madden's
    letter could realistically have made any difference to  the  assessment
    of the risk of re-offending as set out in the  OASys  Report  and  Pre-
    Sentence Report, that risk of re-offending being  expressed  as  medium
    and the risk of serious harm being expressed as high.  In addition,  as
    was submitted by Mr Mills, the risk of re-offending is but  one  factor
    to be taken into account, to which I would add  that  in  the  case  of
    serious offending it is by no means the most important factor.

26. I am however, satisfied that the Panel erred in law in failing to  make
    express reference to and identify the matters set out in  ss.117A-D  of
    the 2002 Act.  Those provisions of the 2002 Act came into force  on  28
    July 2014 and were directly applicable to the appeal before the  First-
    tier  Tribunal.   They  are  expressly  relevant  to  public   interest
    considerations so far as Article 8 cases are concerned.   Although  not
    advanced in argument, the parallel provisions of the Immigration  Rules
    introduced at the same time were also applicable.

27. However, I am not satisfied that the  Panel's  error  of  law  in  this
    regard is material.  It seems to me that the only matters of a  general
    nature that could be said  potentially  to  apply  in  the  appellant's
    favour are the general  public  interest  considerations  expressed  in
    s.117B, namely the appellant's ability to speak English and, or  so  it
    was  advanced  before  me,  the  fact  that  he  would  be  financially
    independent.  That is predicated on the basis that he would be able  to
    obtain employment with his mother.

28. It cannot be overlooked that the appellant would have to establish that
    there  were  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2" for it to  be  said  that  the  public
    interest in deportation does not apply in his case.

29. Whilst I note the matters relied on on behalf of the appellant, as  set
    out in the skeleton argument at paragraph 10, such  as  his  compliance
    and engagement with the youth offending team, his  apparent  motivation
    to address his offending behaviour, attendance at college and obtaining
    of qualifications and what is said to be his vulnerability,  the  Panel
    did in fact  make  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's  circumstances.
    Included within  that  is  his  mother's  health  which  was  expressly
    referred to.  Significantly, although the Panel did  not  set  out  the
    provisions of ss.117A-C of the  2002  Act  it  did  state  at  [74]  as
    follows:

         "To override the public interest element  requiring  removal,  very
         compelling  domestic  and  family  circumstances  indeed  would  be
         required.  Having carefully evaluated the Appellant's  position  we
         do not accept these exist."

30. In my  judgement,  in  that  paragraph  the  Panel  did  refer  to  the
    appropriate test that needed to be  applied  albeit  not  in  identical
    words to those of the statute or the Immigration Rules, but as near  as
    makes no significant difference.  Insofar as it could be said that  the
    Panel did not expressly refer to each and every one of the matters  set
    out in the grounds or skeleton argument or advanced on  behalf  of  the
    appellant at the hearing before them, it was not required to do so.  It
    is evident from the determination that there was  a  full  and  careful
    evaluation of all the  relevant  factors  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

31. In any event, that is all aside from the fact that  the  appellant  was
    not evidently able to establish that he  comes  within  either  of  the
    Exceptions within s.117C.  He had not been lawfully resident in the  UK
    for most of his life.  Although the Panel found that  he  was  socially
    and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, it could not  be  said
    on the evidence that there would be very significant obstacles  to  his
    integrating  in  Jamaica.   At  [59]  the  Panel  stated  that  it  had
    contemplated the appellant's potential return to Jamaica  and  accepted
    that there would be practical difficulties for him on return.  However,
    it was pointed out that he was young, in good health and adaptable  and
    that the skills that  he  had  obtained  in  the  UK  would  help.   In
    addition, at [56] it was pointed out that the appellant has a sister in
    Jamaica, albeit that the evidence from the appellant and his mother was
    that they were pessimistic about any co-operation or support that could
    be obtained from her.  Again however, at [57] it  was  noted  that  the
    appellant had obtained various qualifications and it was concluded that
    he had transferable skills that would help him on return.

32. The Panel did take into account the appellant's age at the time of  the
    offence, at [28].  It was  also  noted  that  he  had  convictions  for
    violence prior to that offence.  At [35] it was expressly  stated  that
    consideration was given to the length of time he had been  in  the  UK,
    again referred to at [41].  I do not accept that the decision in Maslov
    has any application to the circumstances of this appeal given that  the
    offence which triggered the decision to make a  deportation  order  was
    committed when the appellant was an adult, albeit not  long  after  his
    18th birthday.  The offence was committed in August 2013, about a month
    after his 18th birthday.  In any event, even if it could be  said  that
    Maslov was relevant, the "very serious reasons" were  apparent  in  the
    decision to deport him, given the seriousness of the offence.

33. Although it is said in the original grounds  that  "undue  weight"  was
    given to the appellant's immigration history, I am not  satisfied  that
    there is any error of law in the Panel's assessment of this issue.   It
    is not apparent from the determination that his immigration history was
    a matter that  the  Panel  concluded  was  the  responsibility  of  the
    appellant.  At [51] it was noted that the decision letter  acknowledged
    that responsibility for regularising the appellant's stay lay with  his
    mother.  It was in any event surely relevant for the Panel to take into
    account the fact that for a number of years in the UK his stay has been
    unlawful.  That is a matter that is expressly referred  to  in  Section
    117B in terms of an individual's private life.  It  was  not  a  matter
    that was overemphasised by the Panel and was  not  a  matter  that  the
    Panel considered reflected adversely on the appellant himself in  terms
    of any personal responsibility.

34. Although it does appear that the  Panel  made  a  mistake  of  fact  in
    concluding that it seemed that the appellant was still  using  cannabis
    in 2014, as set out at [49] of the  determination,  even  without  that
    error of fact, the outcome could not have been any different.  The fact
    is that the OASys Report did indicate that the appellant  was  misusing
    cannabis at a serious level up to the date of his  detention  in  2013.
    It was only after he was detained that he said  that  he  ceased  using
    cannabis.  The error by the Panel in this respect is not such as  could
    be characterised as an error of law, although it is a mistake of  fact.
    Still less could it be said that if it is an error of law,  it  is  one
    that is material to the outcome.

35. As regards the complaint made about [69] of the determination in  terms
    of the adjudications referred to by the appellant which accrued  during
    his detention, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law by the
    Panel in this respect either.   The  Panel  stated  that  there  is  no
    indication that the  adjudications  spoken  of  by  the  appellant  are
    recorded in the OASys Report.  It then concluded that the evaluation of
    re-offending currently  at  a  medium  level  "may  be  susceptible  to
    variation" as a result.  In other words,  the  Panel  stated  that  the
    medium risk of re-offending, implicitly, could arguably be  re-assessed
    as perhaps being higher  than  medium.   However,  the  Panel  did  not
    express its view that the risk of re-offending had  in  fact  risen  to
    higher than a medium risk.  It was at the level of medium risk  of  re-
    offending that the Panel made its assessment of the proportionality  of
    deportation.

36. In summary, I am not satisfied that there is any material error of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal therefore stands.

    Decision

37. There is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and its decision to dismiss the appeal therefore stands.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  29/04/15

