

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01977/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Royal Courts of Justice    |                  Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                                |
|On : 23 November 2015                 |                  On: 8 December 2015      |
|                                      |                                           |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (SSHD)
against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  SM's  appeal
against a decision to deport him from the United Kingdom. For  the  purposes
of this  decision,  we  shall  refer  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
respondent and SM as the appellant, reflecting their positions as they  were
in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background to the Appellant's Case

The appellant is a national of  Zimbabwe,  born  on  24  December  1984.  He
entered the United Kingdom on 11 April 2000 as a visitor, together with  his
aunt and sister, at the age of 15  years.  His  mother,  brother  and  other
sister were already living in the United Kingdom. His mother and the  sister
with whom he came to the United Kingdom returned to Zimbabwe in 2002 and  he
went to live with his other sister and her husband and  son,  before  moving
in with his partner CS, a British  citizen,  in  2003,  having  commenced  a
relationship with her in 2002.  After  being  arrested  for  an  offence  in
January 2003 he claimed asylum but was  refused  on  non-compliance  grounds
and was unsuccessful on appeal.

The appellant and CS had a son TM, born on  12  August  2003.  In  2006  the
appellant and CS separated for a  period  of  time,  during  which  CS  fell
pregnant by another man and had a son, MS, born on 4  November  2006.  Prior
to the birth of her son, she and the appellant got  back  together  and  the
appellant brought up her son as his own, with no further  contact  from  the
biological father. The relationship between the appellant and  CS  ended  in
2008 and the appellant moved out and returned for some  time  to  live  with
his sister. He  retained  some  contact  with  his  children,  although  the
evidence is not entirely clear on the level of contact.

On 5 November 2008 the appellant was convicted of  battery  and  received  a
community order with a supervision requirement of 18  months.  He  was  also
convicted of destroying or damaging property and  failing  to  surrender  to
custody and  received  a  community  order  with  an  18  month  supervision
requirement. On 6 October  2009  the  sentences  were  varied  to  14  days'
imprisonment, with 7 days served. The appellant was  also  convicted,  on  5
November     2008,      of      using      disorderly      behaviour      or
threatening/abusive/insulting words and was fined �50. On 17  June  2009  he
was convicted of breach of a community order and the  order  was  continued.
He was given a 14 day prison sentence and  served  7  days  for  failing  to
surrender to custody. On 10 November 2009 he was convicted of  possessing  a
knife blade/ sharp pointed article in a public place and imprisoned  for  20
weeks. The Home Office decided not to pursue deportation action against  him
at that time.

In 2010 the appellant met another woman, AK, and moved in with her  and  her
two daughters. Their relationship deteriorated after  his  nephew  moved  in
with them and he became aware that AK was having  a  relationship  with  his
nephew. On evening, on 5 April 2012, after consuming a quantity of  alcohol,
the appellant returned home and argued with AK, kicking her and  threatening
her with a heated iron and  kettle,  brandishing  a  large  knife,  verbally
abusing her and throwing eggs at her. He was arrested the following  morning
and charged with  false  imprisonment,  threats  to  kill  and  assault.  He
pleaded not guilty, but on the day of the trial changed his plea  to  guilty
for the offence of affray and was convicted on 7 August 2012 of  affray  and
sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment, with a  restraining  order  preventing
him from contacting AK or her children (judge's sentencing remarks at  Annex
L and trial record sheet at Annex N of the respondent's bundle).

As a  result  of  that  conviction,  the  respondent  commenced  deportation
proceedings against  the  appellant  and  a  deportation  order  was  issued
against him on 14 February 2013 pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
Act 2007. The appellant appealed against the deportation  decision  and  the
appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 8 April 2013. His appeal  was
allowed, with the consent of the respondent, on Article  8  grounds  with  a
view to his having limited leave to remain pending ongoing care  proceedings
concerning  the  two  children,  which  had  been  commenced  by  the  local
authority while the appellant was in prison and to which  he  had  become  a
party. The proceedings had been commenced as a result of concerns about  the
presence of drugs in the home and anti-social behaviour, and concerns  about
the children's mother CS's ability to care for them  and  the  children  had
been taken into care and then gone to live with their grandmother  JS,  CS's
mother in April 2013.

Following the appellant's  successful  appeal,  the  deportation  order  was
revoked  in  May  2013  and  the  respondent  indicated  that  a  period  of
discretionary leave would be granted although that in fact did  not  happen.
A Care Order was made in the family court on 3 October  2013  in  which  the
children were made subject to  a  Special  Guardianship  Order  to  JS.  The
appellant was permitted contact with the children at least  twelve  times  a
year, with the  expectation  that  that  would  move  to  overnight  staying
contact as and when considered appropriate. Once the care  proceedings  were
concluded deportation action was again pursued  by  the  respondent.  A  new
deportation order was signed on 6 October 2014 and the same day  a  decision
was made that section  32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  applied.  The
appellant appealed against that decision.

The appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 8  December  2014  before
First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs and was allowed on Article  8  grounds.  The
appellant was unrepresented, his representatives  having  withdrawn  shortly
before the appeal hearing. Judge Gibbs heard from the  appellant,  his  aunt
and his children's grandmother  JS.  She  found  that  the  requirements  of
paragraph 399(a)(i) and (ii) of the immigration  rules  had  been  met  with
respect to the two children and that Exception 2  of  section  117C  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied on the  basis  that  it
would be unduly harsh for the children to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
appellant.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted to the respondent  on
9 July 2015 in relation to the judge's  assessment  of  the  "unduly  harsh"
consequences to the children of remaining in the United Kingdom without  the
appellant.

The appeal came before us on 23 November 2015 and, having heard  submissions
from both parties, we concluded that the judge's assessment of  the  "unduly
harsh" consequences was  materially  flawed,  in  that  it  failed  to  take
account of the public interest and did not involve any proper  balancing  of
the relevant interests. Accordingly we  set  aside  Judge  Gibbs'  decision,
albeit preserving  her  findings  of  fact  which  were  in  any  event  not
disputed.

In re-making the decision we heard submissions from Mr Norton and  gave  the
appellant and his mother-in-law, JS, an opportunity to provide  a  response.
Mr Norton relied upon the case of KMO (section 117 -  unduly  harsh)  [2015]
UKUT 543 in submitting that, taking account of the  best  interests  of  the
child, the appellant's criminal offence and the public  interest,  it  would
not be unduly harsh for the appellant's two children to  remain  in  the  UK
without the appellant.  JS,  in  response,  told  us  that  the  appellant's
offending behaviour had been linked to alcohol and to the people  with  whom
he had been associating and that he had stopped drinking altogether and  had
moved to a  different  area  away  from  his  previous  influences.  He  had
completely changed and was committed to the children, whom he saw  at  least
once a fortnight. He was unable to work but she would give  him  some  tasks
around the house, such as gardening. He would not  re-offend.  The  children
had become very challenging and needed their father. He was not a danger  to
the public and should be allowed to stay in the United Kingdom.

Re-making the Decision

The appellant pursues his appeal on  the  basis  that  he  falls  within  an
exception to automatic deportation under section 33 of the  UK  Borders  Act
2007, on the grounds that his deportation would be in breach of his  Article
8 human rights. He  relies  upon  his  relationship  with  his  two  British
children (one biological and one not) and therefore  claims  that  paragraph
399(a) of the immigration rules and section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act  applies
in his case.  For the sake  of  completeness,  we  conclude  that  paragraph
399(b) does not apply to the appellant as he is not in  a  relationship  and
paragraph 399A does not apply as he has not been lawfully  resident  in  the
United Kingdom for most of his life.

With regard to paragraph 399(a), it is not disputed that the  appellant  has
a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  the  two  children  and
that the children are British. There is no suggestion that it would  not  be
unduly harsh for the children to live in Zimbabwe with  the  appellant,  and
we  agree:  first,  the  children  have  a  close  relationship  with  their
grandmother JS who is their  legally  appointed  guardian,  further  to  the
family court proceedings; next, their mother remains in the  United  Kingdom
albeit that there is little evidence of contact with her; and finally  their
ties in terms of schooling and friendships are in the  United  Kingdom.  The
issue in this appeal is whether or not it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
children to remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant, pursuant  to
paragraph 399(a)(b).

When considering the phrase "unduly  harsh"  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  KMO,
found that  "the  word  "unduly"  in  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"  requires
consideration of whether, in the light of the seriousness  of  the  offences
committed by the foreign criminal and  the  public  interest  considerations
that come into play, the impact on the child, children  or  partner  of  the
foreign criminal being  deported  is  inordinately  or  excessively  harsh."
Accordingly the test was considered to be a rounded one, not  only  focussed
upon the impact on the children, but also taking  into  account  the  public
interest and the seriousness of the criminal offending.

The starting point has to be the best interests of the  children,  which  is
clearly informed by the care order made by the family court.  It  cannot  be
disputed that the children's best interests  lie  in  remaining  with  their
grandmother JS who provides them with attention and  stability,  which  they
previously lacked when living with  their  mother.  It  is  clear  from  the
parenting assessment report from the specialist  assessment  team,  prepared
for the family court proceedings, that the children suffered  severe  trauma
and neglect whilst in their mother's care (paragraph 11.0).

It is significant also  that  the  family  court,  despite  the  history  of
domestic violence in the appellant's relationship with CS,  considered  that
the appellant should continue to have  contact  with  his  children,  albeit
limited contact.  Accordingly  we  find  it  also  in  the  children's  best
interests for them to have the continued  contact  with  their  father  that
they do and that, to that extent therefore it would not  be  in  their  best
interests for him to be deported from the United Kingdom. We  have  to  say,
however, that that has to be contingent upon the appellant  maintaining  the
level of contact and the change in character that he has thus far  achieved,
since a withdrawal by the appellant of his affections and interest would  no
doubt have a particularly detrimental effect on the  children,  given  their
past experiences of neglect. It  is  therefore  paramount  to  consider  the
sincerity of the appellant's intentions towards his  children,  particularly
in light of the threat of deportation.

We were very impressed by the evidence given before  us  by  JS  as  to  the
appellant's close relationship with and support for the  children  and  were
impressed by the fact that she continued to support  the  appellant  despite
the abusive nature of the  former  relationship  between  him  and  her  own
daughter. JS spoke of her belief in the  appellant's  change  of  character,
his abstinence from alcohol and his dedication to his children  and  to  the
increased involvement he had in the  lives  of  his  children.  From  weekly
supervised contact with the children  at  a  contact  centre  following  his
release from detention, and then weekend visits to her house once  or  twice
a month following the issuing of the Care Order, he has  now  increased  his
contact to a week at a time once or twice a month,  staying  at  her  house.
JS's evidence was that the boys would be devastated if the appellant had  to
leave the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the  effect  on  the  boys  would  be
"horrendous".  Indeed it was on the basis of JS' evidence, as  well  as  the
parenting assessment report, that the First-tier Tribunal concluded that  it
would be unduly harsh for the children  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
without the appellant.

However that has to be considered against the background of the  appellant's
previous involvement with his children, which the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
not address in any detail and which was said  in  the  parenting  assessment
report to  have  been  inconsistent  and  intermittent  (paragraph  4.6  and
9.5.8). It is relevant to note that, according to that report, the  children
were subject to a child protection plan on three occasions between 2004  and
2012 (paragraph 4.2) which, aside from the most recent  period,  would  have
included at least one period of time  when  the  appellant  lived  with  the
children. At paragraph 9.1 of the report, the author refers  to  neglect  of
the children when in their mother's care but also an  indication  that  that
was happening when the appellant was visiting home.  The  report  refers  to
the appellant's inability to make meaningful changes in the past  (paragraph
11.6) and to a lack of commitment in the past to giving up alcohol,  to  the
extent that CASCADE alcohol treatment services closed  his  file  (paragraph
9.4.5), albeit that he has subsequently been assisted by his pastor and  his
aunt in maintaining his  abstinence  from  alcohol  (paragraph  9.4.6).  The
report refers at paragraph 9.6.4 to the risk of the appellant  being  unable
to put the children's needs first, no matter how much he speaks  of  wanting
to do so. Whilst he  attended  all  the  parenting  sessions  and  undertook
various courses in prison and was considered  in  the  parenting  assessment
report to have been moving forward (paragraph 11.6), the report also  refers
to progress in the past being short-lived despite the guidance  and  support
offered to him (paragraph 11.7). It is also of  relevance  that  the  family
court, having taken account of  the  findings  and  recommendations  in  the
report, was not willing to give the  appellant  care  of  the  children  and
limited his contact at that time to at least 12 times a year  in  accordance
with the local authority's care plan.

Of course our concern, in considering the best interests  of  the  children,
is not the appellant's ability to care for them, but rather  the  effect  on
the children of being  deprived  of  their  father's  involvement  in  their
lives. The parenting assessment report, in its risk assessment at  paragraph
12, refers to the very good relationship the  appellant  had  with  the  two
boys (paragraph 12.1) and the strong bond  between  the  appellant  and  the
boys (paragraph 10.6). That was the position at  the  time  the  report  was
prepared over two years ago and, since that time, as we have  already  said,
JS's evidence is that he has become  very  much  involved  in  their  lives,
spending a great deal of time with them.  The  parenting  assessment  report
referred, at  that  time,  to  a  risk  of  the  appellant  forming  further
unsuitable relationships diverting attention from  his  children  (paragraph
12.2) and there is no evidence before us of such  concerns  having  come  to
fruition. It is also the case, however, that there have  not  been  any  new
relationships, unsuitable or not. Whilst it  is  not  for  us  to  speculate
about risks which the evidence of  JS  would  suggest  will  not  arise,  we
cannot ignore the concerns previously  held  by  independent  professionals.
That is particularly so, given the absence of any  more  recent  independent
evidence.

It remains the case that the only independent evidence we have before us  of
the appellant's relationship with his children is the  reports  from  Health
Farm Children's Services of the parenting sessions in  June  and  July  2013
and the parenting assessment report referred to  above  which  is  dated  29
July 2013. Whilst the parenting assessment report refers  to  the  appellant
undertaking counselling, there is no evidence of that  having  continued  or
the outcome of that counselling. There is no evidence  from  the  children's
schools as to any impact on their progress of their  changed  circumstances.
There are no further social worker's reports. We note that  the  appellant's
previous legal representatives made a  written  request  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, prior to the appeal hearing on 8 December 2014, for  further  time
to produce an independent social worker's report and  provided  evidence  of
having contacted two social workers who had  agreed  to  see  the  appellant
with a view to producing reports. The adjournment request was  refused.  The
representatives  subsequently  ceased  representing  the  appellant  and  no
further social worker's report was  ever  produced,  whether  that  was  for
financial reasons  or  otherwise.  Whatever  the  reason,  we  consider  the
absence of recent independent evidence to be relevant, particularly in  view
of the reservations previously expressed. Accordingly our  conclusion,  that
the best interests of the children  lie  in  the  appellant  being  able  to
continue his current level of involvement  in  their  lives,  is  inevitably
subject to such reservations.

In any event, the best interests of the children are only  a  consideration,
albeit a primary one. We have to take account of  the  public  interest  and
the circumstances and seriousness of  the  appellant's  criminal  offending.
The appellant and JS both stressed that he was not a risk to the public  and
the appellant said that his offending in the past was  only  in  a  domestic
setting. However that is not the only consideration. Deportation of  foreign
criminals is in the public interest and the  appellant  has  to  demonstrate
that he falls within an exception to the requirement of the public  interest
for his deportation. We therefore turn to his criminal offending.

The appellant has a history of criminal offending,  in  particular  in  2008
and 2009, albeit that that offending was not sufficiently  serious  to  lead
to deportation proceedings,  but  nevertheless  demonstrating  a  propensity
towards  violence.  The  parenting  assessment  report  makes  reference  to
ongoing  domestic  violence  in  the  appellant's  relationship   with   the
children's mother and to  the  appellant's  excessive  drinking  leading  to
violent behaviour. The  index  offence  was  a  serious  offence,  involving
threats with a hot iron,  a  kettle  and  a  knife  against  another  former
partner and it is relevant to note that that was witnessed by the  partner's
child who was  woken  up  by  the  noise.   The  sentencing  judge,  in  her
sentencing remarks on 7 August 2012, described it as a "very  ugly  incident
of domestic violence" which required a sentence of  immediate  custody.  She
referred to the fact that it was not until the day of  the  trial  that  the
appellant  accepted  guilt,  having  previously  denied  assault  and  using
threats. The National Offender Manager Service (NOMS) report prepared  after
the appellant's conviction refers to the appellant posing a medium  risk  of
serious harm towards current/ past/ future  partners  and  states  that  the
risk is of violence in a domestic setting.

Other than the assurances of the appellant and JS there  is  no  independent
evidence to show that the risk assessed in the NOMS report has  reduced.  As
with the concerns in relation to the children, aside from a  statement  from
his pastor and the manager of a day  centre  where  the  appellant  used  to
volunteer,  there  is  a  complete  lack  of  recent  evidence,   which   is
particularly unhelpful.

The public interest in deporting foreign criminals is strong and  Mr  Norton
relied on the recent case of The Secretary of State for the Home  Department
v Boyd [2015] EWCA Civ 1190 in that respect. We have to take account of  the
fact that the appellant has never had  any  lawful  basis  of  stay  in  the
United Kingdom. Although he was a child when he came to the  United  Kingdom
and cannot be held responsible for failing to do anything to regularise  his
status before his mother and sister left in 2002, his 18th year, he did  not
seek to follow through his asylum claim,  which  he  subsequently  made  and
which was then refused on non-compliance grounds. As an  adult  he  has  not
sought to regularise his stay and has demonstrated a lack of  responsibility
in that regard. He has never had any leave to remain and, although  a  grant
of discretionary leave  was  mentioned  pending  the  outcome  of  the  care
proceedings, none was ever granted.

It is relevant that the appellant does not live with his children  but  sees
them for limited periods of time.  According  to  the  parenting  assessment
report he  has  never  had  sole  care  of  them  and  at  one  stage,  when
imprisoned, had no face-to-face contact with them for a year.  The  children
are at last in a stable environment,  in  the  care  of  their  grandmother.
Whilst there is evidence  that  the  appellant's  presence  has  a  positive
effect on the children,  with  particularly  supportive  evidence  from  the
children's grandmother JS, there is also evidence of concerns  in  the  past
as to his commitment and a lack of recent independent  evidence  to  assuage
concerns of any remaining risks to the  children  in  the  event  of  future
relationships  with   potential   partners.   Although   modern   means   of
communication are no substitute for physical contact, the children would  be
able to maintain a relationship  with  the  appellant  through  letters  and
Skype upon his return to Zimbabwe and may be able to visit him. There is  no
independent evidence before us to show that the effect of  separation  would
be so adverse as to outweigh the public interests. Should the  appellant  be
able to obtain such evidence in the future, it is  always  open  to  him  to
make a fresh human rights claim and apply for the deportation  order  to  be
revoked.

For all of these reasons,  and  after  very  careful  consideration  of  the
matter, we conclude that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  children  to
remain in the United Kingdom without their father and we consider  that  the
appellant has not been able to show that the exception in  paragraph  399(a)
and section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act applies to him.

For the same reasons as we have set out above, having taken account  of  the
public interest considerations in sections 117B and 117C, we find  there  to
be no very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
paragraphs 399 or 399A, or sections 117C(4) and (5),  such  as  to  outweigh
the public interest in deportation for the purposes of paragraph 398 of  the
rules. We take account of the fact that the appellant  came  to  the  United
Kingdom as a child of 15 years of age and that he  has  lived  here  for  15
years, but we find no reason why he would not be able  to  reintegrate  into
society in Zimbabwe. Whilst his aunt's evidence in  her  statement  for  the
appeal hearing on 8 April  2013  was  that  there  were  no  family  members
remaining in Zimbabwe, we note from the more  independent  evidence  in  the
parenting assessment report of 19 July 2013 that at that time the  appellant
referred to his parents and younger sister as remaining in that country.  We
find that there are therefore remaining family and other  ties  to  Zimbabwe
to enable the appellant to re-establish himself. As already stated,  he  has
never had any lawful basis of stay in the United Kingdom.

Whilst we appreciate that this decision will not be welcomed at all  by  the
appellant or JS, and whilst we have the utmost  admiration  for  JS  in  her
support of the appellant, our task is to apply the law  in  accordance  with
the immigration rules, statute and  jurisprudence  and  we  are  obliged  to
acknowledge and apply the significant weight of the public interest in  such
cases. We accordingly conclude that the appellant's  deportation  would  not
breach his human rights and that he does not fall within the  exceptions  to
automatic deportation and we dismiss his appeal.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  We  re-make  the
decision by dismissing SM's appeal on all grounds.


Anonymity


We continue the anonymity order previously made by the First-tier  Tribunal,
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
