
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01130/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2015                    |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Hubert ROBERT Hall
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.  I shall refer herein to Mr Hall as the claimant.

 2. This is a troubling case, the claimant being a persistent offender whom
    the public interest clearly dictates should be removed to his homeland.
    The inability of the Secretary of State  to  remove  the  claimant  is,
    however, rooted in Article 3 ECHR - a consideration of which  does  not
    incorporate a public interest element, neither does it incorporate  any
    exercise of discretion or balancing exercise. The rights  protected  by
    Article 3 are absolute.

 3. The claimant is a national of Jamaica born in 1958.  He arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 20 May 1991 and was  granted  leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor for a period of six months.   Thereafter  he  remained  in  the
    United  Kingdom  without  leave  until  he  was  granted   six   months
    discretionary leave to remain on 9 May 2011.

 4. Between 1993 and 2003 the claimant was convicted  of  sixteen  criminal
    offences.  Inter alia, in  1996  he  was  sentenced  to  three  months'
    imprisonment for using threatening or abusive behaviour with intent  to
    cause fear or provocation of violence and one month's imprisonment  for
    deception. In 2000 he was sentenced to  four  years'  imprisonment  for
    robbery, and in 2003 to two months' imprisonment for having an  article
    with a blade and 30 months' imprisonment  for  attempted  robbery.  The
    claimant was arrested in 2005 on suspicion  of  illegal  entry  and  in
    connection with an outstanding charge for assault and failure to answer
    bail, and was served at that time with notice of a decision to  make  a
    deportation order against him - against which he brought an  appeal  to
    the Tribunal.  This appeal was dismissed in a determination of 3  April
    2006 and a deportation order was subsequently made  in  the  claimant's
    name on 17 June 2006.

 5. The Secretary of State was thereafter unable to effect deportation,  it
    appears, because of the claimant's medical  conditions.   The  claimant
    subsequently made an application  for  revocation  of  the  deportation
    order, which was rejected.  He appealed this refusal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in a determination of 8 April 2011 a panel of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Immigration Judge A W Khan  and  Mr  Sheward  (non-legal
    member) allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the  claimant's  medical
    condition was such that requiring  him  to  undertake  the  journey  to
    Jamaica would lead to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.

 6. On 31 May 2012 the claimant was convicted at  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court
    after pleading guilty of committing arson with intent to endanger  life
    - having set fire to clothing outside the room of another  resident  at
    the hostel he was residing at. The sentencing judge observed  that  the
    claimant had failed to take his medication on the day he  had  set  the
    fire and that he had, also, taken cannabis and drunk  alcohol  on  that
    date.  The claimant was sentenced to four years imprisonment on 13 July
    2012. This triggered the application of section 32 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 - the claimant falling squarely within  the  definition  of  a
    foreign criminal  therein.  As  a  consequence,  on  5  June  2014  the
    Secretary of State made a decision that section 32(5) of the UK Borders
    Act 2007 applies to the claimant and a further  deportation  order  was
    signed in his name on that same date.

 7. The claimant appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Stanford on 15  May  2015.
    Judge Stanford allowed the appeal both on Article 3  ECHR  grounds  and
    under the Immigration Rules, in a decision promulgated on 11 June 2015.



 8. It is not disputed  that  Judge  Stanford  came  to  the  unimpeachable
    finding that there would be adequate medical services available to  the
    claimant in Jamaica and that the high threshold required to establish a
    breach of Article 3 in Jamaica had not been met.

 9. The appeal was allowed on Article 3 grounds for ostensibly the  reasons
    summarised in paragraphs 32 and 33 of Judge Stanford's decision:

         "32. The conclusion reached by the Tribunal in 2011 that the  risks
             to the appellant would cause  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  in
             breach of the appellant's rights under Article 3 if it were to
             deport him was based on medical opinion provided by  both  the
             appellant and respondent.   There  is  no  suggestion  in  the
             decision letter or the other documents provided on  behalf  of
             the respondent that there has been a  change  to  the  medical
             conditions suffered by the appellant.  The conclusions reached
             by the respondent in the decision letter about the  effect  of
             his conditions on his fitness to fly  are  despite  the  risks
             specifically referred to in the descriptions of the conditions
             and without reliance  on  any  further  medical  opinion  made
             available to me.

         33.  I find, following the  decision  in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
             00702, that the factual issue of the  appellant's  fitness  to
             fly has been determined in the earlier Tribunal  hearing.   It
             has been determined that he is not fit to do so and  there  is
             no  evidence  before  me  that  the  situation  has   changed.
             Requiring him to fly to Jamaica would breach his rights  under
             Article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention  even  though  his
             removal from the United Kingdom  would  otherwise  be  in  the
             public interest."

10. For the same reasons, the appeal was also allowed under the Immigration
    Rules; the breach of Article 3 en  route  to  Jamaica  being  found  to
    amount to very compelling circumstances for the purposes thereof.

11. Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald granted the Secretary of
    State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in  a  decision  of  6
    July 2015.

Error of Law

12. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal can be summarised thus:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal irrationally concluded that there had  been
         no material change in the claimant's medical condition  since  2011
         and/or it failed to give adequate reasons for such conclusion;

     ii) Given that the claimant would not be returned until such time as  a
         member of the  relevant  airline's  medical  department  had  given
         medical approval for  him  to  fly,  the  Tribunal  ought  to  have
         dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  there  could  be   no
         circumstances in which removal would take place that would lead  to
         a breach of the claimant's Article 3 rights.

13. At the hearing Mr  Kandola  sought  to  crystallise  these  grounds  as
    follows: (i) although the findings of the 2011 Panel were to  be  taken
    as the starting point, that did not relieve the claimant of  having  to
    prove his case to the required standard before the  Tribunal  in  2015;
    and (ii) there had been insufficient  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal from the claimant so as to entitle it to  rationally  conclude
    that his removal would breach Article 3 ECHR.

14. Mr Kandola also sought to rely upon  the  following  passage  from  the
    Secretary of  State's  28  page  decision  letter  of  5  June  2014  -
    (accurately summarised by the FtT in paragraph 31 of its decision):

         "Fitness to travel

         93.  While the findings of the previous appeal Tribunal with regard
             to your returnability by air  are  noted,  recent  information
             provided by staff at the immigration removal centre healthcare
             department advised, on 22 November 2013, that you  'should  be
             fit to fly'.

         94.  Section 6 of the International Air Travel  Association  (IATA)
             Medical Manual (6th Edition) provides information  on  medical
             conditions, and fitness to fly, to  enable  airlines  to  make
             decisions on the  suitability  of  accepting  passengers  with
             medical conditions.

             Section 6.1.2. commences:

             'Medical  clearance  is  required  by  the  airline's  medical
             department if the passenger:

             (a)  suffers from any disease which is believed to be actively
                  contagious and communicable;

             (b)  because of the  physical  or  behavioural  condition,  is
                  likely to  be  a  hazard  or  cause  discomfort  to  other
                  passengers;

             (c)  is considered to be a potential hazard to the  safety  or
                  punctuality of the flight  including  the  possibility  of
                  diversion of the flight or an unscheduled landing;

             (d)  is incapable of caring for himself and  requires  special
                  assistance;

             (e)  has a medical condition which may be  adversely  affected
                  by the flight environment.

             Passengers not falling into the above categories  normally  do
             not need medical clearance,  however,  if  in  doubt,  medical
             advice should be obtained."

         95.  While it might be the case that  the  coronary  conditions  or
             chronic obstructive pulmonary disease require assessment by an
             airline medical officer,  there  is  no  indication  from  the
             information listed that  you  would  be  refused  flight.   If
             deemed necessary, oxygen could be  provided  to  you  for  the
             duration of the flight.

         96.  There is no  indication  that  your  diagnosed  mental  health
             conditions make  you  a  hazard  to  other  passengers;  these
             conditions appear to be managed effectively by treatment.

         97.  There is nothing to suggest that, you would be deemed unfit to
             fly as a result of any of the other diagnosed conditions."

15. The claimant suffers from the following medical conditions: depression,
    schizophrenia,  alcoholic  cardiomyopathy,   a   myocarditic   episode,
    pulmonary embolism, paroxysmal  atrial  fibrillation,  dilated  cardiac
    myopathy, diabetes,  asthma,  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease,
    hypertension and obesity.

16. The FtT carefully considered the evidence and information  produced  by
    the Secretary of State, concluding in the following terms:

         "24. The one reference in the Respondent's  bundle  to  a  possible
             change of circumstances is in a letter dated 22 November  2013
             from the 'Operational Manager' of West  Kent  Prisons  to  the
             Home Office summarising the medical conditions suffered by the
             appellant  and  listing  his  sixteen   different   doses   of
             medication  then  being  prescribed.   In   the   letter   the
             Operational Manager refers to a 'physician point of view' that
             following a review, in  the  opinion  of  'our  doctors',  the
             appellant 'should be fit to fly'.   No  medical  report  by  a
             named doctor, supporting this opinion that  circumstances  had
             changed, formed part of the evidence before me.

         25.  The letter incorporating the decision that s.32(5) of  the  UK
             Borders Act applies, dated 5 June 2014, adopted that  reported
             medical opinion, describing it as 'recent information prepared
             by  staff  at  the  immigration  removal   centre   healthcare
             department'.  There was no reference to an identified report.

         26.  The detention review dated 8 May 2015  handed  to  me  at  the
             hearing also refers to removal directions being  cancelled  in
             February 2010 because  the  appellant  was  'deemed  medically
             unfit to fly'.

         27.  There is a note in  the  review  that  there  was  a  'medical
             response' by a Dr Shah at HMP Elmsley in January 2015  stating
             that 'there is no change in  the  health  of  [the  appellant]
             since his last report  was  done  in  September  2014'.   That
             report was not part of the Respondent's bundle.

         28.  It is noted in that review that, following the making  of  the
             current deportation  order  requests  for  an  update  on  the
             appellant's current health were  sent  to  healthcare  at  HMP
             Elmsley in April and May 2015 and a response was received from
             Dr Mukhopadhyay on 22 April 2015.  His response  is  noted  as
             recording that 'Mr Hall suffers  from  the  following  medical
             conditions: Ischemic heart disease, Past history of myocardial
             (sic),  Dilated  cardiomyopathy  with  impaired  LV  function,
             Atrial  fibrillation,   Diabetes,   Bronchial   asthma,   Iron
             deficiency  and  Depression.   He   has   been   referred   to
             cardiologist, general surgeon and  genitourinary  medicine  in
             the past and is waiting to be seen by them'. The full response
             by Dr Mukhopadhyay was not made available to me and there  was
             no further evidence  that  the  consultations  for  which  the
             Appellant was  waiting.   There  is  no  indication  that  the
             question of his fitness to fly was re-assessed."

17. Before turning to a consideration of the specific  challenges  made  by
    the Secretary of State it is first  prudent  to  set  out  the  binding
    guidance provided by the  Tribunal  in  the  starred  determination  of
    Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702;  a  decision  which  has  been  widely
    approved by the Court of Appeal.

18. Devaseelan concerned a second appeal made on human rights grounds by an
    asylum seeker whose asylum appeal had previously been  dismissed.   The
    IAT gave guidance as to the weight to be attached to  the  findings  of
    the Adjudicator who had rejected  the  asylum  appeal.  It  is  not  in
    dispute that this guidance is of application in the instant  appeal  or
    that it applies equally to a scenario in which an  earlier  appeal  was
    allowed.  Insofar as it  is  relevant,  the  IAT  said  as  follows  in
    paragraphs 39 to 42 of its decision:

          1) The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
             starting point.  It is the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
             Appellant's status at the  time  it  was  made.  In  principle
             issues such as whether the Appellant was properly represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

          2) Facts happening since the  first  Adjudicator's  determination
             can always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.

          3) Facts happening before the first  Adjudicator's  determination
             but having no relevance to the issues before him can always be
             taken into account by the second Adjudicator.

          4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought  to  the
             attention  of  the  first  Adjudicator,  although  they   were
             relevant to the issues before him, should be  treated  by  the
             second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest  circumspection.   An
             Appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to add  the  available
             facts in an effort to obtain  a  more  favourable  outcome  is
             properly regarded with suspicion from the  point  of  view  of
             credibility ... for this reason, the adduction of  such  facts
             should  not  usually  lead  to  any  reconsideration  of   the
             conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.

          5) Evidence of other facts - for example country guidance  -  may
             not suffer from the  same  concerns  as  to  credibility,  but
             should be treated with caution.

          6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on facts
             that are not materially different from those put to the  first
             Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by what  is  in
             essence the same evidence as available  to  the  Appellant  at
             that time, the second Adjudicator should regard the issues  as
             settled by the first Adjudicator's determination and make  his
             findings in line with that determination rather than  allowing
             the matter to be re-litigated ...

          7) The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4)  and  (6)
             is greatly reduced if there is some very good reason  why  the
             Appellant's failure to adduce  relevant  evidence  before  the
             first Adjudicator should not be as it were held  against  him.
             We think such reasons will be rare."

19. Turning to the Secretary of State's grounds of challenge. It  is  trite
    that the burden of proof before the FtT rested with the claimant.  That
    burden is not easily discharged in a medical claim (see for example  GS
    (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40). Although Judge Stanford failed  to  direct
    himself in this regard, such a failure will rarely of itself lead to  a
    determination being set aside absent it being clear  from  reading  the
    determination as  a  whole  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    lawfully  apply  the  correct  burden  or  standard  of  proof  to  its
    considerations.

20. The fact that there have been findings made in relation to the  instant
    claimant in an earlier determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
    not lead to a reversal of the burden of proof, or  a  dilution  of  the
    relevant standard of proof to be applied. As made clear in  Deveseelan,
    the findings in the earlier  determination  are  determinative  of  the
    situation at the time the earlier determination was promulgated.

21. Judge Stanford was required to treat the findings of the 2011 Panel  as
    the starting point for his  consideration  of  whether  the  claimant's
    removal would lead to a breach of Article 3 and, with this in mind,  to
    consider the evidence before him and  determine  whether  such  a  risk
    currently  exists.  The  claimant,  for  reasons  which   are   readily
    understandable - given his lack of  legal  representation,  his  mental
    health issues and the fact that he  has  either  been  in  criminal  or
    immigration detention since 2012 - did not produce  up-to-date  medical
    evidence before Judge Stanford. This does not mean, however,  that  the
    claimant could not be successful in demonstrating an  Article  3  risk.
    That was a matter for the First-tier Tribunal to  determine  using  the
    2011 findings as its starting point and considering the  evidence  that
    it did have before it.

22. In this regard, I reject the assertion that Judge  Stanford  failed  to
    pay regard to the assertions and evidence put forward by the  Secretary
    of State. Judge Stanford correctly observed that the Secretary of State
    had not put any medical evidence before the Tribunal despite, it  would
    appear, having access to such.  The Judge  took  full  account  of  the
    anecdotal evidence of an 'Operational Manager' in 2013  that  a  doctor
    had stated that the claimant 'should be fit to  fly',  and   he,  also,
    correctly identified that there  was  no  medical  evidence  from  this
    [unnamed] doctor to support such opinion. The weight to be attached  to
    the assertion made by the Operational Manager  was  a  matter  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal. It could also have been  observed,  but  did  not,
    that not only was there no medical evidence produced in support of  the
    Operational  Manager's  assertion,  but  the  Manager's  letter  of  22
    November 2013  did  not  even  identify  when  the  doctor  purportedly
    provided such opinion.

23. Judge Stanford did not, as claimed, direct himself that the  Respondent
    was required to produce a medical report from a named doctor  in  order
    to establish that the claimant's removal would not lead to a breach  of
    Article 3, but simply observed the state of the evidence before him.

24. Judge Stanford also took full  account  of  the  other  assertions  and
    evidence relied on by the Secretary  of  State  and  there  is  nothing
    irrational in the consideration of such evidence found in paragraphs 26
    to 30 of the determination, or indeed elsewhere therein.

25. In my conclusion, although the judge could have expressed himself  with
    greater clarity in paragraph 33 of his determination, he performed  the
    task that was required of him - i.e. to consider the findings  made  in
    the 2011 determination as the starting point and, with  those  findings
    in mind, to assess the evidence before him to determine whether  as  of
    the date of his determination there was a real risk of the  appellant's
    removal leading to a breach of Article 3. When doing so he did not fail
    to take into account  material  matters,  nor  does  his  determination
    display  an  unlawful  inadequacy  of   reasoning.   Judge   Stanford's
    conclusions are clear, cogent and rational, given the  evidence  before
    him.

26. The Secretary of State's second ground trespasses to an extent  on  the
    first, however, given the way in which the Secretary of State  has  put
    her case before me I will deal with it as a discreet issue.

27. It is said that the fact that the claimant  will  not  be  returned  to
    Jamaica until he is deemed medically fit to fly by a  doctor  employed,
    or engaged, by the airline that it is proposed will fly him there, must
    lead to his appeal being dismissed. I do not accept that this is so.

28. This submission has parallels to the submissions made by the  Secretary
    of State, and rejected by the Court of Appeal, in both  in  JI  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 279 and CL (Vietnam) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 1551.

29. In JI the Special Immigration Appeal Commission ("SIAC") had  concluded
    the Secretary of  State  was  acting  lawfully  in  deciding  that  the
    applicant, who  had  links  with  terrorist  organisations,  should  be
    deported to Ethiopia. The Ethiopian authorities had given assurances to
    the UK Government which SIAC believed in the main  would  ensure  there
    would be  no  risk  of  Article  3  ill  treatment  upon  return.  SIAC
    nevertheless had concerns as to  whether  the  Ethiopian  Human  Rights
    Commission could effectively monitor and report on  any  ill  treatment
    carried out by junior officials in the Ethiopian administration.  There
    was still work to be done to develop a  proper  monitoring  capability.
    SIAC left it to the Secretary of State to determine  whether  and  when
    that had been achieved.

   1. The applicant in JI submitted that this was unlawful: SIAC  could  not
      leave this issue to be resolved by the  Secretary  of  State  at  some
      future date. He claimed that he was entitled  to  a  determination  by
      SIAC itself, at the time of  the  hearing,  whether,  if  returned  to
      Ethiopia, he would be at risk of Article 3 ill treatment or  not.  The
      Court of Appeal agreed, Elias LJ stating at [97]:

         "There are three reasons why it is in principle wrong for the court
         to allow the Secretary of State to determine  any  element  of  the
         asylum claim. First, it involves  an  unlawful  delegation  of  the
         judicial function  allowing  the  Executive  to  determine  matters
         falling within the jurisdiction of the court. Second, it means that
         the case will be determined not on the basis of the evidence before
         the court but on speculation as to what the facts are likely to  be
         at some time in the future. Third, it leaves the asylum  seeker  in
         an unacceptable state of limbo pending the future clarification  of
         his status. He is technically illegally in the country and  yet  he
         is unable to return to his home State until further steps have been
         taken sufficient to guarantee his safety.  If  he  is  entitled  to
         refugee status or protection from removal on human rights  grounds,
         even if only on the basis that he should be given leave  to  remain
         for  limited  duration,  he  ought  to  be  given  that  status  or
         protection from removal at least for the period when his safety  is
         potentially compromised."

30. In my  view  this  reasoning  applies  equally  in  the  instant  case;
    although, of course, on the Secretary of State's case it would  not  be
    for her to determine the core element of the  claimant's  human  rights
    claim in the future, but an unnamed doctor engaged by an airline  whose
    conclusion the Secretary of State  would  accept.  For  this  reason  I
    reject the second limb of the Secretary  of  State's  case  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

31. For the reasons given above  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination does not contain an error of law capable of affecting the
    outcome of the appeal and it is to remain standing. It will  now  be  a
    matter for the Secretary of State as to whether to grant  the  claimant
    leave to remain in the UK and, if so, the length of such leave.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal  is  dismissed.  The  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is to remain standing.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 7 September 2015
