
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01029/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 3 December 2014                           |On 29 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  V A D S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Capel instructed by Adam Khattak, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge N J Osborne and Mrs S Singer)  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision taken on 27 May 2014 to make a  deportation  order  by
    virtue of s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Guinea-Bissau who was born on 19 February
    1976.  On 28 August 2013, the appellant was convicted of  a  number  of
    offences: (1) driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol; (2) using  a
    vehicle whilst uninsured; (3) driving otherwise than in accordance with
    a licence; (4) dangerous driving; (5) committing an act/series of  acts
    with intent to pervert the course of justice; (6) causing or  procuring
    an act of cruelty to a child or young person;  and  (7)  committing  an
    act/series of acts with intent to pervert the course of  justice.   The
    appellant was sentenced to a total of two years imprisonment  but,  and
    the importance of this will become apparent shortly, it is  clear  from
    the court record that none of the sentences was individually of  twelve
    months or more imprisonment.

 5. The background to the driving  offences  was  that  the  appellant  was
    arrested whilst driving with over three times the limit of  alcohol  in
    his blood and in the car with him was his young daughter, "M".  She was
    born on 12 July 2009 and is  a  British  citizen.   Her  mother,  "KB",
    cohabited with the appellant between July 2008  and  January  2009  but
    their relationship has since ended.

 6. On 8 May 2014, the Secretary of State wrote to the appellant indicating
    his liability to be deported and seeking any representations as to  why
    that should not occur.  A response was made on behalf of the  appellant
    on 12 May 2014.  The basis of  those  representations  centred  on  the
    appellant's relationship with his daughter, M, and the impact upon  her
    if he were deported.

 7. On 27 May 2014, the Secretary of State rejected the  appellant's  claim
    not to be deported based upon that relationship under  para  399(a)  of
    the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  Further, the  Secretary  of
    State rejected the appellant's claim based upon his private life  under
    para 399A of the Rules.  Finally, in relation to Art 8,  the  Secretary
    of State concluded that there were no "exceptional circumstances"  such
    that the appellant's deportation would be disproportionate.

 8. As a consequence, on 27 May 2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  made  the
    decision to make a deportation order under s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration
    Act 1971 on the basis that the appellant's deportation was conducive to
    the public good and in accordance with the Immigration Rules and not  a
    breach of Art 8.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 9. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. First, before the First-tier Tribunal, it appears to have been  assumed
    that the appellant was  appealing  against  a  decision  to  apply  the
    automatic deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007.  That  was
    not correct as the respondent's decision of 27 May  2014  makes  plain,
    because the 2007 Act did not apply as the appellant,  although  he  had
    been sentenced to an aggregate  period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least
    twelve months, was not a "foreign criminal" within s.32(1) and  (2)  of
    the  2007  Act  because,  by  virtue  of  s.38(1)(b)  a   sentence   of
    imprisonment of at least twelve months:

         "does not include a reference to a person who  is  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least twelve months only by virtue  of
         being sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate  to
         more than twelve months ..."

11. I will return to this below.

12. Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal concluded that  the  applicant  could
    not succeed under para 399(a) of the Immigration Rules because  one  of
    the requirements was that:

         "(ii)    ...

             (a)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the UK; and

             (b)  there is no other family member who is able to  care  for
                  the child in the UK; ..."

13. Although the provision applied, in principle, because M  is  a  British
    citizen under the age of 18 and it was not disputed that  there  was  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental  relationship"  between  her  and  the
    appellant, she had another family member, namely her mother  (KB),  who
    was able to care for her  in  the  UK.   Consequently,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal concluded that the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules but then went on to consider  whether,  nevertheless,
    he could succeed under Art 8 of the ECHR.

14. In applying para 399(a) the First-tier Tribunal directed itself  as  to
    the terms of that rule in force prior to 28 July 2014.   However,  that
    rule was amended from 28 July 2014 by HC 532.  It  is  clear  from  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  1292
    that the Rules in force from 28 July 2014 apply in any  appeal  hearing
    on or after that date.  The First-tier Tribunal, therefore, applied the
    wrong rule.  I will also return to this below.

15. Thirdly, in applying Art 8, it was common ground before the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the case, in effect, turned upon the application  of  the
    new Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from  28  July
    2014.  In particular, the  appellant  relied  upon  s.117C(3)  and  (5)
    applicable to cases involving  "foreign  criminals".   Section  117C(3)
    states that:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies."

    The relevant exception is 'Exception 2' which is set out  in  s.117C(5)
as follows:

         "Exception 2 applies where C has  ....  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the .... child would be unduly harsh."

16. Having considered the circumstances of the appellant and M at paras 41-
    44, the First-tier Tribunal concluded that it would

         "be unduly harsh upon [M] to  deprive  her  of  a  direct  physical
         relationship with her natural father, the Appellant." (at [42]).

17. Further, having regard to her best interests [43] and having regard  to
    the appellant's offending and any future risk, the First-tier  Tribunal
    found (at para 44) that:

         "If  the  Appellant  is  deported  such  a  relationship  would  be
         adversely affected, if not effectively terminated as  modern  means
         of technology are  no  substitute  for  the  natural  physical  and
         intimate relationships that exist between a  parent  and  a  child.
         For all those reasons we find that this particular case is  one  of
         those cases where the public interest in deporting the appellant is
         outweighed by the established family life that exists  between  the
         Appellant and his daughter [M]."

18. Consequently, the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

19. It is not readily apparent upon  what  basis  it  was  assumed  by  the
    parties and the Tribunal that Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002 applied.   It
    may have been on the same basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  assumed
    that the automatic deportation provisions in the UK  Borders  Act  2007
    applied, namely that the appellant, not being a  British  citizen,  had
    been "sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve  months"
    (see s.117D(2)).  However, as with the UK Borders Act, that  period  of
    "at least twelve months" imprisonment required to engage Part 5A of the
    2002 Act had to reflect at least a single sentence of that  period  and
    could not be established merely by  aggregating  consecutive  sentences
    (see s.117D(4)(b)).

20. Section 117C was not, as a result, applicable to this appeal.   I  will
    return to this issue also shortly.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

21. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on three grounds.  Only the second error I have identified was
    relied upon.  No mention was made of  the  other  errors.   First,  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision that the appellant's  deportation  would
    be "unduly harsh" upon the appellant's daughter, M, under s.117C(5) was
    irrational having regard to his relationship  and  the  nature  of  his
    offending, including an act of cruelty towards M.  The finding was both
    irrational and  unreasoned.   Secondly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to  identify  whether  there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"
    outside the Rules so as to allow the appeal under  Art  8  applying  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  Thirdly, the First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law  by  wrongly  applying  the  Immigration
    Rules in force prior to 28 July 2014 rather than the amended  Rules  in
    force after that date.

22. On 10 September 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (D  J  Macdonald)  granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    all grounds.

23. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

24. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Richards challenged  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
    "unduly harsh" on his daughter M and that, therefore, the appellant was
    entitled to succeed because s.117C(3) and  (5)  applied.   Mr  Richards
    conceded that if Exception 2 set out in  s.117C(5)  applied,  then  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision was correct.  Indeed, he did not seek to
    specifically address grounds 2 and 3 in relation  to  the  "exceptional
    circumstances" point and that the First-tier Tribunal had  applied  the
    wrong rule.  He indicated that he did not consider that grounds 2 and 3
    took the matter  further  than  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  the
    primary legislation in the new Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002.

25. However, Mr Richards submitted that the  evidence  was  not  reasonably
    capable of leading to the conclusion that the  appellant's  deportation
    would have an "unduly harsh" effect on M.   He  pointed  out  that  M's
    mother had not attended to give evidence although written evidence  had
    been submitted and there was no independent evidence of  the  potential
    effect of the appellant's deportation on M.  He submitted that the only
    tested evidence before the Tribunal was that of the  appellant  himself
    and,  by  and  large,  the  Tribunal  had  found  his  evidence  to  be
    unreliable.  Mr Richards submitted  that  in  determining  whether  the
    appellant's deportation would have an "unduly harsh" effect on  M,  the
    severity of the offence had to be  taken  into  account  (and  all  its
    circumstances) as well as the factual impact upon M.  He submitted that
    there was, in effect, a balancing exercise to be undertaken laying  the
    public interest against the severity of the effect  of  deportation  in
    order to decide whether the impact upon M was  "unduly"  harsh  in  the
    sense of "unjustifiably" harsh.

26. Ms Capel on behalf of the appellant provided me with  a  very  detailed
    and helpful skeleton argument and rule 24 response.  She expanded  upon
    that document in her oral submissions.

27. First, she submitted that the correct approach to  applying  the  Rules
    and Part 5A of the 2002 Act was as follows:

         (1) Following MF (Nigeria), the Immigration  Rules,  in  particular
         paras 399-399A were a "complete code" in  relation  to  deportation
         cases;

         (2) First, it had to be decided whether an individual  fell  within
         para 399(a) or 399A and, if he did, then he succeeded under  Art  8
         in resisting his deportation;

         (3) Secondly, if however that was not the case, then the  decision-
         maker should go on to consider Art 8 on the basis  of  "exceptional
         circumstances" (pre-28  July  2014)  or  whether  there  are  "very
         compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in  paras
         399 and 399A"  (post-28 July 2014).  That, Ms Capel submitted,  was
         the Art 8 exercise involving proportionality and at this point  the
         relevant considerations under Part 5A had to be factored in.

         She submitted that there was no  material  difference  between  the
         words   "exceptional   circumstances"    and    "very    compelling
         circumstances" as a result of the amendment to  para  398  from  28
         July 2014.

28. Secondly, Ms Capel submitted that even if the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    applied the wrong rule, namely the pre-28 July  2014  version  of  para
    399(a), that was not a material  error  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding in relation to para 117C(5) that  the  appellant's  deportation
    would have an "unduly harsh" effect on M,  effectively  determined  the
    issue under the new para 399(a) that it would be unduly harsh for M  to
    live in Guinea-Bissau and it would be unduly harsh for M to  remain  in
    the UK without the appellant.

29. Thirdly, Ms Capel submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  in
    relation to  para  117C(5)  was  not  irrational  or  unreasoned.   She
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had been entitled  to  act  upon
    the evidence of the appellant's former partner, M's mother, in  respect
    of the appellant's relationship with M.  She submitted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal took a  balanced  view  of  the  evidence  including  the
    seriousness  of  the  appellant's  offending  and  his  post-conviction
    behaviour.  Initially, Ms Capel somewhat 'sat on the fence' in relation
    to Mr Richards' submission that the phrase "unduly harsh" in  s.117C(5)
    required a balancing exercise in  itself  in  determining  whether  the
    impact was "unduly" harsh.  However, when pressed, she  submitted  that
    such an exercise was not required but that, in any event, it was  clear
    from the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning that, even if Mr Richards  was
    correct in this regard, the Tribunal had taken into account the  public
    interest and engaged in a balancing exercise in reaching  its  finding.
    She  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  was,  as  a
    consequence, properly open to it and sustainable in law.

Discussion

30. I begin with the relevant Immigration Rules.  Prior to  28  July  2014,
    para 398 provided as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             at least 4 years;

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 23 months; or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of  State,
             their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law,

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,  it
             will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
             interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

31. Paragraph 399, so far as relevant, provided as follows:-

         "399 This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                           to leave the UK; and

                      (b)  there is no other family member who is  able  to
                           care for the child in the UK."

32. That is the provision applied by the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal
    and which, and it is not disputed,  the  appellant  could  not  succeed
    under as he could not establish the requirement in  399(a)(ii)(b)  that
    there was "no other family member" who was able to care for her in  the
    UK.

33. Paragraph 399A deals with an individual's 'private life' claim.   I  do
    not set it out here as it was not relied upon by either party  in  this
    appeal.

34. However, on 28 July 2014, paras 398 and 399 were amended by HC  532  so
    as to read as follows.  The inserted or replaced text is underlined.

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least  23
             months; or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because, in the view of
             the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused  serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a  particular
             disregard for the law,

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

35. Paragraph 399 is in the following terms:

         "399 This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported, and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported."

36. First, clearly the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by applying the pre-
    28 July 2014 Rule.  As I have said, Mr  Richards  did  not  press  this
    point before me.  That error would, in my judgment, not be material  if
    the First-tier Tribunal's finding in relation  to  s.117C(5)  that  the
    appellant's deportation would be  "unduly  harsh"  on  M  stands  as  a
    factual finding.   Mr  Richards  did  not  seek  to  argue,  indeed  he
    accepted, that M could not be expected to live in  Guinea-Bissau  given
    her age, that she is a British citizen as  is  her  mother  who  is  no
    longer in a relationship with the appellant.  It would  undoubtedly  be
    "unduly harsh" for M to have to live in the  appellant's  own  country.
    That satisfies, therefore, the requirement in para 399(a) and,  if  the
    finding in relation  to  s.117C(5)  stands,  the  requirement  in  para
    399(a)(i)(b) would be satisfied, namely that it would be "unduly harsh"
    for M "to remain in the UK without [the Appellant]".

37. Secondly,  I  accept  Ms  Capel's  submission  as  to  the  appropriate
    structure in relation to deportation decisions reading the  Immigration
    Rules with Part 5A of the  2002  Act.   The  "complete  code"  approach
    adopted by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) is  no  less  applicable
    given the amendments to the Rule and the enactment of Part  5A  of  the
    2002 Act.

38.  Consequently,  applying  the  Rules,  the  decision-maker  must  first
    consider whether an individual can succeed under para 399 or 399A.   If
    he or she does so, then they will have succeeded in  establishing  that
    the deportation breaches Art 8.  If, however, the individual  does  not
    satisfy the provisions of para 399 or 399A (which, in  any  event,  are
    inapplicable where an individual has been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of four years or more), then the decision-maker should  go
    on to consider (in the language of the new para 398) whether there  are
    "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraph 399 and 399A".

39. That exercise is, in my judgment, as the Court of Appeal recognised  in
    MF (Nigeria), to engage in the proportionality assessment  required  by
    Art 8.2 of the ECHR.  It does seem to me that the change  in  language,
    namely   from   "exceptional   circumstances"   to   "very   compelling
    circumstances" necessarily beyond those based on an individual's family
    or private life under paras 399 and 399A  does  reflect,  at  least  in
    principle, a change in the potency of individual circumstances required
    to outweigh the public interest in deportation.  I say  "in  principle"
    because it may well be that only in a marginal cases would it make  any
    difference in outcome.  Because of the view I take in relation  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's finding in respect of s.117C(5) and therefore the
    application of the new para  399(a),  the  point  does  not  arise  for
    decision in this appeal and I do not express a concluded view.

40. Thirdly, I accept Ms Capel's submission that it is at this later  stage
    in carrying out the assessment in para 398 of assessing  whether  there
    are   "very   compelling   circumstances"   which   incorporates    the
    consideration set out in the new Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

41. I do not propose to set out  the  whole  of  Part  5A  but  rather  the
    relevant provisions related to  the  structural  argument  and  to  the
    particular application of Exception 2 to this appeal.

42. The application of Part 5A is set out in s.117A as follows:

         "117A     Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest  question'  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2)."

43. Consequently, a court or tribunal (but not apparently the Secretary  of
    State) when Art 8 is raised  in  relation  to  a  decision  "under  the
    Immigration  Acts"  "must  (in  particular)   have   regard"   to   the
    considerations in s.117B in all cases and, in addition, those in s.117C
    in the case of the deportation of foreign  criminals.   Part  5A  would
    seem,  therefore,  to  have  no  application  in  appeals   under   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003 as amended).

44. Regard must be had to those factors in determining the "public interest
    question" which means whether the  interference  with  an  individual's
    private or family life is justified under Art 8(2).

45. Before turning to s.117B and s.117C, it is worth pausing  to  note  the
    application  of  the  deportation  provision  in  s.117C  to   "foreign
    criminals".  A foreign criminal is defined in s.117D(2) as follows:

         "(2) In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

             (c)  who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                      least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                      serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender."

46. By virtue of s.117D(4)(b), a person who has been sentenced to "a period
    of imprisonment of a certain length of time" does not

         "include  a  person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a   period   of
         imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by  virtue  of  being
         sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate  to  that
         length of time; ..." (my emphasis)

47. The underlying assumption by both the parties and  First-tier  Tribunal
    in this appeal that  s.117C  applied  could  not,  as  I  have  already
    indicated above, turn on the fact that the appellant had been sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of "at  least  twelve  months"  since  that
    period of  imprisonment  could  only  be  reached  by  aggregating  the
    consecutive sentences passed upon him.

48. The provisions in Part 5A therefore could only apply  if  he  had  been
    convicted of "an offence that had caused serious harm" or if he was  "a
    persistent offender".  It  does  not  seem  that  the  appellant  could
    possibly be described as a "persistent offender" as  all  the  offences
    relate to a single driving incident.  No one has considered whether  he
    has been convicted of "an offence" that has "caused serious harm".   It
    is far from clear to me that, although his offences were serious,  they
    actually caused "serious harm".  If  this  point  was  crucial  to  the
    outcome of this appeal,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  consider
    whether  the  parties  should  be  invited  to  make  further   written
    submissions  or  whether,  without  more,  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    decision plainly could not stand.  However,  it  is  not.   As  I  will
    shortly make clear, the First-tier Tribunal's findings in  relation  to
    s.117C, even if that  provision  was  technically  not  applicable,  in
    substance determine the appellant's appeal in his favour under the  new
    para 399(a).

49. I now return to ss.117B and 117C.  Section 117B sets out  a  number  of
    "considerations" applicable in all cases  where  Art  8  is  raised  as
    follows:

         "117B    Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
             all cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

50. Section 117C, dealing  with  deportations  of  "foreign  criminals"  is
    directly  relevant  to  this  appeal  and  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    decision.  It provides as follows:

         "117C     Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

51. As I have already pointed out, the First-tier Tribunal considered  that
    Exception 2 in s.117C(5) applied.

52. It is not disputed that the appellant has  a  "genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with M who is  a  qualifying  child  because  by
    virtue of s.117D(1) the term "qualifying child" includes a person under
    the age of 18 who is a British citizen.

53. On the face of it, the effect of s.117A(2) is that a court or  tribunal
    must "have regard" to the considerations set out in  s.117B  and  117C.
    That requires the considerations to be taken into account in  assessing
    the "public interest question" namely whether the interference with the
    person's Art 8 rights  is  justified  under  Art.  8.2.   Clearly  some
    "considerations" set out in ss.117B an 117C are relevant,  but  do  not
    purport to be "determinative" factors, for  example  speaking  English,
    not being an economic burden on the  UK  and  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence committed.

54. However, the wording of s.117C(3), which was the  one  applied  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in this appeal, is more difficult to read  in  that
    way.  It states that "the public  interest  requires  C's  deportation"
    unless either Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.  If neither exception
    applies,  what  is  meant  by  the  "public  interest   requires"   C's
    deportation?  It appears to permit of no further analysis of any factor
    relevant  to  the  balancing  exercise  inherent  in   proportionality.
    Likewise, if one of those two exceptions applies, it would appear  that
    the public interest does not require C's deportation.  The  latter  was
    conceded by Mr Richards in his submissions and,  in  like  fashion,  he
    accepted that if neither of the  exceptions  applied  then  the  public
    interest was resolved against C.

55. I confess to have some difficulty in understanding what is intended  by
    Parliament in s.117C(3) and also, though not applicable to this appeal,
    s.117B(6), when stating that  the  public  interest  does  require  C's
    deportation (in s.117C(3))  or  "does  not  require"  and  individual's
    removal (in the case of s.117B(6)) if those are "considerations"  which
    the court or  tribunal  must  "(in  particular)   have  regard"  to  in
    determining the  "public  interest  question".   There  are,  I  think,
    arguments both ways.

56. Here, however, Mr Richards conceded on behalf of the Secretary of State
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision was correct if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  Exception  2  applied   in
    s.117C(5).  In the light of that, and given my view as to the effect of
    that finding on the application of para 399(a) - where there can be  no
    ambiguity - it is not necessary for me  to  resolve  this  complex  and
    difficult issue in this appeal.

57. Further, I also resist the invitation to determine whether in  applying
    s.117C(5) and the phrase "unduly harsh" that  required  not  simply  an
    assessment of the impact upon a child by the  individual's  deportation
    (or partner if that is the relied upon part  of  s.117C(5)),  but  also
    required a consideration of the public interest, namely the nature  and
    extent of the offending committed by the person  to  be  deported.   My
    attention was drawn to the Secretary of State's  guidance  in  applying
    Art 8 and these provisions in deportation cases in the IDI, Chapter 13:
     Criminality Guidance in Article 8 ECHR Cases (28 July  2014).   There,
    the Secretary of State  plainly  considers  that  whether  the  "unduly
    harsh" requirement is met  must  take  into  account  all  the  factors
    relevant to the public interest and at para 2.5.3 states:

         "The effect of deportation on a qualifying partner or a  qualifying
         child must be considered in the context of the  foreign  criminal's
         immigration and criminal history.  The greater the public  interest
         in deportation, the stronger the countervailing factors need to  be
         succeed.  The impact of deportation on a partner or  child  can  be
         harsh, even very harsh, without being unduly  harsh,  depending  on
         the extent of the public interest in deportation and on the  family
         life affected."

58. In other words, what is "unduly" harsh will, in part, depend  upon  the
    nature  of  the  appellant's  criminality.   The  stronger  the  public
    interest, the greater the impact upon the child or partner may have  to
    be to fall within s.117C(5).  If that is correct, s.117C(5)  has  built
    into  it  the  very  balancing  exercise  that   is   required   by   a
    proportionality assessment under Art 8.  It is a microcosm of the fifth
    Razgar question.  It is not entirely clear to me that was the  intended
    effect of this provision.  It is  not  necessary  for  me  to  reach  a
    concluded view upon this.  I am content for the purposes of this appeal
    to approach the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State is correct that in determining  whether  the  impact
    upon M is "unduly harsh" regard must be had to the public interest.   I
    say that because, as will  be  apparent  below,  I  accept  Ms  Capel's
    submission that the First-tier Tribunal  did,  in  fact,  approach  the
    issue on that very basis in its determination.  Therefore, even putting
    the Secretary of State's case at its highest  on  this  point,  if  the
    First-tier Tribunal's finding  in  relation  to  "undue  harshness"  is
    legally sustainable, the Appellant  was  entitled  to  succeed  in  his
    appeal as the First-tier Tribunal in fact decided.

59. Consequently, I now turn to the First-tier Tribunal's finding that  the
    appellant's deportation would be have an "unduly harsh" impact upon  M.



60. The First-tier Tribunal's determination must fairly be read as a  whole
    and not on the basis of an isolated consideration of its  reasoning  in
    particular paragraphs.

61. First, the Tribunal dealt with the appellant's relationship with  M  at
    para 21 as follows:

         "21. We find, however, that the Appellant does have a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with his daughter [M].  We accept that
             the  Appellant  exercised  regular  direct  contact  with  his
             daughter on Saturdays from 11am, returning [M] to her mother's
             home at around 6-7pm, as confirmed by the  Appellant's  former
             cohabitee and former girlfriend [KB], date of birth  15  March
             1988.  She has provided two pieces of evidence in the form  of
             a statutory declaration dated 8 October  2013  and  a  further
             statement dated 10 July 2014.

             We find that  [KB]  acknowledges  that  the  Appellant  has  a
             relationship  with  his  daughter  and  that  [M]  enjoys  her
             relationship with her father.  We further find that  [KB]  has
             no relationship with the Appellant.  We note that  she  failed
             to attend the final hearing as a witness,  claiming  that  she
             was unable to obtain  time  off  work  from  her  position  of
             employment at Cardiff University.  We further  note  that  the
             university is now  just  over  half  way  through  its  summer
             vacation.  We have received  no  correspondence  from  Cardiff
             University itself confirming  that  it  could  not  allow  the
             witness time off work to attend the hearing and so in relation
             to this discrete issue we are not satisfied that  the  witness
             could not have attended this hearing if she  considered  it  a
             matter of importance to her.  Nonetheless,  in  two  documents
             she has confirmed that the Appellant  is  a  feature  of  some
             importance to their daughter [M]."

62. Having accepted the genuineness of the appellant's relationship with M,
    the Tribunal dealt further (at paras 28-39) with the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and KB  and  found  the  appellant  to  be  an  "unimpressive
    witness" but accepted the evidence of KB as to their relationship.

         "28. The Appellant concedes that he formed a relationship with [KB]
             in or about 2007  but  that  they  cohabited  only  relatively
             briefly between July 2008 and January 2009.  [M] was  born  on
             12 July 2009 and the  Appellant  exercised  contact  with  her
             until he was sent to prison in August 2013.   He  remained  in
             contact with her during his imprisonment by means of telephone
             calls and cards.  She was unable to visit him in prison as  he
             had committed an act of cruelty towards her as detailed above.
             .....

             In some respects the Appellant was  an  unimpressive  witness.
             It is established that he has a propensity to dishonesty  when
             it suits him as set out above and as is illustrated by his use
             of two aliases.

         32.  Additionally, we find that during his evidence  the  Appellant
             was prone to inappropriately exaggerate in an attempt to  make
             a favourable impression upon the Tribunal.  He told us that he
             wanted his daughter to grow up having a father figure  because
             he himself had benefited from no such father figure.  However,
             we find that the Appellant's father was a significant  feature
             of the Appellant's life until the Appellant at  aged  14  left
             his  home  country  of  Guinea-Bissau  as  a  talented   young
             footballer for a life and career in Portugal.   The  Appellant
             proceeded to play professional football  in  Portugal  over  a
             period of some ten years.  Moreover,  the  Appellant's  father
             was employed by the Guinea-Bissau government and the Appellant
             travelled  to  Portugal  with  the  benefit  of  a  diplomatic
             passport obtained due to his father's employment.

         33.  Whilst in Portugal the Appellant  developed  a  cohabitational
             relationship with a female partner with whom he had  a  child,
             [AMM] who was born on 20 September 2004.  When  the  Appellant
             stopped playing football, he found that Portugal was suffering
             a financial recession and so the  Appellant  voluntarily  left
             that country in an attempt to find work in  the  UK.   He  has
             remained in this country ever since, thereby  depriving  [AMM]
             of a father figure.

         34.  The Appellant told us that it was his intention to send  money
             home to his partner for the benefit of their child and to  pay
             for her mortgage on the property in  which  they  lived.   The
             Appellant stated that he did so but he was unable  to  provide
             any documentary or other evidence of any sum of money that  he
             had ever sent to his family  in  Portugal  whether  for  their
             general maintenance or for the  payment  of  the  mortgage  on
             their home.  Yet further, the Appellant stated  that  he  paid
             for his partner and daughter to visit him some four years  ago
             for a holiday in the UK but he was equally unable  to  provide
             any documentary  evidence  of  his  funding  of  that  claimed
             holiday.

         35.  Appeals of this nature are determined upon the  basis  of  the
             evidence adduced.  On the basis of  the  evidence  adduced  in
             this appeal on these issues, we are far  from  satisfied  that
             the Appellant sent money to his family in Portugal whether  as
             claimed by him or at all.  We are  further  not  satisfied  to
             that standard which has to be applied in  these  appeals  that
             the Appellant paid or  contributed  to  the  mortgage  on  his
             family's home in Portugal whether as claimed by him or at  all
             and we are equally not satisfied that he funded a holiday  for
             his former partner and their child.

         36.  Although we have already above  accepted  that  the  Appellant
             exercised direct contact with his daughter  [M]  between  11am
             and 6-7pm on Saturdays, the  Appellant  asserted  in  evidence
             that upon his release from detention on 14 August he then  had
             [M]  stay  with  him  all  day  Friday,  Saturday  and  Sunday
             overnight on Friday and Saturday, until he returned her to her
             mother at 6pm on Sunday evening.  There is  no  evidence  from
             [M]'s mother to confirm that extent of  contact  was  allowed.
             We find that as  the  Appellant  was  exercising  only  weekly
             direct contact as described above before his imprisonment,  it
             is most implausible that not  having  seen  the  child  for  a
             period of a year, that the child's mother would  have  allowed
             [M] to stay with him for a full three day period including two
             overnight  stays.   The  Appellant's  account  of   exercising
             contact to that extent is so implausible as to be incapable of
             any objective belief without additional acceptable independent
             evidence.   There  was  none,  and  we  do  not   accept   the
             Appellant's evidence upon this discrete issue for the  reasons
             set out above.

         37.  Yet further in his evidence the Appellant stated at  paragraph
             6 of his statement and in his oral evidence that he had  taken
             several courses in prison specifically in respect of his drink
             problem and also  in  respect  of  childcare.   The  Appellant
             adduced in evidence certificates demonstrating  exactly  which
             courses he had completed whilst  in  prison.   None  of  those
             certificates confirm that he  embarked  upon  or  completed  a
             specific course in respect of his drink problem.  When pressed
             upon the point by Mr Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)
             the Appellant prevaricated,  and  maintained  that  the  clean
             living course that he had completed  dealt  with  his  alcohol
             problem.  We accept that the Appellant has been teetotal since
             he was imprisoned and that during his period of  detention  he
             was not able to and did not consume alcohol.  We  also  accept
             that he has formed the intention of remaining teetotal and  of
             defeating  his  drink  problem.   However,  we  are  far  from
             satisfied that he embarked upon or  completed  any  course  in
             prison which was specifically directed to his  drink  problem.
             This is yet a further example of the Appellant's propensity to
             exaggerate   during   his   evidence   in   an   attempt    to
             inappropriately mislead the Tribunal into making a decision in
             his favour.  That having been said, we  do  not  underestimate
             for one moment the effort the Appellant made whilst in  prison
             in focusing  upon  his  drink  problem  and  completing  those
             courses for which he has been provided with certificates.   We
             note also and significantly that the Appellant  undertook  the
             safeguarding children and young people course whilst in prison
             and was awarded a certificate for so doing on 3 April 2014.

         38.  We find that the Appellant is likely to have learned  valuable
             lessons by being  in  prison  and  serving  a  sentence  which
             prevented him from seeing his daughter for a period of  twelve
             months.  We also find that he is likely to have benefited from
             taking those courses in prison, particularly the  safeguarding
             children and young people course.

         39.  Furthermore, since the hearing a letter from  the  Appellant's
             Probation Officer Mr Alistair Moore has been received.  He has
             confirmed that he will be undertaking work with the  Appellant
             during weekly probation sessions that specifically address the
             Appellant's alcohol related offending. ..."

63. Then, having set out the relevant provisions of Part 5A of NIA Act 2002
    the Tribunal continued as follows at paras 40-43 as follows:

         "40. There are specific additional considerations  which  apply  in
             cases involving foreign  criminals.   The  Appellant  in  this
             appeal is a foreign  criminal.   The  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals is in the public interest.   The  more  serious  the
             offence the greater the public interest in the deportation  of
             the criminal.  We have indicated above  our  consideration  of
             the seriousness of the Appellant's offending.   The  Appellant
             was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  two  years  in
             total and so the  public  interest  requires  his  deportation
             unless Exception  1  or  Exception  2  applies.   We  find  in
             accordance with  117C(4)  that  the  Appellant  has  not  been
             lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life;
             he is not socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom any more than he is Portugal or Guinea-Bissau in  that
             he speaks Portuguese  which  is  the  main  language  of  both
             Portugal and Guinea-Bissau and he has a brother and sister who
             continue to reside in his home country.  We have not been made
             aware of any very significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
             integration into his home country.

         41.  In relation to Exception 2, we find that the Appellant  has  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child as
             [M] is a British citizen.  We find from the evidence  that  we
             have heard that the effect upon the Appellant's deportation on
             his daughter would be unduly harsh.  It is important  to  note
             and to explain that at this juncture we must consider not what
             is unduly harsh in respect of the Appellant himself  but  what
             is unduly harsh for his child.  We are required by statute  to
             consider this aspect of the  Appellant's  appeal  specifically
             from the aspect of his 5 year old daughter.  [M] has known her
             father from birth.  She has had frequent and  regular  contact
             with him until he committed the above-mentioned offences which
             led to his imprisonment.  They remained  in  indirect  contact
             with each other throughout his term of imprisonment  by  means
             of telephone calls and cards.  The Appellant has a  reasonable
             relationship with [M]'s mother. [KB] promotes contact  between
             father and daughter and she is commended for  so  doing.   She
             has no relationship with the Appellant herself  but  she  sees
             the benefit to [M] of regular direct contact with her  father.
             [KB] acknowledges that [M] benefits from direct  contact  with
             her  father.   We  find  that  the   Appellant's   period   of
             imprisonment and the courses which he has completed in prison,
             particularly  the  safeguarding  children  and  young   people
             course, may well have led to an improvement in the Appellant's
             determination to control his alcohol habit.  To  some  extent,
             time will tell.

         42.  [M] only has one  natural  father.   She  has  benefited  from
             knowing  her  natural  father,   albeit   through   a   weekly
             arrangement made between her parents for her to  have  contact
             with her father each Saturday.  Until his criminal  offending,
             the  Appellant  had  maintained  that  relationship  and   had
             consistently exercised direct contact with his  daughter  each
             Saturday.  We find that generally, the Appellant is capable of
             maintaining an appropriate paternal parental relationship with
             [M].  We further find that [M] is likely  to  benefit  from  a
             consistent relationship with both her parents if  that  is  at
             all possible.   We  find  that  in  this  case,  provided  the
             Appellant remains teetotal and/or appropriately  controls  his
             intake of alcohol, that the Appellant will be able to maintain
             a relationship that [M] will find beneficial to her  stability
             as she develops.  Indeed we find that [M]  and  the  Appellant
             have had at least some contact since the recent release of the
             Appellant  from  immigration  detention.   [M]  has  a   well-
             established relationship with her natural father.  She  should
             under  present  circumstances  be  given  the  opportunity  of
             further benefitting from that relationship and we find that it
             would at this stage in the context of the particular facts  of
             this appeal be unduly harsh upon  [M]  to  deprive  her  of  a
             direct physical relationship  with  her  natural  father,  the
             Appellant."

64. As can be seen, the First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that  it  would  be
    "unduly harsh" for M  to  live  in  the  UK  without  her  father,  the
    appellant.  On behalf of the  respondent  it  is  submitted  that  that
    finding is untenable on the evidence and fails to take into account the
    public interest in assessing whether the impact is "unduly" harsh.

65. Dealing with those in reverse order, it is plain beyond doubt that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was well aware of  the  importance  of  the  public
    interest and the considerable weight that should be given to it because
    of the seriousness of the appellant's offending.

66. The Tribunal dealt with this in paras  29-30,  quoting  the  sentencing
    remarks of the Crown Court Judge as follows:

         "29. Assessing proportionality in an appeal  such  as  this  is  an
             exercise in taking all relevant matters into consideration and
             appropriately balancing them.  It is a most  delicate  matter.
             We find most definitely that society is  entitled  to  express
             its revulsion  against  the  Appellant's  criminal  offending.
             Having said that, we find that the criminal offences committed
             by the Appellant, whilst serious, are by some degree  not  the
             most  serious  that  this  Tribunal  has  considered.   It  is
             important to acknowledge that the Appellant's actions were not
             violent and did not involve illegal drugs.  We find  that  the
             Appellant's offending arose out of a dependency  upon  alcohol
             and his misuse of alcohol.  The  Appellant  acknowledges  that
             for some while he had suffered from an  alcohol  problem.   He
             has acknowledged his stupidity and  the  inappropriateness  of
             his actions in driving dangerously with his  young,  unsecured
             daughter in the motor vehicle  which  he  was  driving  whilst
             three times over the legal limit.

         30.  In  reaching  our  conclusion  upon  the  seriousness  of  the
             offending we have paid particular attention to the  sentencing
             remarks of the learned sentencing judge, His Honour Judge Wynn-
             Morgan who said,

                   "I have also taken into account the fact  that  you  have
                  pleaded guilty now to all of these allegations  ....  That
                  having been said, you have pleaded guilty to a  series  of
                  very  serious  offences.   Leaving  aside  the   dangerous
                  driving, the fact that you were over three times the limit
                  for driving, and  had  a  small  child  in  your  vehicle,
                  insecure,  your  own  daughter,  who,  apart  from   being
                  frightened by the nature of your driving, was found to  be
                  freezing cold, is a quite appalling offence for  a  father
                  to commit in respect of his own daughter.  ....  You  have
                  been dishonest with the  court;  you  have  perverted  the
                  course of public justice by  attempting,  successfully  in
                  one case, unsuccessfully in this, to pass yourself off  as
                  someone whom you are not."

67. Prior to that, the First-tier  Tribunal  had  set  out  the  well-known
    passages in N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004 EWCA Civ 1094 and OH (Serbia) v SSHD
    [2008] EWCA Civ 694,  setting  out  the  three  facets  of  the  public
    interest and concluding that:

         "Having considered all the evidence we have heard in  this  appeal,
         we  find  that  the  expression  of  society's  revulsion  at   the
         particular crimes committed by this Appellant and the  building  of
         public confidence in the treatment of foreign citizens  who  commit
         serious crimes is a relevant feature of this appeal."

68. Then, at para 44 the First-tier Tribunal returned to the issue  of  the
    public interest and  proportionality  and  concluded  that  the  public
    interest was outweighed by the impact on the relationship  between  the
    appellant and M.

         "44. For these and for all the other reasons we have set out  above
             and below, we  consider  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to
             deport  the  Appellant  is  in  all  the   circumstances   not
             proportionate in a democratic society to the legitimate aim to
             be achieved.   We  have  formed  the  view  that  despite  the
             Appellant's criminal  offending,  the  Respondent  adduced  no
             evidence that he is or will be a risk to the public.  We  have
             noted and accept that the Appellant was during his  period  of
             imprisonment an enhanced prisoner and we have been told of  no
             adjudications which were made against him during his period of
             imprisonment.  For all intents and purposes therefore he was a
             model prisoner and to  that  extent  we  find  there  is  some
             foundation to the Appellant's evidence that he has learned his
             lesson since his conviction and sentence.  We find that if [M]
             is to have a relationship with her  father  she  will  benefit
             from a physical relationship with him which will be based upon
             the intimacy that they share and  that  will  develop  between
             them.  We find that  if  the  Appellant  is  deported  such  a
             relationship would be adversely affected, if  not  effectively
             terminated as modern means of technology are no substitute for
             the natural physical and  intimate  relationship  that  exists
             between a parent and a child.  For all those reasons  we  find
             that this particular case is one  of  those  cases  where  the
             public interest in deporting the Appellant  is  outweighed  by
             the established family life that exists between the  Appellant
             and his daughter [M]."

69. Consequently, I reject Mr  Richards'  submission  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to take  into  account  the  relevant  public  interest
    reflected  in  the  Appellant's  offending.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    correctly, and in detail, directed itself  on  the  importance  of  the
    public interest and in the paragraph cited  clearly  took  that  public
    interest into account in assessing the appellant's claim under  Art  8.
    The Tribunal was not 'wrong footed' by considering  the  appeal  to  be
    under the automatic deportation provisions  but  even  if  it  was  the
    stronger public interest in such cases could only operate  against  the
    appellant and so could not  materially  have  affected  the  Tribunal's
    decision to allow the appeal.  It would, in my judgment, be  myopic  to
    read the Tribunal's  decision  as  excluding  those  considerations  in
    reaching its findings under s.117C(5) on whether the impact upon  M  of
    the appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh".

70. Further, it  is  plain,  as  Ms  Capel  submitted,  that  the  Tribunal
    carefully assessed the evidence concerning the relationship  between  M
    and the appellant.  The Tribunal did not simply accept everything  that
    it was told.  It did not  accept  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  in
    relation to the level of contact  he  had  with  M.   However,  it  was
    entitled  to  accept  the  evidence  of  M's  mother  concerning  their
    relationship both  as  to  its  nature  and  quality.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal gave reasons for accepting her evidence even though, as it was
    well aware and  expressly  commented  upon,  she  did  not  attend  the
    hearing.  The First-tier Tribunal took into account, as  it  was  fully
    entitled to do, the appellant's post-conviction conduct in  prison  and
    to reach its view that the appellant was not  a  future  risk  and  was
    addressing his problems related to alcohol.  As Carnwath LJ (as he then
    was) pointed in Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at [40]:

         "The mere fact that one tribunal  has  reached  what  may  seem  an
         unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does  not
         mean that it has made an error of law...."

71. Whilst the finding was not inevitable, the  Tribunal's  assessment  was
    not, in  my  judgment,  irrational  or  perverse.  These  were  factual
    findings that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to make on the basis
    of the written and other evidence before it.

72. Thus, I reject Mr Richards' submission that the First-tier Tribunal was
    not entitled as a matter of law to find that s.117C(5) applied.  On the
    basis of Mr Richards' concession, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to
    allow the  appellant's  appeal  under  Art  8  necessarily,  therefore,
    followed.  If, however, the  appellant  was  not  in  fact  a  "foreign
    criminal" and so  s.117C  did  not  apply,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding did, in substance, resolve the appellant's appeal in his favour
    under the new para 399(a)(a) and (b).   His  appeal  would,  therefore,
    have also succeeded under the new para 399(a).

73. Despite, therefore, the difficulties that I have  identified  with  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision, I am not persuaded that any  error  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal.  Given the First-tier Tribunal's
    finding in relation to s.117C(5), which  is  sustainable  in  law,  any
    remaking of the decision would inevitably result in  the  appeal  being
    allowed under Art 8 applying the Immigration Rules in effect  since  28
    July 2014.

Decision

74. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 did not involve the making of a material
    error of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

75. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
