

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01211/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 13th February 2014                         |on 19th February 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                SI YUN ZHENG
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Royston instructed by TRP Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer and Ms S
        E Singer, hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel', who dismissed the
        appeal on all grounds.


     2. Permission was sought on the basis the Panel had  made  a  material
        misdirection in law.



Error of law finding


     3. The Appellant, a citizen of the Peoples Republic of China, was born
        on the 5th July 1986. She is the subject of an automatic
        deportation order dated 28th May 2013 as a result of a conviction
        for involvement in the production of counterfeit DVD's for which
        she was sentenced to 14 month imprisonment.


     4. Deportation was resisted on the basis she satisfied one of the
        exceptions provided in UK Borders Act, namely that her removal will
        result in a breach of Article 8 ECHR.


     5. The Panel noted that the appellant has a child, J, who was born in
        2010. The child is a British citizen as evidenced by the British
        passport produced to the Panel [87]. Nationality was not disputed
        by the Respondent.


     6. The Secretary of State's position in the decision to deport letter
        is that it was not considered unreasonable for the child, then aged
        3, to leave the UK and so adapt to life in China and that in any
        event there was another family member in the UK, his father, who
        has ILR who can care for him. It is said J can maintain contact
        with his mother indirectly. This view was endorsed by the Panel who
        in paragraph 105 also found:


              105.     In considering the welfare and best interests of this
   young child we                   find that it would be in the best
   interests of the child to live with and                be brought up by
   his parents.  As it is in the best interests of the child
   to live with and be brought up by his parents, then the child's
          removal with his parents does not involve any separation of family
                  life.  We find that the child is still young and there has
   not been such                a period of substantial residence such that
   the child may have                    significant roots put down,
   personal identity developed, friendships               formed and links
   made with the community outside the family unit.                We find
   the appellant has not established that her child's private life
     has been significantly forged and therefore we do not place major
     weight as during the child's early years, he has been primarily
          focused on self and the caring parent.  We find that there is not
   a                   period of long residence sufficient for this child to
   have formed ties                 outside the family. is likely to have
   greater impact on his or her                       wellbeing.  We find
   that this young child may readily adapt to life in                   a
   new country with the support of his mother.


     7. The above may be correct as an application of the relevant test for
        a foreign national child, but the Panel were assessing a British
        national child who is also a European Citizen. There is no mention
        of cases such as Sanade [2011] UKUT 48 in which it was found that
        "where a child or indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen
        and therefore a citizen of the European Union, it is not possible
        to require them to relocate outside of the European Union or to
        submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so" [95].  UK
        nationality and European citizenship from part of the child's
        private life yet there is no indication this important element was
        properly considered by the Panel.


     8. I find the above to be a material error supporting the assertion
        the issues in the appeal have not been adequately considered and
        that adequate reasons have not been given for the conclusions
        reached. Accordingly the determination is set aside.



The remaking of the decision




Discussion



     9. In relation to the nationality issue, in R (on the  application  of
        Mansoor) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  EWHC
        832 (Admin) Mr Justice Blake  said  that  a  national  enjoyed  the
        international human right as well as the domestic  human  right  to
        live and remain in their own country (para 42).


    10.  In ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the
        Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 Lady Hale said that
        "Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is of particular
        importance in assessing the best interests of any child".


    11. In Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012]
        UKUT 00048 (IAC) the Tribunal held that Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano
        , BAILII: [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 "now makes it clear that where the
        child or indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and
        therefore a citizen of the European Union, as a matter of EU law it
        is not possible to require the family as a unit to relocate outside
        of the European Union or for the Secretary of State to submit that
        it would be reasonable for them to do so".


    12. If the above is correct then in practice nearly all case law in
        this jurisdiction regarding the reasonableness of return by one
        spouse to join another is now swept away although I do not find
        such an absolute statement is legally correct. In European law
        there is constant reference to the doctrine of proportionality
        which must be relevant to any decision involving this issue.  In
        relation to domestic case law, in AA v Upper Tribunal (Asylum and
        Immigration Chamber) [2013] CSIH 88 it was held that there was no
        error where significant weight had been accorded to the Claimant
        child's British nationality because nationality was not a trump
        card. It was necessary to take account of the whole circumstances
        which included the availability to the child of family life with
        parents in one of their countries of origin, and the extent to
        which the Claimant's immigration history involved dishonesty.


    13. In relation to the appellant's son, he faces a situation in which
        if he is forced to leave the EU, this may breach his rights under
        Community Treaties/EEA law such as to make the decision unlawful.
        If the child's mother is his primary carer the right to a family
        life with her will be lost if she is deported. It has not been
        shown on the facts to be warranted as being in the child's best
        interests or proportionate.


    14. Whilst in Sanade it was acknowledged that where there is a
        persistent and/or serious offender separation of a family may be
        warranted this has not been proved to be so on the facts of this
        case.


    15. A further relevant finding, which is not challenged, is that
        relating to the strength of the relationship between the appellant
        and the father of her child. In paragraph 78 the Panel find that
        there may have been a close relationship in the past but that they
        have significant doubts that it is as close as the appellant has
        suggested.  They find as a result the child will be taken to China
        with his mother indicating it is accepted by the Panel that his
        father does not represent an option for his care as a person who
        can meet the needs of the child in the UK. This contradicts the
        endorsement of the submissions that there is such a person in
        paragraph 90.


    16. Although it is said the child can return to China and live there,
        there is no comparison between his rights as a British and European
        citizen and the benefits flowing there from and those available to
        him in China.


    17. The right of the European citizen child to remain within the
        borders of the EU and enjoy the rights flowing from such a status
        is enshrined within the treaties of the European Union. The concept
        of a European citizen may not be one some politicians care to
        acknowledge but it exists and is relevant to this case. It has not
        been shown that the decision maker when considering the best
        interests considered this element with the required degree of care
        and neither did the Panel. A decision that forces the child to have
        to leave the EU can be said to breach the child's rights under
        Community Treaties/EEA law. I find this to be the case on the
        evidence in relation to the appellant's son.


    18. As the child has a legal right to remain as an EEA national his
        mother has as his primary carer. It has not been established on the
        evidence that there is another in the UK capable of meeting the
        child's needs. It has not been shown on the evidence that the
        conduct of the mother is such that removal is proportionate if this
        means the child having to loose the benefit of his rights derived
        from his national identity. Whilst not a trump card in either the
        national or European context I find this an important element that
        is material to the proportionality of the decision. The best
        interests of the child are of importance although not
        determinative. As the child cannot be removed this is a family
        splitting case. There is insufficient evidence to enable a finding
        to be made that the severance of the family life enjoyed between
        the child and his mother is justified in this case; therefore the
        only other option is for the child to leave with his mother which
        it has not been shown it is reasonable to expect him to do in all
        the circumstances.


    19. I find the exceptions to the UK Borders Act therefore made out and
        that at this time the appeal must be allowed.

Decision

    20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005. I make no such order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) as no application for
        anonymity was made and it not established on the facts that such an
        order is warranted.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13th February 2014












