
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01375/2013
     DA/01377/2013
     DA/01378/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Given orally at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th March 2014                             |On 13th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE



                                   Between

                            tamika latesha talabi
                             SAPHIRE JADE WILSON
                               talisa willson

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, instructed by MetroLaw Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian and Mrs Endersby  promulgated  on
    20th  January 2014 in  which they allowed the appeals brought   by  the
    appellants against the decisions of the Secretary of  State  that  they
    should be deported.  The issue with which we are concerned  is  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal in doing  so  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    state's interests articulated in the UK Borders Act  2007  and  related
    case law that favours the deportation of those categorised  as  foreign
    criminals.  The first of the appellants is the mother of the second and
    third appellants.  All  three  are  citizens  of  Jamaica.   The  first
    appellant has a significant criminal history.  She is married to a dual
    Nigerian/British national resident in the United Kingdom  by  whom  she
    has two further children who are British citizens.

2.   The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is, I am fully  satisfied,
    materially wrong in law. Before me Mr Layne has done the very  best  he
    could to preserve the determination.  In particular he has urged me  to
    find that the experienced First-tier Judge who wrote the  determination
    must have had in mind the relevant case law stretching back as far as N
    (Kenya) and more recently  SS  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550,  when
    writing the determination.  I have to  say  that  one  looks  in  vain,
    however, in the determination for  any  reference  to  those  or  other
    relevant cases.  One also more  particularly  looks  in  vain  for  any
    articulation of what those cases have to say about the 2007 Act.

3.   As was made plain by Lord Justice Laws in SS (Nigeria) the  deportation
    of foreign criminals is a matter which Parliament itself has decreed to
    be in the public interest and that important matter finds no expression
    in  the  determination.   Nor  do  we  find  any  expression   in   the
    determination of the public interest so far as  it  concerns  deporting
    foreign criminals as an expression  of  societal  revulsion  of  crimes
    committed by them.  Instead the Tribunal  concentrates  effectively  to
    the exclusion of all else upon the fact that the  first  appellant  has
    remained crime free for a number  of  years.   That  is  undoubtedly  a
    factor to be weighed in  the  balance  in  determining  proportionality
    under Article 8; but it is not the only issue.

4.   I fully accept as Mr Lyne has submitted this morning that the  case  is
    complicated.  As I have already indicated,  there  are  other  children
    concerned by the potential deportation of the first  appellant.   Those
    children are described in paragraph 15 of the determination.    It  may
    be the case that a proper analysis by a Tribunal would  conclude  under
    paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules that it would not be  reasonable
    to expect those children to leave the United Kingdom and/or that  there
    is no other family member who is able to care for them.

5.   At paragraph 15 the Tribunal summarily dismissed  the  suggestion  that
    the father of the British children could look after them if  the  first
    appellant were deported but  that  paragraph,  however,  on  inspection
    lacks any adequate reasoning.  It seems to accept that a preference  on
    the part of a parent not to have to care for a child is  sufficient  to
    engage paragraph 399(2)(b) of the Immigration Rules.  It is by no means
    certain that that is  so.   By  the  same  token  paragraph  16,  which
    concerns the asserted inability of  the  father  to  live  in  Jamaica,
    ignores the detailed decision letter of the Secretary of State in which
    amongst things it was pointed out that the gentleman concerned had been
    to Jamaica in the past.  It also ignores the fact  that  he  originally
    came from  Nigeria  and  has  experience  of  relocating  to  different
    continents.

6.   In all the circumstances therefore, despite Mr Layne's  submissions,  I
    have come to the conclusion that one cannot in any sense  be  satisfied
    that the decision in this appeal would be bound to be the same, even if
    the factors missing from the determination had been considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

7.    For  those  reasons  I  have  no  hesitation  in  setting  aside  this
    determination.  The issue therefore arises as to how  the  decision  in
    the appeal should be remade.  I agree with Mr Layne  that  in  all  the
    circumstances the appropriate course  is  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I say that because the complete failure  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to have regard to relevant matters in the case before it means
    that a fact finding  exercise  needs  to  be  conducted.   But  I  also
    consider that  in  these  circumstances  it  is  appropriate  that  the
    appellants start again at the First-tier Tribunal so that if  they  are
    ultimately unsuccessful, and I express no view on that, they will  have
    a right of appeal, subject to permission being  granted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

8.   This appeal is therefore allowed to the extent that  the  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  for  error  of  law  and  the
    appeals are remitted to be re-heard in their entirety in the First-tier
    Tribunal by a panel that shall not include First-tier Judge Andonian or
    non-legal member Mrs Endersby.






                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



