
                                    [pic]

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: DA/02043/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 October 2016                   |On 24 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   M.F.B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Ball, counsel instructed by Greater London,
solicitors.


                                  DECISION

 1. The respondent, who is a citizen of Nigeria, is a foreign criminal  for
    the purposes of s.32 UK Borders  Act  2007  as  a  consequence  of  his
    conviction before the Gloucester Crown Court of offences  of  deception
    arising from his marriage of convenience to an  EEA  national,  entered
    into solely for the purpose  of  dishonestly  securing  an  immigration
    advantage. He was sentenced to 14 months'imprisonment. That led to  the
    making of a deportation order against him  and  against  his  wife  and
    children as his family members, they also being citizens of Nigeria.

 2. The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
    permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell who, by a determination promulgated on 22 August 2016, allowed
    the respondent's appeal against that  deportation  order.  In  granting
    permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge said:

         "There is merit in the grounds' assertion that the judge has failed
         to apply the correct legal framework  and  conflated  the  test  of
         reasonableness with that of unduly harsh  in  the  context  of  the
         weight to be given to the public interest."

 3. As it is transparently clear that the judge has made material errors of
    law in his approach to the applicable immigration rules  and  statutory
    provisions, it is necessary only briefly to identify those  errors  and
    to explain why, as a consequence, his  decision  to  allow  the  appeal
    cannot stand.

 4. It was plain from the outset of the hearing before the judge  that  the
    main focus of the respondent's case was upon the best interest  of  his
    children and upon the arguments that were said to indicate  that  those
    best interests should displace the public interest in  the  deportation
    of their father, he being the foreign criminal concerned.  Although  Mr
    Ball, who appeared as counsel for the respondent before the  First-tier
    Tribunal as well as before the `Upper Tribunal this morning,  had  made
    clear in his skeleton argument and in  his  oral  submissions,  as  are
    recorded in the decision of the judge, that the correct  test  involved
    an assessment of whether the impact upon the children would  be  unduly
    harsh, the judge has set out the earlier  version  of  para  399(a)(ii)
    which spoke of what would be reasonable rather than unduly harsh.

 5. Mr Ball points out that, at para 65 of the decision the judge refers to
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 450 and guidance found therein  concerning  the  interpretation  of
    "unduly harsh" but the judge then went on to direct himself in terms of
    s117B(6) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act, which  was  not
    applicable since each was a person liable  to  deportation  because  of
    s.3(5)(b) Immigration Act 1971. At paragraph 74  of  his  decision  the
    judge  said,  making  clear  that  he  was  about  to  embark  upon  an
    application of the wrong legal test:

         "I have to consider whether or not it is reasonable to  expect  the
         child to live in another country."

    He proceeded to direct himself on no fewer  than  8  further  occasions
    that it was a test of reasonableness that  was  to  be  applied  as  he
    completed his assessment of  the  evidence  between  paragraphs  75-90.
    Finally, eliminating  any  possible  doubt  that  he  had  fallen  into
    material legal error as to his approach, he said at para 91:

         "I therefore consider that the effect of  section  117B(6)  of  the
         2002 Act is that the public interest does not require  the  removal
         of the appellant...."

 6. There is, plainly,  a  difference  of  significance  between  tests  of
    whether something is  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh,  as  perhaps  is
    inherent in the fact of the amendment of para v399(a)(ii). We simply do
    not know if the outcome would have been the same had the judge  applied
    the correct legal test. Indeed, he remarked at paragraph 90 that:

         "The decision in this case is finely balanced..."

 7. For these reasons it is plain that the judge has made  material  errors
    of law and that his decision to allow the appeal cannot stand.

 8. Mr Walker invited the Upper Tribunal to substitute a fresh decision  to
    dismiss the appeal without any further hearing. That  was  because  the
    judge had said, at para 87 of his decision about the children:

         "They would face great difficulties  and  hardships  on  return  to
         Nigeria. It is impossible to say though that the hardships would be
         unduly harsh..."

    As the judge had said earlier that the  claims  of  "the  rest  of  the
    family" could not succeed, therefore, applying the correct  legal  test
    to those findings the only possible outcome, in Mr Walker's submission,
    is that the appeal must be dismissed.

 9. I have concluded that this is not  the  appropriate  disposal  in  this
    appeal. The judge has made fundamental errors of interpretation of  the
    immigration rules and applicable statutory provisions  and  it  is  not
    safe to rely upon how he has expressed himself at various parts of  his
    decision. Given the facts concerning the children, and their length  of
    residence in the United Kingdom, there must be no  doubt  or  ambiguity
    about findings of fact or the assessment of evidence that  may  have  a
    fundamental impact upon the direction of their  lives.  Therefore,  the
    decision of the judge will be set aside in its entirety, other than  as
    a record of what was said in evidence at the hearing,  and  the  appeal
    must be determined afresh  by  a  different  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Summary of decision:

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell made a material error of  law  error
    of law and his decision, promulgate don 22 August  2016  shall  be  set
    aside.

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  afresh
    by a different judge of that Tribunal.




                               Signed   [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 21 October 2016
