
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02127/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 April 2014                              |On 28 May 2014               |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                         kuganathan balasubramaniam

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Halligan, Counsel instructed by Bloomsbury Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Sri Lanka who was  born  on
    25 November 1969.  I will briefly summarise  his  immigration  history.
    He came to this country  on  25  March  2002  using  a  false  passport
    provided by an agent.  He claimed asylum and this  claim  was  refused.
    He appealed against the refusal of his asylum claim and was issued with
    temporary release on 23  June  2002  but  failed  to  comply  with  the
    reporting conditions.  Subsequently on 12 November 2002 his  appeal  to
    the  Adjudicator  was  dismissed.   His  subsequent   application   for
    permission to appeal to the Tribunal was rejected and he became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 14 December 2002.  Thereafter the appellant did not
    return home as he ought but remained in  this  country  without  leave.
    Subsequently, on 18 January 2010  (by  which  time  the  appellant  had
    apparently managed  to  remain  in  this  country  without  leave)  his
    representatives submitted further representation for his  asylum  claim
    to be re-assessed in light of objective  evidence  of  changes  in  the
    country situation and subsequent case law but also under Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  His  representatives  also  requested  that  he  be  granted
    indefinite leave to remain under the legacy casework programme.  On  13
    August 2010 the appellant's application was considered under the legacy
    project and he was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  He was granted a no time limit stamp although it is
    common ground (as set out in the skeleton argument produced before  the
    panel of the First-tier Tribunal to which reference will be made below)
    that it was stated in the  letter  granting  him  indefinite  leave  to
    remain that any criminal activity would be a ground for  withdrawal  of
    this leave.

 2. On 19 November 2013 at  Peterborough  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
    convicted of dishonestly conspiring to make  false  representations  in
    order to make gain for himself or  another  or  cause  loss  or  expose
    others to risk.  Although I have not seen  the  sentencing  remarks  it
    appears that the criminal activity of which he was convicted involved a
    scheme whereby others would take driving tests  for  people  who  would
    then obtain driving licences to which  they  were  not  entitled.   The
    circumstances of the offending are set out in the decision letter  sent
    by the respondent to the appellant on 16  October  2013  in  which  the
    respondent stated that as a result of  the  appellant's  conviction  at
    Peterborough Crown Court for which he had been  sentenced  to  fourteen
    months' imprisonment, he was subject to automatic deportation  pursuant
    to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  In this  decision  letter
    it is stated that the offence of which the appellant had been convicted
    was that "between 17 December 2008 and 26 March 2010, you were involved
    in a conspiracy to take driving tests in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
    identities of others so that those  others  (your  co-defendants)  were
    able, or would have been able, to obtain UK  driving  licences  without
    passing the UK driving test."

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before a panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  consisting  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth and Mr  G  H  Getlevog,  lay  member,
    sitting at Nottingham Magistrates' Court on  3  February  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 14 February 2014 the panel  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  It is fair to record that,  in  the  words  of  Mr
    Deller who appeared before me "the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    did not deal with the merits in any great degree and did not mention by
    name the post 9 July 2012 Immigration Rules and  only  has  the  barest
    regard to the case law which has ensured".  It is  a  feature  of  this
    determination that it  does  not  even  mention  that  the  appellant's
    presence in this country between 2002 and 2010 was entirely unlawful.

 4. The appellant has appealed against this decision on the basis that  the
    decision to remove him was "disproportionate".  It  is  argued  in  the
    grounds that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to give proper  reasons
    as to "why/whether it had been demonstrated that it  was  necessary  in
    the interests of a democratic society to deport the appellant (i.e. the
    proportionality question)".  It is said  further  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel failed to attach appropriate weight to its finding  that
    there was a low risk of re-offending.

 5. Permission to appeal was, perhaps surprisingly given the  circumstances
    of this case, granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Warren L Grant on 14
    March 2014.  Judge Grant, when setting out  his  reasons  for  granting
    permission, stating that "the grounds of application  assert  correctly
    that in deciding that deportation was proportionate the panel failed to
    consider the issue in respect of which they considered  deportation  to
    be proportionate".



The Hearing

 6. For reasons which have not been explained the appellant did not  attend
    the hearing  before  this  Tribunal  although  he  was  represented  by
    Counsel, Mr Halligan.  I heard submissions on his  behalf  and  I  also
    heard submissions on  behalf  of  the  respondent.   I  recorded  these
    submissions contemporaneously and  as  they  are  contained  within  my
    Record of Proceedings I do not intend to set out below, word for  word,
    what was said before me, but shall set out only such of the submissions
    as are necessary for the  purposes  of  this  determination.   I  have,
    however, had regard to everything which was said to me in the course of
    the hearing as well as to all the documents contained within  the  file
    before reaching my decision.

 7. I was provided with statements from the appellant's wife  and  children
    and also a letter from the appellant himself.  These statements are  in
    a case of this nature unusual because the appellant's  wife  (described
    in her statement as "legal wife") and his children are  all  living  in
    Sri Lanka and so rather than saying that they want  their  husband  and
    father to continue living with them in order  for  family  life  to  be
    continued (as is normally the case where  removal  is  being  resisted)
    they say the opposite which is that they want their husband and  father
    to continue living apart from them.   I  will  set  out  their  reasons
    briefly in a moment.  The letter from the appellant himself states that
    he has "a family which includes a wife, two children and a  mother  who
    depends on me with everything" and that  they  were  suffering  from  a
    fault he committed before in his country but that he has  "learnt  from
    his mistake."  He says that "if you  decide  to  send  me  back  to  my
    country then my life and my family will be shattered both mentally  and
    physically".  Again, it is unusual in a  case  where  an  applicant  is
    seeking to resist removal for an argument to be made that the  life  of
    that applicant's family will be "shattered" in circumstances  where  he
    will be reunited with them.  The reason apparently is contained in  the
    next sentence when he says that "I won't be able to face society in  my
    country if I [am] labelled as a criminal".  He then goes on to add that
    "more than me, my  children's  life  will  be  questionable.   This  is
    because, they will be named as criminal's children and the society will
    be against them and will bully them to the extreme they will eventually
    stop  continuing  their  education".   He  invites  this  Tribunal   to
    "consider my children's future and my future and make a  very  generous
    decision".

 8. The letter from the appellant's wife just refers  to  their  children's
    education and says that if the appellant has to come back to Sri  Lanka
    "I will have to suffer a lot" and also that "my husband's coming to Sri
    Lanka my children will spoil all their life in future".

 9. The letters from the appellant's two daughters are almost identical and
    are written it would appear in identical handwriting even to the extent
    of having a similar gap in the word "faithfully"  between  "faith"  and
    "fully".   Essentially  they  are  both  saying  that  they  would   be
    embarrassed by their father's return to the extent  that  people  would
    ask questions about him at their school and they would find it hard  to
    face their friends.  It is  not  suggested  in  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant has any family life in this country and nor has any  argument
    been advanced on the basis of any private  life  he  might  have.   The
    highest that his case can or has been put is that in Sri  Lanka  people
    tend to disapprove of criminals and perhaps the family can benefit from
    the money that the appellant would be able to go on sending were he  to
    be allowed to remain.



Discussion

10. As I observed during the course  of  the  hearing  when  expressing  my
    provisional views this appeal would seem to have  absolutely  no  merit
    whatsoever.  This is an automatic deportation case and I should for the
    sake of completeness set out the relevant provisions of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007 as follows:

         "Deportation of Criminals

         32.  Automatic Deportation

             (1)  In this section "foreign criminal" means a person -

                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
                      and

                  (c)  to whom condition (1) or (2) applies.

             (2)  Condition (1) is that the person is sentenced to a period
                  of imprisonment of at least twelve months.

             (3)  Condition (2) is that -

                  (a)  the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of
                      State under  Section  72(4)(a)  of  the  Nationality,
                      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (serious  criminal),
                      and

                  (b)  a person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

             (4)  For the purpose of Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
                  2971, the deportation of a foreign criminal  is  conducive
                  to the public good.

             (5)  The Secretary of State must make a deportation  order  in
                  respect of a foreign criminal (subject to Section 33).

             (6)  The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation order
                  made in accordance with sub-Section (5)  unless....  [this
                  is not relevant for the purposes of this determination]...

         33.  Exceptions

              (1) Section 32(4) and (5) -

                  (a)  do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
                      applies (subject to sub-Section (7) below)...

             (2)  Exception (1) is where removal of the foreign criminal in
                  pursuance of the deportation order will breach:

                  (a)  a person's Convention rights, or

                  (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee
                      Convention.

             (3)  Exception (2) is where the Secretary of State thinks that
                  the foreign criminal was under the age of 18 on  the  date
                  of conviction...

             (7)  The application of an exception -

                  (a)  does not prevent the making of a deportation order;

                  (b)  results in it being assumed neither that  deportation
                      of the person concerned is conducive  to  the  public
                      good nor that it is not conducive to the public good;
                      but Section 32(4) applies despite the application  of
                      exception (1) or (4)."

11. There is no question and it is not and cannot  be  suggested  but  that
    this appellant falls within the definition of a "foreign  criminal"  as
    set out within Section 32(1) of the 2007 Act.  Accordingly, subject  to
    the exceptions set out within Section 33 by Section 32(5) the Secretary
    of State must [my emphasis] make a deportation order in respect of him.
     It is also the case that by virtue of Section 32(4) his deportation is
    conducive to the public good.  That as will be discussed briefly  below
    is a relevant factor when considering whether or not his deportation is
    proportionate.

12. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that because his deportation
    would be in breach of his article 8 rights, the exception  set  out  at
    section 33(2)(a) of the 2007 Act applies.  The position as regards  the
    circumstances in which this exception will apply in  deportation  cases
    has been considered by the respondent and amendments were made  to  the
    Immigration Rules in an attempt to set out the circumstances in which a
    deportation order might properly not  be  made  because  of  Article  8
    considerations.  The relevant paragraphs of the Rules which  came  into
    force on 9 July 2012 (which as noted by Mr Deller were regrettably  not
    referred to within the panel's determination) are paragraphs  398,  399
    and 399A, which provide as follows:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12  months;
                  or


             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of
                  State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
                  a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                  the law, the Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim
                  will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
                  if  it  does  not,  it  will  only   be   in   exceptional
                  circumstances that the public interest in deportation will
                  be outweighed by other factors.


             399. [This paragraph is not applicable in the circumstances of
                  this appellant]...


             399A. This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                  applies if -


             (a)  the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                  20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
                  decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he
                  has no ties (including social, cultural  or  family)  with
                  the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
                  leave the UK....".


13. It was made clear by the Court of Appeal in MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 that a Tribunal must first consider whether or not in the case
    of a deportation order an applicant  is  entitled  to  claim  that  his
    removal would be disproportionate under Article  8  by  reason  of  the
    matters set out within these paragraphs, but that where  it  would  not
    be, further consideration can be given to whether removal could be said
    still to be disproportionate outside  these  specific  provisions.   In
    this case the appellant has not lived continuously in the UK for twenty
    years immediately preceding the date of the decision and nor can it  be
    said that he has no ties with Sri Lanka; indeed the evidence is that he
    has substantial ties in that country because that is where his wife and
    daughters live, albeit they would prefer that  he  did  not  return  to
    them.  So following the decision in MF (Nigeria)  the  Tribunal  should
    consider whether or not even outside the  provisions  contained  within
    these specific paragraphs it could  still  be  said  that  removal  was
    disproportionate.  To this extent  the  current  jurisprudence  remains
    valid and the use  of  the  words  "exceptional  circumstances"  within
    paragraph 398(c) is not meant to impose any test of exceptionality  but
    rather to be predictive such that those occasions where  a  person  who
    does not come within any of the exceptions set out within paragraph 399
    or 399A will nonetheless be able to argue successfully that his removal
    would still be disproportionate would be the exception.  It is in light
    of this guidance that this appeal has to be considered.

14. I also have in mind the observations of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
    (Nigeria) (at paragraph 43) that in order for an argument under Article
    8 to succeed in these circumstances, an applicant would  need  to  show
    "very compelling" reasons.  What the court in that case had in mind was
    very strong family ties within this country.

15. The circumstances in this  case  cannot  be  said  in  any  way  to  be
    compelling nor could they by any stretch of the imagination be said  to
    be exceptional.  This appellant had no right to be in this  country  at
    all after his appeal against the refusal of asylum was dismissed.  That
    he remained for a number of years does not reflect any credit  on  him.
    He was very fortunate indeed to be granted leave to  remain  under  the
    legacy policy because this leave was given not because individually  he
    had any proper basis for being here but because the backlog  of  claims
    was so enormous that the respondent considered that for  administrative
    reasons  it  was  more  efficacious  to  grant  some  applicants  leave
    generally rather than give further individual  consideration  to  their
    specific claims.  It was however made clear to this appellant  when  he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain that this leave could be revoked
    in the event of a criminal conviction.  No evidence  regarding  private
    life was put before the Tribunal and it has not been suggested that his
    deportation would be disproportionate because of any particular ties he
    has in this country; nor can it be credibly suggested that he  has  any
    family life in this country.  Indeed the evidence is that  all  of  his
    close family (that is his wife and children) are in Sri  Lanka.   I  do
    not consider it even remotely arguable that to return this appellant to
    the country where his wife and children live would engage his Article 8
    rights because it would stop him sending money back to them or  because
    his family would be better off  without  him,  as  they  appear  to  be
    arguing.

16. In these circumstances, even though it is regrettable that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not make its decision in a more structured manner and
    it would have been preferable as Mr Deller accepted if the relevant law
    had been at least referred to, nonetheless the decision which  it  made
    cannot be impeached.  This appeal could  not  possibly  have  succeeded
    before any Tribunal and although the  structure  of  the  determination
    might be open to challenge, nonetheless the panel did have in mind  the
    merits of the appellant's claim or rather in the circumstances of  this
    case its lack of merits.  In these circumstances I find that there  was
    no material error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such that this decision needs to be  re-made  and  I  will  so
    find.  For the sake of completeness I will just add that had I felt the
    need to set aside the determination I would have had no  hesitation  at
    all in re-making the  decision  by  again  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal.



Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal this appeal is dismissed.



Signed:                                               Date:  27 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


