
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02027/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 June 2015                          |On 18 June 2015                    |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 M M (Iraq)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr Collins, Counsel instructed by Caulker &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on
    27 March 2015 for the following reasons:

      1) Permission is sought, in time, to appeal against  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge McWilliam, promulgated on 3  March  2015,
         in which she allowed the [claimant's] appeal against a decision  to
         make a deportation order against him, following his conviction  for
         an offence of rape, for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  six  years'
         imprisonment.

      2) The grounds seeking permission assert the judge  erred  in  law  by
         stating that the [claimant] had  previously  been  given  leave  to
         remain under Article 3 of the ECHR  when,  in  fact,  he  had  been
         granted discretionary leave due to  the  prevailing  conditions  in
         Iraq.  Furthermore, it is said that the judge failed to  adequately
         resolve the conflict in his evidence concerning the role he  played
         in the Ba'ath Party.

      3) There is a tension in  the  decision  concerning  the  [claimant's]
         previous leave.  In paragraph 4, the judge observed  that  claimant
         had  been  granted  periods  of  discretionary  leave  due  to  the
         country's situation.  However, at paragraph 33, she stated that the
         [claimant] had been granted leave under Articles 2  and  3  of  the
         ECHR because of his claimed involvement in  the  Ba'ath  Party  and
         risk on return  from  the  Mahdi  Army.   Although  she  found  the
         [claimant] an unimpressive witness because of  the  change  in  his
         account to distance himself from the Ba'ath Party, it is argued the
         judge failed to adequately resolve the conflict  in  his  evidence.
         His role as set out in paragraph  35  of  the  decision  is  vastly
         different from his oral evidence as recorded at paragraph 24;  that
         he was merely a cook.

      4) In these circumstances, it is argued the judge erred in law,  so  I
         grant  permission  to  appeal.   All  of  the  grounds  raised  are
         arguable.

Background

 2. The claimant, born 25 December 1958, entered the UK on 13 December 2004
    after being granted a visit visa.  On 26 May 2005 he applied for  leave
    to remain in  order  to  access  private  medical  treatment,  and  the
    application was refused on 17 June 2005.  He  appealed  this  decision,
    and his appeal was allowed on 25 August  2005.   Leave  to  remain  was
    issued on 19 September 2005 until 31 December  2005.   On  24  February
    2006 he was granted further leave to access medical treatment until  13
    June 2006.  And leave was granted again on  the  same  basis  until  23
    March 2007.  On 21 March 2007 he applied for an EEA residence  card  as
    the dependant of his brother, who  was  a  national  of  Denmark.   His
    application was refused on 15 October 2007.

 3. On 16 January 2008, the claimant was issued with a notice to  a  person
    liable for removal.  On 3 March 2008 the claimant applied  for  asylum.
    His core claim, as summarised in paragraphs 8 to 9 of Judge McWilliams'
    decision, was that he was a well-known member of the  Ba'ath  Party  in
    the Al-Doora area of Baghdad.  He had been a member of the Ba'ath Party
    since 1989.  He was trained and had to attend seminars in  relation  to
    the use of firearms and the capture and detention of  those  wanted  by
    the party.  He was responsible to Dr Iyad  Al-Mesh  Hadni  who  was  in
    charge of the whole area.  His rank was Moayed-Nassseer  and  his  main
    task was to control events on the streets  and  to  capture  and  bring
    those who were wanted by the party for prosecution.  Between  1995  and
    1996 he had been  given  a  list  of  names  and  was  responsible  for
    apprehending the individuals named on the  list.   In  that  period  he
    captured a group from the Mahdi Army.  One of  those  captured  was  an
    Ameer, which is a prince or someone who is responsible  for  a  certain
    area.  This person's name was Abu (Hadeed), and his followers knew  the
    claimant by name  and  could  identify  him.   He  frequently  received
    threats (and made some telephone calls) from the  Mahdi  Army  and  the
    Salafi Al-Jihad Al-Rafidayn Group ("SAR Group") had said that  one  day
    they would take revenge.

 4. The claimant said he fled to Syria in 2003, and  that  he  returned  to
    Iraq at least once in 2004. On 15 March 2004 a warrant  was  issued  by
    the Ministry of Justice Iraq for his arrest. He decided to come to  the
    UK and he entered on a valid visit visa in  December  2003.     He  had
    returned to Syria in 2007 in order to relocate his family to  a  secure
    location because he had received threats in relation to them.     Since
    the fall of the regime members of the Mahdi Army  had  taken  over  the
    judiciary.  Colleagues that he had worked with were being  killed.   In
    2006 he had received a note from the Mahdi Army threatening  his  life.
    The note was delivered to his house in Iraq, and subsequently  sent  to
    his wife in Syria by an uncle.  As a Ba'ath Party member he had certain
    privileges and he had done well  for  himself  in  Iraq,  owning  three
    houses.  These three houses had now been destroyed.

 5. The claimant's asylum claim was considered by a specialist  group.  The
    decision-maker who responded to his claim for asylum in a decision of 9
    September  2011  indicated  that  his  account  was  considered  to  be
    generally credible, save for his claim that he was  forcibly  recruited
    into the Ba'ath Party.  It was accepted that he  had  received  threats
    from the Mahdi Army since he  had  left  Iraq  in  2003,  and  that  he
    remained of ongoing adverse interest to the Mahdi Army.

 6. On the basis of his account of his activities for the Ba'ath Party, the
    Secretary of  State  decided  that  he  had  committed  crimes  against
    humanity, thereby excluding  him  from  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  So his  claim  was  certified  under  Section  55  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  It followed that he  was
    also excluded from the grant of  humanitarian  protection  pursuant  to
    paragraph 339D of the Rules.  The claimant challenged this decision  by
    judicial review, but the application was refused on  9  May  2012,  the
    judge having found that his case was totally without merit.

 7. On account of the Article 3 risk he faced  from  the  Mahdi  Army,  the
    claimant was granted discretionary leave until 8 March 2012.  He made a
    further application for discretionary leave on 22  February  2012,  and
    this was granted until 8 September 2012.

 8. The claimant applied for an extension  of  discretionary  leave  on  20
    August 2012.  While this application was pending, on 10 September  2012
    the claimant  was  convicted  of  rape  and  sentenced  to  six  years'
    imprisonment.  Following this, he was served with a notice of liability
    to deportation on 19th October 2012.  The Secretary of State considered
    representations, but went on to make a deportation  order  pursuant  to
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 on 11 September 2013.  At  the
    same time, the claimant's application for further  discretionary  leave
    to remain was refused.   The  Secretary  of  State  asserted  that  his
    previous links to the Ba'ath Party would not  put  the  claimant  at  a
    continued threat should he return.  The Secretary of State   relied  on
    background evidence to the  effect  that  being  targeted  solely  with
    reference to former Ba'athist association was unlikely, and  that  such
    risks were minimal due to the extensive de-Ba'athification process; and
    that former membership of the Ba'ath Party was not a determining factor
    when it came to the question of whether or  not  the  person  would  be
    targeted.  The influence of the  Mahdi  Army  had  waned  significantly
    since 2007/2008, and they had become more splendid and more  political;
    they rarely used violence openly.  The threats that  the  claimant  had
    received were made when the Mahdi Army was at the height of its  power,
    and with its decline, the threat level to the claimant had decreased to
    the point where he was not at a real risk of serious harm on return  to
    Baghdad. It was this decision that was the basis of the  appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. At the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  took  place  on  3
    February 2015, the claimant adopted as his evidence-in-chief a  witness
    statement dated 25 October 2014 in which he said at paragraph  24  that
    the interpreter used in his case "gave wrong interpretation", as he was
    from Yemen.  The SAJR Group (about which the  2013  decision-maker  had
    not been able to find any evidence as to existence)  had  become  DASH-
    Isis, and he was wanted by these people  to  kill  him.   These  people
    believed that he was an informant against them to the Ba'ath Party.

10. In his oral evidence, he said that he was just a cook  for  the  Ba'ath
    Party, and his duties were making meals.  There was a problem with  the
    interpretation during his asylum interview.  The interpreter  was  from
    Yemen and not Iraq.  He denied saying in interview that he was part  of
    a militia which went out and arrested people.  His role was minimal.

11. In her subsequent decision, the judge addressed the  claimant's  change
    of case at paragraph [33].

         "I find that the [claimant] is an unimpressive witness  because  he
         has changed his account today in order to distance himself from the
         Ba'ath Party.  I do not accept the [claimant's] account that  there
         was a problem during the interview with the  interpreter.   He  has
         not raised this concern before.  I prefer the detailed and  clearer
         account that he gave an accurate account of his  activities  during
         his interview for asylum.  On 9 September  2011  the  Secretary  of
         State granted leave to the [claimant] pursuant to Articles 2 and  3
         of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights on the basis of  his  claim.
         The Secretary of State last granted leave  to  the  claimant  under
         Article 3 on 22 February 2012 and therefore she  was  of  the  view
         that he was, at that date, at risk on return from the Mahdi Army."

12. The judge went on to observe that the Secretary of  State  now  took  a
    different position in the decision of 2013 from  that  taken  in  2011.
    Issues were raised in the 2013 letter  about  the  credibility  of  his
    account which were not  raised  in  2011.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    position in the 2013 letter was now that the claimant was a  low  level
    member of the Ba'ath Party, but this was not consistent with  her  view
    in 2011 which was that he had committed crimes  against  humanity.   In
    2011  and  again  in  2013  the  Secretary  of   State   accepted   the
    documentation produced by the claimant.  The judge's own  view  of  the
    claimant's evidence was that which was accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in 2011.  She found that he was  involved  in  the  detention  of
    members of the Mahdi Army prior to the fall of the regime;  and  before
    and after the fall of the regime he received threats.   She  considered
    the arrest warrant in the context of the evidence on the whole, and she
    found that it was reliable.

13. The judge continued in paragraph [37]:

         "The issue is whether or not the [claimant] is still at risk on the
         basis of the account as accepted by the Secretary of State in  2011
         and which is the account that I prefer for the reasons given above.
           The  background  evidence  cited  in  the  RFL  is  out  of  date
         considering the ever changing and evolving circumstances  in  Iraq.
         While it is the  case  that  the  Mahdi  Army  has  waned,  I  have
         considered the relatively up-to-date background  evidence  produced
         by the [claimant] which establishes that there has been  resurgence
         since Muktada Al-Sadrs' withdrawal from politics.  Of course I have
         taken into account the fact that the reports predate  the  stepping
         down of Al-Maliki on 14 August 2014, but there is no evidence  that
         the Mahdi Army has again waned since then.  The evidence is that it
         is now involved in opposition to ISIS operations in  Iraq  and  has
         been re-named the Peace Brigades.  The [claimant]  has  established
         that he would be at risk on return to Iraq."

14. There was no Article 8 claim and the  judge  dismissed  the  claimant's
    appeal against deportation under the Rules.   She  allowed  his  appeal
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

Discussion

15. Ground 1 is that the judge was wrong to find at paragraph [33] that the
    claimant was previously granted leave under Article 3 ECHR in  2012  as
    the Secretary of State considered  that  he  was  at  risk  on  return.
    Earlier, at paragraph [4] the judge noted that the claimant was granted
    discretionary leave in 2012 due to the country situation in Iraq.

16. While there is a discrepancy between what the judge said  at  paragraph
    [4] and what she said at paragraph [33],  Mr  Tufan  rightly  abandoned
    this ground of appeal.  In the decision letter of 9 September 2011, the
    Secretary of State explained at paragraph  32  that  the  claimant  was
    being granted limited leave to enter the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
    published  Home  Office  policy  instruction  on  discretionary   leave
    because, although he had been excluded from benefiting  from  the  1951
    Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees  and   Humanitarian
    Protection, there was a  real  risk  that  he  would  suffer  treatment
    contrary to Article 3 of the European Convention of Human  Rights,  and
    would  otherwise  have  been  given  humanitarian   protection.    This
    statement immediately follows the acceptance in  paragraph  31  of  the
    letter that his actions in Iraq had created a  real  risk  upon  return
    that he would face treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR
    as he was being sought out by the Mahdi Army.

17. Ground 2 was that the Tribunal  gave  scant  regard  to  the  fact  the
    claimant had now  changed  his  asylum  claim  to  something  that  was
    completely  different  to  what  he  had  raised  previously;  that  no
    reasonable explanation for the vast discrepancy had  been  provided  by
    the claimant; and the Tribunal failed to provide adequate  reasons  why
    this discrepancy did not cast serious doubts upon  the  credibility  of
    his previous claim.

18. As we informed the parties at the hearing, we find  that  ground  2  is
    made out.  The judge's error was to treat the new  claim  and  the  old
    claim as being on  an  equal  footing  when  deciding  which  claim  to
    believe.  This was the wrong approach, as the new claim supplanted  the
    old one.  The judge failed to engage with the implications of this, and
    with the probative force of what was objectively a confession  that  he
    had previously lied about his level  of  involvement  with  the  Ba'ath
    Party.  As the judge indicated in her reasoning, the  level  of  detail
    that the claimant  had  given  in  his  asylum  interview  was  totally
    inconsistent with  the  proposition  that  the  Yemen  interpreter  had
    wrongly attributed to him all the activities for the Ba'ath Party which
    had led to the Section 55 certification, when in fact what the claimant
    had been trying to say in his asylum interview was that  his  role  was
    minimal  and  he  was  just  a  cook.    Since   misunderstanding   and
    mistranslation  is  not  a  credible  explanation,   the   only   other
    explanation for the discrepancy is that if the present account  is  the
    correct account  then  the  claimant  had  presented  a  dishonest  and
    fabricated account when initially claiming asylum.

19. Not only was the credibility  of  the  initial  account  thus  severely
    undermined for this reason, but it was additionally undermined  by  the
    fact that the new account severely weakened the asylum  claim  both  by
    reference to alleged past persecution (threats from the Mahdi Army) and
    by  reference  to  future  risk.   Confessions  or  admissions  against
    interest have a high evidential status in  this  jurisdiction  no  less
    than in other jurisdictions as in the normal course of events an asylum
    seeker is unlikely to tell a lie to his disadvantage; or,  put  another
    way, if a  claimant  admits  in  effect  that  a  previous  account  is
    invented, there would ordinarily  have  to  be  cogent  reasons  and/or
    compelling evidence to justify the Tribunal adhering to  an  acceptance
    of the claimant's "retracted" version of events.

20. We acknowledge that the claimant did not retract his earlier claims  to
    have been threatened by the Mahdi Army, and that, through his  Counsel,
    he continued to place reliance on documents such as the arrest warrant.
     But in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed, the  burden  continued  to  rest
    with the claimant to show that such documents  could  be  relied  upon,
    having regard to his new account of his  "true"  level  of  involvement
    with the Ba'ath Party.

21. As submitted by Mr Tufan, there is no suggestion that the  claimant  is
    suffering from mental health problems, such that  his  new  version  of
    events could be disregarded on that account.  Judge McWilliams was  not
    assisted by the line taken by the Presenting Officer, who may have been
    surprised by the content of the claimant's oral evidence, and  who  had
    not had an opportunity to  reflect  upon  its  full  implications.  The
    thrust of his submissions, as recorded in paragraph [26] of the judge's
    decision, is that it was open to the judge to accept or not the account
    given by the claimant in his oral evidence.

22. In fact, for the reasons given above, the scales were heavily  weighted
    in favour of the acceptance of the appellant's new account, or at least
    heavily  weighted  against  a  continued  acceptance  of  his  original
    account.

23. In short, not only  has  the  judge  not  given  adequate  reasons  for
    adhering to the original account, but for procedural reasons  (the  new
    account being the only account now being relied on in  support  of  the
    claim under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR) the new account should have been the
    judge's starting point.

24. Ground 3 is that in paragraph [37] the  Tribunal  has  found  that  the
    situation in Iraq has changed since the  decision  letter,  but  it  is
    unclear from the Tribunal's findings  what  evidence  this  finding  is
    based upon other than it is based on background evidence  submitted  by
    the claimant.  It is argued that this fails to  show  sufficiently  how
    the situation in Iraq has changed or why it  results  in  the  claimant
    being at risk.

25. We find that ground 3 is made out as the judge has not  identified  the
    specific background evidence submitted by the claimant  which  supports
    the finding in paragraph [37] that the claimant would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Iraq.

26. Accordingly, we find that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained an error of law, such that it should be set aside and remade.

Future Disposal

27. As we canvassed with the parties at the hearing, we consider that  this
    is an appropriate case where the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  None of the findings of fact will
    be preserved.

Conclusion

28. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that it should be set aside and remade.

Directions

29. The appeal against deportation is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at Taylor House for a de novo hearing on the  international  protection
    claim, with a time estimate of three hours.

30. None of the findings of fact made  by  the  previous  Tribunal  on  the
    international  protection  claim  (Articles  2  and  3  ECHR)  will  be
    preserved.

31. An Iraqi interpreter will be required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

