
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02064/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 30 November 2015                      |           On 11 December 2015      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


                                     and


                       JORGE LUIS FIQUEIREDO GESTEIRA
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Claimant:      Mr Mukulu instructed by Ricardina Bridges Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett, promulgated on 13  August  2015,  in
    which he allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 15 October 2014 to deport  him  pursuant  to
    Regulations 19, 21 and 24 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Portugal born on 3 September 1994. He came
    to the United Kingdom in 2005 and has live here since then, undertaking
    full time education for a number of years.  His  mother  lives  in  the
    United Kingdom, and he has no relatives left in Portugal  to  which  he
    has not returned since 2005.

 3. The claimant has been convicted of three offences:

      i) failure to surrender to custody on  21  July  2012,  for  which  he
         received one day's imprisonment;

     ii) possession of a knife in a public place on 26 July 2012, for  which
         he received 8 weeks' detention suspended for 12 months; and,

    iii) supplying a controlled drug, crack cocaine, for which he received 2
         years detention in a young offenders institution.

 4. Consequent on the last conviction, the Secretary of  State  decided  to
    deport the claimant for the reasons set out in the letter of 15 October
    2014, noting that [24] he had been found to present a medium risk of re-
    offending; that there was insufficient evidence that he  had  addressed
    the reasons for his offending, and that [27] he  has  a  propensity  to
    offend, he presented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    to the public to justify his deportation.  She was also satisfied  that
    his removal was proportionate [28] - [32].

 5. On appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett found that:-

      i) the claimant had not acquired  the  right  of  permanent  residence
         [34];

     ii) the claimant represents a sufficiently  serious  threat  to  public
         policy and/or security [48];

    iii) the claimant had started on the road to  rehabilitation  [54],  was
         genuine in his remorse [55] , and

     iv) following Essa, that he was bound to take into account the issue of
         rehabilitation [57]; that it was a factors to be given some  weight
         [58];  and, that there was a reasonable prospect of  rehabilitation
         in the UK, enhanced by the support of his family; and, accordingly,
         deportation was not proportionate [62].

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-



      i) having found that the claimant represents a threat to public policy
         and/or security, it was irrational for the judge to  conclude  that
         the respondent's decision was not proportionate [7];

     ii)  the  judge  erred  in  placing  undue  weight  on  the  issue   of
         rehabilitation, contrary to SSHD v Dumliauskas [2015] EWCA Civ 145




 7. On 20 October 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission
    on all grounds

    Submissions

 8. Mr Norton submitted that there was a clear  error  in  this  case,  the
    judge  having  erred  in  taking  into  account  the   possibility   of
    rehabilitation.

 9. Mr Mukulu submitted that there has been no material error, and that the
    Secretary of State's submissions were, in effect, a submission that all
    she needed to do to succeed was to show that an appellant  presented  a
    genuine, sufficient and serious threat.

    Discussion

21. The main thrust of the Secretary of State's  case  is  that  the  judge
    erred in his consideration of rehabilitation, given in particular  what
    was held in Dumliauskas at [54] per Sir Stanley Burnton:

         Lastly, in agreement with what was said by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Vasconcelos, I do not consider that in the case of an offender with
         no permanent right of residence substantial weight should be  given
         to rehabilitation. I appreciate that  all  Member  States  have  an
         interest in  reducing  criminality,  and  that  deportation  merely
         exports  the  offender,  leaving  him  free  to  offend  elsewhere.
         However, the whole point of deportation  is  to  remove  from  this
         country someone whose offending renders him a risk to  the  public.
         The  Directive  recognises  that  the  more  serious  the  risk  of
         reoffending, and the offences that he may commit, the  greater  the
         right to interfere  with  the  right  of  residence.  Article  28.3
         requires the most serious risk, i.e. "imperative grounds of  public
         security", if a Union citizen has resided in the host Member  State
         for the previous 10 years. Such grounds will  normally  indicate  a
         greater  risk  of  offending  in  the  country  of  nationality  or
         elsewhere in the Union. In other words, the  greater  the  risk  of
         reoffending, the greater the right to deport

22. There is, as the respondent  submits,  no  indication  that  the  judge
    engaged with this decision, although it was  handed  down  some  months
    before the appeal before him.

23. Contrary to what was submitted by Mr Mukulu, it  is  evident  from  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision that significant  weight  was  given  to
    rehabilitation, as can be seen from paragraphs [54]-[59].  While  other
    factors were taken into account, as is required by regs. 21 (5) and (6)
    of the EEA Regulations, these are dealt with briefly, and it cannot  be
    said that, had weight not been improperly  attached  to  the  issue  of
    rehabilitation, that the appeal would nonetheless  have  been  allowed.
    While the judge records the length of time the claimant  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom and his ties, including family, there is  no  indication
    of this being weighed or what weight  was  attached  to  any  of  these
    factors.

24. I do not, however, consider that there is merit in  the  submission  in
    the grounds at [7] that it is irrational for a judge, having found that
    an appellant does present a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to public policy and/or security, to proceed to allow an appeal.
    As Sir Stanley Burnton stated in Dumliauskas at [55], a  real  risk  of
    reoffending (and thus presenting such a risk) is a condition  precedent
    to the power to deport being exercised; only once that  is  established
    is there a need  to  consider  the  proportionality  of  doing  so,  in
    accordance with the principles set out in regs. 21 (5) and (6).

25. It follows therefore that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law, and I set it aside.

26. I consider that there will in this case  be  a  need  to  hear  further
    evidence. It is also unclear why  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered
    that the applicant did represent a risk of or  propensity  to  reoffend
    if, as appears from [54] ant [59] he was on the road to rehabilitation,
    was genuinely remorseful and would have the support of family which was
    likely to diminish his likelihood of reoffending.   Accordingly,  I  am
    satisfied that in this case it would be appropriate to remit the appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.



Summary of conclusions


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh determination
    on all issues.



Signed                                  Date:  2 December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul







