
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02524/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th August 2014                              |On 4th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                              Olaf Lukasz Pikus
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, Counsel instructed on behalf of Bruce
Short Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Grant-Hutchison and Mrs E  Morton)
    promulgated on 28th March 2014.  By its decision,  the  Tribunal  panel
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision, dated 10th February 2013,  to  deport  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  Tribunal  dismissed  his  appeal  on  the  ground  that
    deportation would not breach his rights as a European citizen under the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations") and would not be an  infringement  of  his  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Poland born on 10th April 1982.   It  was
    asserted by the Appellant that he first arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    in June 2006.  He was not able to state the exact date of entry nor had
    he provided the Secretary of State with any  evidence  to  confirm  his
    date of entry.  It was the Appellant's case that he had been working in
    the United Kingdom since his entry.  However the Secretary of State  in
    the reasons for deportation letter dated 10th  December  2013  was  not
    satisfied that there was evidence of residence in accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of either five years of  ten  years
    continuous residence.  During the time  that  he  had  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom he had lived with his partner and had a daughter of that
    relationship.  The partnership had broken down and at the date  of  the
    decision had a relationship with another partner for two years.

 3. The Appellant has an offending history. The Appellant first came to the
    attention of the police in Scotland on 27th October 2009 for minor road
    traffic offences.  The Appellant continued to offend in 2011 again  for
    minor road traffic offences but also carrying  a  knife,  in  2012  was
    convicted of driving whilst disqualified and of a  minor  road  traffic
    offence.  In 2013 he was convicted of  behaving  in  a  threatening  or
    abusive manner likely to cause a reasonable person to suffer  harm  for
    which he was admonished and was also  found  to  be  an  aggravator  in
    domestic abuse and on 16th February 2013 was convicted of two counts of
    theft by house breaking.

 4. On 6th June 2013 he appeared before a Sheriff of Grampian Highland  and
    Islands at  Aberdeen  and  pleaded  guilty  to  two  charges  of  being
    concerned in the supply of a controlled drug under the Misuse of  Drugs
    Act 1971 Section 4(3)(b).  As a result of the  Appellant's  conviction,
    he  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of  sixteen  months'   imprisonment.
    Following the Appellant's conviction, the Secretary of  State  on  27th
    June 2013 notified the Appellant that she was considering  whether  his
    deportation from the United Kingdom was justified on grounds of  public
    policy and requested reasons why he should not  be  deported  from  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant provided reasons making reference to his
    family life in the United Kingdom  with  his  previous  ex-partner  and
    daughter and his present relationship with his girlfriend.

 5. The decision to make a deportation order  was  made  on  10th  February
    2013.

 6. The Appellant appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent  under
    Regulation 26 of the Regulations 2006.   The  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Grant-Hutchison and Mrs E  Morton)  on
    27th February 2014 at Glasgow.  The panel heard oral evidence from  the
    Appellant and from two witnesses Miss Migas and  Miss  Lesak.   In  the
    determination, the panel set out the relevant parts of the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006, namely Regulations 19 and 21.  They  noted  the
    evidence before them at length and set out the findings  of  fact  from
    the evidence that had been put before the panel.

 7. In respect of the Appellant's length of  residence,  the  Secretary  of
    State had  not  accepted  that  there  was  evidence  of  residence  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years
    or that the Appellant had demonstrated ten years' continuous  residence
    and thus had concluded in light of the information  available  that  he
    had not acquired  the  right  of  permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The panel dealt with that issue at [18] but found that by the
    date of his conviction the Appellant had only resided  in  the  UK  for
    four years and four months.  The panel considered there was a  lack  of
    evidence to support his claim that he had entered the United Kingdom in
    June 2006 and rejected the  evidence  of  his  ex-partner  and  present
    partner as to the length of time that  he  had  been  resident  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   The  panel  also  considered  that  there   was   no
    documentary evidence in support of his length  of  residence  from  any
    employment noting that there were no pay slips nor did they  hear  oral
    evidence from  fellow  employees.   Thus  they  placed  weight  on  his
    conviction history and therefore the earliest date that they could rely
    upon was 2009.  As he was convicted of offences from 16th April 2013 by
    using the date of 2009 they reached the conclusion  that  he  had  only
    demonstrated length of  residence  for  four  years  and  four  months.
    Therefore they found that the Appellant was not entitled to the  higher
    level of protection afforded by Regulation 21(3) to  a  person  with  a
    permanent right of residence.

 8. They then turned to the issue of the  matters  set  out  in  Regulation
    21(5) and (6).  In this respect  they  considered  his  conviction  and
    recited the sentencing remarks of the judge at [21].  In  this  respect
    the Tribunal noted that they  "whole  heartedly  endorsed  the  judge's
    sentence remarks.  There is not much more we can  add.   The  Appellant
    would have been sentenced for twenty months had  he  not  plead  before
    that."  At [23] they turned to the  consideration  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant's  personal  conduct  represented  a  "genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat" to public policy or public security in the
    UK."  At [24] the panel took into account  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    conviction in Poland for robbery using violence or  weapons,  or  using
    threats of violence as weapons  against  a  person  for  which  he  was
    convicted with a sentence of six years.  They took the  view  that  his
    conduct in the United Kingdom indicated "an escalating  seriousness  of
    criminality".  They also  found  that  he  had  "displayed  a  cavalier
    approach to the laws of the country by driving whilst disqualified  and
    by not cooperating with the community payback  order"  (at  [24]).   At
    paragraph [25] the panel considered his attitude  to  the  offences  of
    which he had  been  convicted.   They  found  that  he  had  not  taken
    responsibility for his own actions and reached a finding  that  he  had
    not given a consistent version of events  concerning  his  criminality.
    For those reasons at [26] they found  the  Appellant's  removal  to  be
    justified on the grounds of public policy and security and  thus  found
    at [26] that it was proportionate that he should be deported.

 9.   They then went on to consider Article 8 of the  ECHR  and  considered
    the well-established five stage test in Razgar at [31]  and  that  [32]
    reached the  conclusion  that  the  answer  to  each  of  the  separate
    questions were in favour of  the  Appellant  and  therefore  the  issue
    before the panel at [33 - 38] dealt with the issue of  proportionality.
    The panel at [33] considered the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    child as a primary consideration and found, contrary to  the  Secretary
    of State's decision, that he was the father of the child  although  his
    name was not on the birth certificate.  They found his contact with the
    child had been "transitory" and that the birth of the child in 2008 had
    not prevented him from committing the  crimes  for  which  he  went  to
    prison.  They found the child was not a British citizen and had "barely
    engaged with the educational process in the UK"  and  that  her  mother
    could return with him to Poland as she had done before  where  she  had
    relatives and the Appellant.  The panel also  considered  that  if  the
    mother of the child chose not to return there would be an  interference
    with her Article 8 rights and that the question of her  best  interests
    would require to be considered.  However, the panel found

         "Her mother who may be considered to have a view as to what was  in
         the best interests of the child chose to  remove  herself  and  the
         child  to  Poland  and  separate  from  the  Appellant  albeit  she
         eventually returned.  We are not persuaded by the contents  of  the
         expert report regarding the  best  developmental  interest  of  the
         child.  Many children do live separately from one of their parents.
          Given the Appellant's criminal record we are  far  from  persuaded
         that he would be supportive of the child or a good role  model  for
         her.  Given the interests of the state and deportation we  did  not
         find that when the best interests of the child  or  any  Article  8
         rights weigh decisively against the said deportation."

10. Thus the panel dismissed the appeal.

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds and on  15th
    April 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge De  Haney  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

12. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Winter on behalf of
    the Appellant relied upon the grounds as  drafted.   The  first  ground
    related to the panel's failure to address the correct test at paragraph
    [18] of the determination.  He submitted that the panel had incorrectly
    found that the Appellant had resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  four
    years and four months. The assessment had been made from  a  letter  in
    the  Appellant's  bundle  exhibited  at  G1  but  that  the  panel  had
    misconstrued the contents of that letter.   Whilst  the  panel  in  the
    determination at [18] referred to the letter and  stated  "this  was  a
    letter from an employment agency which stated that  he  was  'on  their
    books'", the letter itself said no  such  thing  but  in  fact  clearly
    stated that the Appellant had worked from 30th October 2007 until  19th
    December 2007.  Thus he submitted it  was  unclear  from  the  evidence
    where the panel had obtained that view that the Appellant was  "on  the
    books" as it was not reflected in  the  evidence  at  G1.   He  further
    submitted that in that respect, having found erroneously that there was
    no evidence to support his length  of  residence  before  2009  wrongly
    assessed his length of residence and therefore the wrong test had  been
    applied and that this was an error of law.  In respect  of  the  second
    ground, it was submitted that the panel failed to take into account  or
    to give any proper account to an expert report from  Dr  McCormack  who
    had carried out an independent  risk  assessment.   He  submitted  that
    there had been no OASys Report in  this  case  to  deal  with  risk  of
    reoffending although the panel had made reference to a  social  enquiry
    report which had found him to be a medium risk.   At  the  hearing  the
    panel had been provided with an  up-to-date  risk  assessment  from  Dr
    McCormack  which  had  assessed  the  Appellant  as  a  low   risk   of
    reoffending.  He submitted that there had been no assessment of risk in
    the light of this report.  He further submitted that it was a  material
    part of the evidence because if he did not present a risk it  would  be
    difficult to see how the panel could have reached the  conclusion  that
    he would represent a "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat"
    to public policy or public security in the  United  Kingdom.   Thus  he
    submitted there were errors of law in the determination.

13.  Miss O'Brien on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted in relation
    to Ground 1 that the question for the Tribunal was  not  how  long  the
    Appellant had been in the United Kingdom but whether there was evidence
    to demonstrate that he fulfilled the Regulations.   She  conceded  that
    the letter referred to by the panel at [18] was more likely than not to
    be the employer's letter set out at G1 and  that  the  inference  drawn
    from the panel that he was "on the books" could not be drawn from that.
     However she submitted there was  no  other  evidence  to  support  his
    length of residence and it was open to the panel to find that there was
    insufficient evidence to demonstrate a five year period.  She submitted
    the Tribunal were entitled to be entirely dissatisfied that the  period
    had been met.  The panel found that there was no  alternative  evidence
    in the form of pay slips and  therefore  the  first  ground  could  not
    succeed.  As to Ground 2, she submitted that whilst  the  Tribunal  did
    not reference the report the reasoning  at  paragraph  25  demonstrated
    that the Tribunal were dissatisfied with the Appellant's changing story
    and what had caused his offending behaviour.  Therefore  his  differing
    accounts and the most recent account to the psychologist was very  much
    different in terms of guilt.  At [25] of the determination the Tribunal
    was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was  being  honest  about  his
    offending history.  Thus she submitted even  if  the  report  had  been
    considered they could have come to any different  conclusion  on  those
    findings of fact [25].  This was a report  that  was  self-serving  and
    thus they could not place any weight on it and  therefore  the  outcome
    would be the same.

14. By way of reply, Mr Winter submitted that despite the  submission  that
    the expert report was "self-serving"  expert  evidence  should  not  be
    marginalised in that way.  It made an assessment of risk which  was  of
    relevance and thus it could not be said that the  Tribunal  would  have
    reached the same result.  In this context I  asked  Mr  White  for  his
    submissions on the report in the context of the submission the Tribunal
    would have not come to the same conclusion.  In this  respect  he  made
    reference to the risk of  reoffending  in  the  light  of  his  present
    circumstances which were relevant factors in the assessment of risk  as
    referred to in the expert evidence as he in employment. In  respect  of
    his stability, he had been in a stable relationship for two  years  and
    had a good employment history and therefore would  not  engage  in  any
    criminal activity and had adopted a strategy if ever  approached  again
    by those men with whom he had had contact  with  during  his  offending
    history.  The various factors, he submitted would not  inevitably  lead
    to him being a "genuine risk".  He further submitted that in respect of
    Ground 2 it was  a  material  error  and  the  Tribunal  could  not  be
    satisfied that it would have reached the same conclusion  had  it  been
    considered.  Thus he invited the Tribunal, even if errors of  law  were
    found, for a fresh hearing to determine all issues.

15. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination.

16. The first Ground of Appeal relates to the calculation of the length  of
    time the Appellant had resided in the United Kingdom.   The  scheme  of
    the 2006 Regulations in respect of those falling within their scope and
    who face removal as a consequent of a relevant decision, as defined, it
    to provide three levels of protection for removal.  The lowest level of
    protection afforded is provided by Regulation 21(1) which requires that
    a relevant decision, which includes a decision  to  remove,  is  to  be
    taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health.  Turning to the intermediate level of protection, which applies
    to a person who has acquired  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 15, such a decision can be taken only on serious grounds  of
    public policy or public security (per Regulation 21(3)).  The third and
    highest level of protection applies to a person who has accumulated  at
    least ten years' continuous residence prior to the date of the relevant
    decision.  In this case, such a decision cannot be taken except on  the
    imperative grounds of public security (see Regulation 21(4)).

17. Thus the calculation of the length of time is of importance in deciding
    the relevant level of protection and tests to apply.  It  is  submitted
    on behalf of the Appellant that  the  panel  failed  to  calculate  the
    period correctly or in accordance  with  the  evidence  by  reaching  a
    finding that the Appellant had resided in the UK  for  four  years  and
    four months (see [18]).  The panel erroneously reached the  finding  by
    basing their assessment on a letter  from  the  Appellant's  employment
    agency (set out at G1), the contents of which they misconstrued.  It is
    further submitted that the letter exhibited at G1 made  it  clear  that
    the Appellant had been employed on a service contract from 30th October
    2007 until 19th December 2007 and therefore the  panel  were  wrong  to
    find that he had only had four years and four months residence.

18.   To consider this ground it is important to look at  the  decision  of
    the panel and the findings of fact reached on the evidence before them.
     The Appellant's claim was that he had entered the  UK  in  June  2006.
    The panel heard oral evidence from two witnesses  in  support  of  this
    namely his ex-partner and his present partner.   The  panel  found  the
    evidence of his ex-partner to be "uncertain and contradictory" and that
    the evidence of his present partner was in effect  what  she  had  been
    told by the Appellant (see [18]).  The panel also considered that there
    was no evidence to support his claim of residence from 2006.

19. The panel considered if there was any other  evidence  to  support  the
    length of residence and it was in this context that they considered the
    evidence of employment.  They said as follows:-

         "The Appellant claimed to be in continuous  employment  from  2006.
         There was  simply  a  lack  of  such  evidence.   In  addition  the
         Appellant claimed to be in continuous employment from 2006 and  yet
         the only  documentary  evidence  of  this  was  a  letter  from  an
         employment agency which stated that he was on 'their  books'.   The
         Appellant sought to explain  this  by  stating  that  some  of  the
         companies had gone bankrupt.  He referred to  the  difficulties  of
         obtaining documentary evidence while in prison.  We rejected  these
         arguments.  There is no documentary evidence  before  us  that  any
         particular employer had gone into liquidation.  There were  no  pay
         slips.  We did not hear any oral evidence  from  fellow  employees.
         By contrast we know that he was in the  UK  in  2009  when  he  was
         convicted for minor offences."

20. Thus the panel took the date to calculate his residence as being  2009.



21. It is plain from reading the determination at  [18]  that  the  "letter
    from the employment agency" referred to by the panel  could  only  have
    been the letter exhibited at G1.  There is no reference in this  letter
    to support their finding that the Appellant was "on their books" as the
    panel found but simply states that he  worked  on  a  service  contract
    between  the  dates  of  30th  October  2007  and  19th  December  2007
    inclusive.  In this sense, there  was  evidence  before  the  panel  to
    demonstrate that his period of residence should  have  been  calculated
    from October 2007 rather than 2009 and in that respect the  panel  were
    clearly wrong.  However, it is not simply  a  matter  of  demonstrating
    continuous  residence  of  five  years.   The  Regulations  are  clear,
    permanent residence within the meaning of the Regulations  require  the
    Appellant to be continually lawfully resident under EU law, that is  to
    say, is residing in the host state as  a  qualified  person  or  family
    member of a qualified person or to demonstrate that he is  residing  in
    the EU state in accordance with the Regulations.

22. The finding of the panel make it clear that they  considered  from  the
    evidence before them there was no evidence to demonstrate that  he  was
    residing in accordance with the Regulations.  The  panel  at  [18]  say
    that there was "no evidence of employment" and they say that there were
    "no  pay  slips"  or  witnesses  or  evidence  from  fellow  employees.
    However, here was evidence before the panel at D1, E1, F1 and  G1  that
    related to the Appellant's employment.  It can be  summarised  to  show
    his work history as follows October 2007 to December 2007, no  evidence
    for 2008, 12th January 2009 to 28th August 2009 (F1) 13th November 2009
    to 20th November 2009 (E1), 18th February 2010 -  24th  February  2010,
    1st March 2010 - 2nd March 2010, 6th March 2010 - 10th March 2010, 30th
    March 2010, to April 2010.  There were no records for 2011 and 2012 and
    records for 15th January 2013 to March 2013.

23.  There is no reference to these documents in the findings of fact  made
    or the decision at [18] relating to calculation of length  of  time  in
    the United Kingdom or whether this was evidence to  support  his  claim
    that  he  had  been  resident  and  residing  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations.  It seems  to  me  that  the  panel  fell  into  error  by
    calculating the relevant period from 2009 as being four years and  four
    months rather than 2007 of which there was evidence at G1.  As a result
    of this the panel did not consider the  evidence  I  have  referred  to
    above that sets out his periods of employment and  in  effect  did  not
    take into account the period of employment that he had  in  2007.   The
    panel also made no findings as they were required to do as  to  whether
    or not he had demonstrated from 2007 that he had been living in the  UK
    in accordance with the Regulations from  that  time  which  would  have
    necessitated a careful evaluation of the evidence of employment and the
    gaps that there were.  From the dates set out above it can be seen that
    there were gaps in the evidence of 2008, 2011 and  2012.   However,  as
    the panel began the calculation from the wrong date in  2009  and  that
    they had reached the view erroneously that there was no evidence as  to
    his employment prior to 2009 as there clearly  was,  it  is  not  known
    whether they would have accepted the Appellant's oral  evidence  as  to
    his employment history and the reasons for any such gaps and whether he
    could have qualified under the Regulations  as  a  "jobseeker"  or  any
    other way.  Thus I have concluded that the panel  fell  into  error  in
    this regard.

24. The second ground relates to the failing of the panel to have regard to
    the expert report of Dr McCormack who had conducted a  risk  assessment
    which determined the Appellant's risk of reoffending  to  be  low.   As
    Miss O'Brien conceded there was no reference  to  that  report  in  the
    findings or assessment at [25]. when considering what might  be  termed
    as his propensity to offend. However she submits  that  notwithstanding
    that failure, that the panel would have reached no other outcome.

25. I am satisfied that the panel did err in law by not taking into account
    the expert  report  of  Dr  McCormack.   The  report  was  commissioned
    expressly to consider  and  asses  the  risks  of  reoffending  of  the
    Appellant (see page 3 of the report).  The source of the information in
    the report came from the documentation provided and two meetings of the
    Appellant on 30th December 2013 and 24th February 2014.  The conclusion
    reached by the author of the report was that the Appellant presented  a
    low risk of reoffending.  Thus the panel were required to  have  regard
    to the expert report in reaching the conclusion on  the  assessment  of
    risk.  Whilst the panel at [25] considered the  social  enquiry  report
    and the Appellant's later evidence,  they  made  no  reference  to  the
    assessment and the contents of the report  of  Dr  McCormack  and  thus
    their conclusions were not reached in the context of  the  findings  of
    the expert at all.  It would have  been  open  to  the  panel  to  have
    reached a different conclusion from that of the expert but in  reaching
    such a conclusion upon the assessment  of  risk  it  required  them  to
    analyse the report in the context of the evidence  and  to  give  their
    reasons for doing so.  They did not do so.

26. The panel had determine whether the Appellant's conduct  satisfied  the
    applicable "public  policy"  criteria  and  was  required  to  consider
    whether his personal  conduct  represented  a  "genuine  and  presently
    sufficiently serious threat" and this, in my judgment required them  to
    carefully consider all of the evidence including  that  of  the  expert
    report.  It is not possible in the context of the findings to reach the
    conclusion that the panel, had they considered that report  would  have
    reached the same conclusions.  They did  not  take  into  account  that
    report and as I have said in doing so the  conclusions  that  they  did
    reach were not considered in the context of the contents of the  report
    and its assessment of the report.  Thus I am satisfied that  the  panel
    erred in law and that the decision should be set aside.

27. In the event that the  Tribunal  found  an  error  of  law,  Mr  Winter
    indicated that there would be some fresh evidence.  There are a  number
    of issues from which factual findings are required  to  that  end  oral
    evidence will be required from the relevant parties  and  thus  I  have
    reached the conclusion that the appropriate course is to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal to a different judge or  panel  to  consider
    the evidence further and to make factual findings necessary.

28. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and the
    case is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  in
    accordance  with  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act at paragraph 7.2 of  the  Practice  Statement  of  10th
    February 2010 (as amended).

Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel involved the making of an
    error on a point of law.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as  set
    out in the preceding paragraph.






Signed                              Dated


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


