

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Da/02097/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on: |
|On 26 January 2016                            |On 8 March 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                      Kriston Kori Ken Anthony Marshall

                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Rachel Francis of Counsel, instructed by Irving &
Co, solicitors.

For the respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal to deport him  to  his  country  of  origin  as  a  foreign
   criminal pursuant to sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  and
   paragraphs 398 and 399A of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).  The
   appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.

Background

2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom  with  his  mother  in  December
   1993 when he was just a year old.  He was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
   remain, along with his mother, in 2001.  He came to adverse attention  on
   4 June 2006, age 15, when he was convicted of possessing a  bladed  knife
   and sentenced to a  9-month  referral  order.  The  appellant's  criminal
   history and conduct thereafter is set out  in  the  deportation  decision
   made on 1 October 2013. The index offence, for which  the  appellant  was
   arrested with his mother, was  one  of  possession  of  a  Class  A  drug
   (heroin) with intent to supply, for which the appellant was convicted and
   received 2 sentences of 18 months.

3. The respondent concluded that he  could  not  bring  himself  within  the
   exclusions in section 32(5) of the  2007  Act,  and  in  particular,  she
   rejected his human rights claim. She did not consider that there were any
   exceptional circumstances for which leave to remain should be given.

4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

5. The  First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  the  appellant's  history,  and  the
   respondent's evidence, which comprised two witness statements from police
   officers before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  PC  Dunkason  did  not  give
   evidence.   His  statement  concerned  his  work   with   Chaucer   Safer
   Neighbourhood Team (Chaucer SNT).  Before arriving he had been  aware  of
   the appellant through his work on Operation Wasp, which was an undercover
   drugs operation in which the appellant had been arrested  for  the  index
   offence. In his statement, PC Duncan recorded that  when  he  arrived  at
   Chaucer SNT:

         "...the  estate  was  quiet  and  relatively  peaceful.   Residents
         remarked to me that they were grateful  for  police  assistance  in
         incarcerating [the appellant]  and  returning  their  estate  to  a
         pleasant place to live.  However, this all  changed  shortly  after
         his release in December 2011.  Residents started to  report  youths
         hanging round the gardens of [the appellant's address] again and in
         the stairwells of surrounding blocks every day at all hours.

         These youths are well known  criminals  who  intimidate  the  local
         residents. Numerous reports were made to  Southwark  Council  about
         the noise and antisocial behaviour caused by  [the  appellant]  and
         his friends, who were drawn in from surrounding estates.

         It appeared that [the appellant's address] was  a  magnet  for  all
         crime and all complaints on the estate.  The  stairwells  would  be
         covered in spit and litter and loud music  would  be  played  until
         late at night from mobile phones.  Residents  were  intimidated  to
         walk past these groups in stairwells and felt  unable  to  confront
         them through fear of reprisals.  Children  stopped  playing  around
         the blocks and an atmosphere of tension and uncertainty returned to
         the estate.  In  an  effort  to  remove  this  problem,  the  local
         authority attempted to evict  [the  appellant's]  mother  from  her
         home, however this failed.

         Chaucer SNT started to receive  intelligence  reports  in  February
         2012 reporting that dealing had started again on the ...Estate  and
         at the centre of it was [the appellant and his home  address].   He
         was then given a warning for possession of cannabis  and  convicted
         of possession of a knife in May 2012. ... In my opinion he  remains
         actively involved in criminality and is a blight on the local area.
         ... His removal from the United Kingdom will make  Chaucer  Ward  a
         better place to live."

   The appellant's Counsel did not have the opportunity to cross-examine  PC
   Dunkason on that devastating assessment.

6. PC David Glicksman  was  called  by  the  respondent  to  deal  with  the
   Operation Nexus material.   The  officer  accepted  that  there  were  no
   statements from complainants and that in a number of cases the  appellant
   had been arrested but not  charged.   The  'agenda  of  the  witness'  in
   respect of allegations made was not part of the CRIS records, which  were
   a running log, rather than a  diary.   His  understanding  was  that  the
   appellant belonged, not to a street gang but to  organised  crime  gangs,
   mixing not with kids but with adult  criminal  groups.   He  had  pleaded
   guilty to possession of Class A drugs with intent to supply, and had been
   in possession over 90 wraps of drugs, indicating that he had been part of
   the group which provided those drugs.

7. PC Glickman was unaware of the appellant's involvement with Kids  Company
   or the St Giles Trust. An imitation Glock firearm had been found  in  his
   bedroom during a search: the police believed it was there to protect  his
   drugs. After setting out the  appellant's  history  and  his  associates,
   which included several incidents where he was arrested for  possessing  a
   bladed article, use of cannabis, dealing crack cocaine and heroin,  using
   an Oyster card which did not belong  to  him,  engaging  in  illegal  dog
   fighting and numerous other offences.

8. As regards the evidence on the appellant's side,  that  consisted  simply
   of the appellant  and  his  mother.  His  evidence  concerned  3  of  his
   partners, whom I will call P1, P2 and P3 in order of time.   P1  had  not
   said she was pregnant, though the appellant observed that she could  have
   done so. The appellant accepted that P1 might have told the  police  that
   he was still involved with the Rockingham Boys gang:  their  relationship
   had ended in the middle of 2014, when  the  appellant  was  charged  with
   criminal damage to P1's car and had  assaulted  her  during  the  ensuing
   altercation. He had been ordered to attend a domestic violence course but
   had not done so: the appellant did not consider that  he  had  a  problem
   with domestic violence.


9. P2 was pregnant with his child: they  were  intending  to  co-parent  the
   child, with the support of P2's key worker.  He had been seeing P3 for 3-
   4 months when the appeal was heard in January 2015.  She did  not  attend
   court.


10. The appellant gave various  explanations  in  relation  to  offences  of
   which he had been convicted, seeking to minimise them.  He said he was no
   longer associated with people who could be a bad  influence  on  him.  He
   considered the influence of his Kids Company key worker, Will Foster,  to
   be positive, although it had not prevented him from continuing to  commit
   crimes.


11. He could not remember whether his mother had ever  returned  to  Jamaica
   since arriving in the United Kingdom.  He had lived independently but had
   gone back to live with his mother because he did not wish to live  alone,
   and she was suffering from shingles.


12. The appellant had started  but  not  completed  a  Mechanics  course  at
   Croydon College.  He had changed to a creative media course  instead.  He
   had last been stopped by the police 2 weeks ago, in  December  2014:  the
   area where he lived was a high crime area  and  the  police  stopped  him
   regularly.


13. The appellant's mother  gave  evidence,  saying  that  she  had  various
   relatively minor ailments and would not herself return to Jamaica because
   she had a violent ex-husband there, whom she still  feared.  She  was  on
   employment support allowance and had no  relatives  living  nearby  other
   than her children, the appellant and his sister, who both lived with her:
   the appellant helped with the shopping and cooking, and took  his  nephew
   and niece to school.  She  did  not  want  to  accept  help  from  social
   services.  She also considered that St Giles and Kids Company were a good
   influence on the appellant, though she was aware that  he  had  2  recent
   convictions.

14. Mr Will Foster of Kids Company had written letters of support  and  gave
   evidence.  In his oral evidence, he said that he was a senior  worker  at
   Kids Company who had known the appellant since about 2012.   He  was  the
   appellant's mentor.  The appellant had taken advantage of  all  the  help
   Kids Company offered; he knew the appellant  was  working  well  with  St
   Giles Trust.  The appellant was remorseful and the witness'  opinion  was
   that he only smoked marijuana and was 'drugs free'.  No drugs  tests  had
   been done to establish whether that was the case.  The  witness  was  not
   aware of the situation in Jamaica, but had spent many hours working  with
   the appellant at Kids Company, including working on the domestic violence
   issue.

Grounds of appeal

15. The appellant identified 7 grounds of appeal, arguing in each case  that
   the First-tier Tribunal had misdirected  itself  in  law  and  failed  to
   consider material facts.  The  proposed  grounds  may  be  summarised  as
   follows:

   A.     Misdirection and failure to consider material facts

   Grounds 1-2    The appellant argues that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
   to make specific findings as to whether family life  exists  between  the
   appellant and each of his family members: his  mother,  his  sister,  his
   child's mother, and his nephew and niece.  In  particular,  he  complains
   that there is no finding about the support he  provides  for  his  mother
   which would otherwise be  provided  by  social  services.  The  appellant
   contends that the relationship between him  and  his  mother  is  one  of
   Kugathas dependency and relies on his Counsel's skeleton argument  before
   the First-tier Tribunal.

   Ground 3       The interests of  the  affected  children  have  not  been
   treated as a primary consideration for Article 8 ECHR purposes and  there
   is no express self-direction to that effect in the decision.

   Ground 4       The appellant accepts that there is a public  interest  in
   deporting a person who  has  committed  a  serious  crime.   However,  he
   contends that such weight should be  reduced  by  reason  of  significant
   steps towards rehabilitation which he has  taken.  Again,  he  relies  on
   submissions in his Counsel's skeleton argument prepared  for  the  First-
   tier Tribunal hearing.  He also relies on his  'turbulent  childhood  and
   the links between those traumas, his strong community and  rehabilitative
   engagement, and his offending'.

   Ground 7       This ground  is  not  fully  expressed.   The  appellant's
   argument seems to be  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  properly
   consider paragraph 398 of the Rules.

   B.         Factual errors and perversity

   Ground 5       The appellant asserts  that  the  reference  at  [1-2]  to
   paragraph 298 is erroneous; that  he  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
   lawfully for 12 years out of his 22 year old life and that  this  amounts
   to 'most of his life'; and that  the  Tribunal  erroneously  recorded  at
   [117] that his Kids Company social worker and life  coach,  Will  Foster,
   gave evidence that he was  addicted  to  cannabis,  whereas  Mr  Foster's
   evidence, at [77], was  that  'no  drugs  tests  had  been  done  on  the
   appellant but believed him to be drugs free...was  only  aware  that  the
   appellant smoked marijuana'.

   Ground 6       The First-tier Tribunal applied  a  standard  higher  than
   balance of probabilities when assessing the CRIS reports,  by  using  the
   phrase 'taken at its highest we find that  the  CRIS  report  establishes
   that the appellant associates with a number of people who  have  criminal
   records and was present at times when criminal conduct  [occurred]'.   He
   notes the lack of any gang statement in the CRIS reports or the  evidence
   of PC Glickman, the respondent's witness.

Permission to appeal

16. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge White  who
   stated, without particularising his observations, that he was  'satisfied
   that in reaching its decision the panel arguably made an error of law  by
   failing to apply material facts and misdirecting itself on the applicable
   law as fully set out in the extensive grounds seeking permission'.  I  do
   not derive much assistance from the grant of permission.

Rule 24 Reply

17. The respondent in her Rule 24  Reply  observed  that  the  reference  to
   paragraph 298 of  the  Rules  was  an  obvious  typographical  error  for
   paragraph 398.  The respondent then set  out  paragraph  399A,  observing
   that, having regard to [105]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  a
   finding that the appellant had no ties to Jamaica could not be  sustained
   and paragraph 399A did not apply.

18. The respondent contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  considered
   Article 8 ECHR and  made  adequate  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
   relationship with his mother, sister, and his sister's children; the bond
   with his mother was not at the Kugathas  level  but  was  a  normal  bond
   between adult parent  and  child.  His  relationship  with  his  sister's
   children was not such as to outweigh the public interest in deporting the
   appellant, given his drugs convictions and the offences  committed  since
   the deportation order.

19. The respondent contended that in taking the evidence  'at  its  highest'
   the First-tier Tribunal had not applied the wrong standard of proof.  The
   appellant's explanation of the matters relied on  by  the  respondent  in
   that report had  been  accepted  and  his  credibility  was  not  further
   affected.  There was nothing in the 'standard of proof' argument.

20. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

21. The appellant was not present at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing.  His
   Counsel, Ms Francis observed that there was before  me  no  OASys  report
   about the risk of re-offending by this appellant.  She referred me to the
   First-tier Tribunal decision at [82]-[84] and  to  paragraph  10  of  her
   skeleton argument.   The  recital  of  the  evidence  in  this  case  was
   insufficient  and  the  family   members   should   have   been   treated
   individually. She relied  on  the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
   mother, his sister, and his niece and nephew.  The sister  had  given  no
   evidence, though she was at court for the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
   Kugathas had been incorrectly applied. She relied on the  guidance  given
   in the judgment of Sir Stanley Burnton, giving the only reasoned judgment
   in the Court of Appeal, in Singh & Anor v The Secretary of State for  the
   Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630, at [24]-[26] thereof.

22. The evidence was that the appellant  had  lived  with  his  mother  when
   granted immigration bail on 19 February 2012, but then moved  to  Hackney
   for a short period in May or March 2013 as he got into a fight.   The  St
   Giles charity arranged the move.  He returned to his  mother's  house  in
   February 2014 and had been looking for a job since then, working casually
   for a 'man and van' removal company for about 5 months.  His  sister  was
   now working and living  elsewhere,  but  the  appellant  still  took  her
   children to the park sometimes.

23. Regarding the best interests of the children, Ms Francis relied  on  the
   appellant's witness statement and his sister's letter. She had  not  been
   called and her letter stood unchallenged.   The  best  interests  of  his
   sister's children had not been treated as a  primary  consideration.  The
   appellant had taken steps to rehabilitate himself.

24. Ms Frances had no  instructions  on  the  information  from  the  Police
   National Computer (PNC) showing further  offences.    The  appellant  had
   telephoned to say that he was running late.  The hearing was adjourned at
   11 am for an hour.  The appellant had then arrived: he said he  was  late
   because his mother had palpitations and also he had received a  telephone
   call from P2 to say that she was going for a job interview.  On  arrival,
   he had gone to the wrong building.  Ms Frances took instructions and told
   me that the appellant confirmed that the PNC record was accurate.

25. In relation to  rehabilitation,  the  appellant  had  worked  with  Kids
   Company and St Giles Trust.  He was a minor for the  first  few  offences
   and on the cusp of adulthood for the index offence.  Maslov v. Austria  -
   1638/03 [2008] ECHR  546  had  not  been  considered  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, although it was argued in her skeleton argument.  The  Tribunal
   should at least have considered  the  weight  to  attach  to  the  Maslov
   factors.  The appellant  had  a  turbulent  childhood  and  was  strongly
   attached to his community.  He had attended numerous primary schools  and
   lived in bed and breakfast accommodation with his mother.   The  detailed
   factual background was not mentioned and that was  a  material  error  of
   law.

26. The First-tier Tribunal had made a significant error of  fact  at  [102]
   in directing itself that the appellant became lawfully  resident  in  the
   United Kingdom in 2011 not 2001.  On that basis he had indeed spent  half
   his life in the United Kingdom and that  error  infected  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's overall assessment. Also, there was no basis for  finding  him
   to be addicted to cannabis:  his Kids Company worker considered him to be
   drug free.  There was no gang statement: if the Home Office wished him to
   be considered as a gang member, they  should  have  provided  a  specific
   statement detailing the basis on which they so perceived him.

27. There were very compelling circumstances which had not been  considered,
   in that the appellant lived at his mother's house, and his sister and her
   children also lived there now.  The disposal of the  private  and  family
   life in just 3 paragraphs was inadequate and there was  no  reference  to
   very compelling circumstances.  Taken individually or cumulatively, these
   errors amounted to a material  error  of  law  by  reason  of  which  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal was unsafe and materially flawed.  Ms
   Francis asked me to find a material error of law  and  either  allow  the
   appeal or direct a substantive remaking of the decision.

28. For the respondent, Mr Jarvis said that there was no material  error  of
   law.  The grounds were mostly a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal and the outcome of the appeal. As regards  Ground  1,
   it was without substance: it was right that the Tribunal had  erroneously
   approached its assessment on the basis of a free-standing analysis  under
   Razgar, R (on the application of) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2003] EWCA Civ 840 and had failed to direct  itself  that  in
   relation to deportation the Immigration Rules are a complete code.   That
   was an erroneous but over-generous approach and the appellant's claim had
   still been dismissed.

29. In relation to ground 2, the First-tier Tribunal had dealt with this  at
   [110]-[111].   There  was  a  finding  of  fact   that   there   was   no
   Kugathas/Singh dependency by the appellant's mother on him, and there was
   no medical evidence to support his assertion.  There were  other  reasons
   also why the First-tier Tribunal disbelieved this assertion.   The  legal
   argument fell away in the face of those findings. Nor was  the  appellant
   dependent on his mother: the test was a simple one and although there was
   a finding of family life between the appellant and  his  mother,  sister,
   and her children, the First-tier Tribunal  had  explained  how  far  they
   considered that took the appellant.

30. As regards ground 3, his sister's  children  were  not  the  appellant's
   children and his  relationship  with  them  was  relatively  arms-length.
   Their best interests were not irrelevant but on the facts were immaterial
   and certainly insufficient to outweigh the serious crime  and  recidivism
   of the appellant.

31. As regards rehabilitation, the Secretary of State would rely on Danso  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  596  which
   rejected rehabilitation as an argument, in the judgment of  Lord  Justice
   Moore-Bick (the only reasoned judgment) at [20]:

         "20.     Mr. Dixon submitted that the tribunal should  have  placed
         much greater weight on the appellant's rehabilitation and the  fact
         that he did  not  pose  a  significant  risk  of  re-offending.  He
         suggested that far too little importance is attached to factors  of
         that kind, with the result that  those  who  commit  offences  have
         little incentive to co-operate with  the  authorities  and  make  a
         positive effort to change their ways. I  have  some  sympathy  with
         that argument and I should not wish to diminish the  importance  of
         rehabilitation. It may be that in a few cases it will amount to  an
         important factor, but the fact is that  there  is  nothing  unusual
         about the appellant's case. ...It must be borne in  mind,  however,
         that the protection of the  public  from  harm  by  way  of  future
         offending is only one of the factors that makes it conducive to the
         public good to deport criminals. Other factors include the need  to
         mark the public's revulsion at the offender's conduct and the  need
         to  deter  others  from  acting  in  a  similar  way.  Fortunately,
         rehabilitation of the kind exhibited by the appellant in this  case
         is not uncommon and cannot in my view  contribute  greatly  to  the
         existence of the very compelling circumstances required to outweigh
         the public interest in deportation."

   On the facts of this case there was no  real  rehabilitation,  since  the
   appellant was continuing to commit offences, after a brief lull.  The PNC
   showed him as continuing to use cannabis.

32. In relation to ground 5, the First-tier Tribunal did not err in  law  by
   failing expressly  to  mention  Maslov,  since  the  principles  were  in
   practice inapplicable on the facts of this appeal.  The respondent  would
   rely on MM & Ors, R (On the Application Of) v Secretary of State for  the
   Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985. The appellant had  lived  away  from
   home for over a year and was not rehabilitated: Maslov concerned a  child
   who had not offended for 8 years, after  the  age  of  14.   States  were
   entitled to take special measures against drug  dealers,  as  opposed  to
   those who committed offences out of drug need.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
   had made fair findings on the police material and  the  police  evidence.
   The appellant had connections with a large number of other criminals  and
   was known to indulge in anti-social behaviour.

33. As to ground 6,  if  too  high  a  standard  had  been  applied  to  the
   respondent's evidence, that was in the appellant's  favour,  not  to  his
   disadvantage.

34. Regarding ground 7, the First-tier Tribunal had  performed  the  broader
   Razgar  assessment  rather  than  the  narrower  assessment  required  by
   paragraph 398, and again, even to that broader  standard,  the  appellant
   had failed.  The First-tier Tribunal had  made  alternative  findings  at
   [104] dealing with the paragraph 399A(b) social and cultural  integration
   test.   He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

35. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

36. In considering whether there is a material error of law  in  the  First-
   tier Tribunal decision, I discount the question of rehabilitation.  It is
   clear from the PNC records, which the  appellant  accepts  are  accurate,
   that the appellant's criminal career was only briefly  interrupted  after
   he came out of prison, and that he continues to use cannabis.   He  still
   has a number of criminal associates and is present when criminal  conduct
   occurs.  The rehabilitation and Maslov arguments therefore fall away.

37. As regards  private  and  family  life,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made
   careful and sound findings on the limited evidence before it  as  to  the
   links between this family.  It comes to this: that the appellant  does  a
   bit of cooking and shopping for his mother when living at home, and takes
   his niece and nephew  to  the  park  sometimes.   That  is  not  remotely
   sufficient to meet the Kugathas/Singh dependency test.  The  evidence  of
   the best interests of his sister's children is sparse: they are  said  to
   be fond of their uncle but there is no evidence that there  will  be  any
   particularly harsh effect on them if he is removed.

38.  The  Immigration  Rules  are  as  a  complete  code  in   relation   to
   deportation, as set out in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home
   Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  Accordingly, the  correct  approach  to
   the appellant's family circumstances is that set out  in  paragraphs  398
   and 399A, which so far as relevant are as follows:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and ...
             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or
             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State  in
             assessing that claim will consider whether  paragraph  399  or
             399A applies and, if it  does  not,  the  public  interest  in
             deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors  where
             there are very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
             described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, ...

         (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

         (i)  the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
         (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status  was
         not precarious; ...

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -
             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life; and
             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported."

39. It is not suggested that any of  P1,  P2  or  P3  meet  the  test  under
   paragraph 398(b), nor that when the First-tier Tribunal  considered  this
   appeal, 398(a) applied, as P2's child had not yet been born.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal did not err  in  discounting  paragraph  398.   As  regards
   paragraph 399, it is right that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  stating
   that the appellant had not spent most of his life in the United  Kingdom.
   Paragraph 399A(a) does apply to him.  But at [104] the Tribunal  went  on
   to consider paragraph 399A(b)  and  399A(c)  and  to  conclude  that  the
   appellant had not discharged the burden of proving that he  was  socially
   and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom or that there would  be
   very significant obstacles to his integration into Jamaican culture if he
   were to be returned there.  The  reasons  given  are  brief  but  cogent.
   There is no perversity or irrationality therein.

40. As regards the observation that paragraph 298 is  the  wrong  paragraph,
   that is true but nothing turned on it in this decision.  Ground  6  which
   relates to the standard of balance of probabilities not being applied  is
   a misunderstanding:  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude,  to  any
   standard, that the appellant still has multiple criminal  associates  and
   that the respondent had discharged the burden of showing that he did.

41. For all of the above  reasons,  although  there  are  in  this  decision
   errors of law (the failure to recognise that the Immigration Rules are  a
   complete code) and fact (whether the appellant had  been  in  the  United
   Kingdom for 'most of his life'), they are not material to the outcome  of
   the appeal, which would still have been negative had  the  correct  facts
   been found and the Tribunal approached the appeal  narrowly  through  the
   prism of the Rules, analysing whether there were compelling compassionate
   circumstances.  There were none in this appeal.

42. I therefore uphold the First-tier Tribunal decision.

DECISION

43. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Date:         29 February 2016               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


