



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01276/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 12th May 2014                              |on 25th July 2014            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              ADNAN KADIR KARIM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr O'Ryan instructed by Paragon Law.
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal judge V  Osborne  and
        Mrs Bray JP who in their determination promulgated on 19th February
        2014 dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  the
        Secretary of State to revoke a deportation order made  against  him
        on 3rd April 2013.



Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on the 11th July 1978.  He
        left his home country in or around 1999 as a result of alleged fear
        of ill treatment at the hands of his father or  by  others  at  his
        father's instigation.  He  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
        claimed asylum but before his claim was determined he was convicted
        at the Worcester Crown Court on 17th May 2004 on  three  counts  of
        manslaughter for which he was sentenced to  5  years  imprisonment.
        There was no appeal against conviction or sentence.


     3. As a result of his conviction the Appellant  was  notified  of  his
        liability  to  be  deported  and   invited   to   make   additional
        submissions.  He  was  held  in  immigration  detention   following
        completion of his custodial sentence although released on  bail  in
        December 2006.  The Respondent subsequently served a  fresh  notice
        of decision to make a deportation order which was accompanied by  a
        letter setting out the reasons for refusing his asylum  claim.   He
        lodged an appeal against that decision on 21st July 2008 which  was
        dismissed.  Then Senior Immigration Judge Taylor found  a  material
        error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  on  15th
        January 2009 but dismissed the appeal.  Application  for  leave  to
        appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused on 21st May 2009 at which
        point the Appellant became appeal rights exhausted.


     4. On 18th August 2010  further  representations  were  made  for  the
        deportation order to be revoked as the Respondent had  not  removed
        the Appellant. This was followed by yet  more  submissions  on  7th
        September 2012 which were refused on 26th March 2013 on  the  basis
        that although the appeal had failed no deportation  order  had  yet
        been signed.  There was therefore nothing  to  revoke  and  so  the
        submissions were considered by reference to paragraph  353  of  the
        Immigration Rules and rejected as not being a  fresh  claim.  A  JR
        application was issued to challenge the Respondent's  decision  not
        to treat the matter as a fresh claim  although  by  that  date  the
        deportation order had been signed.  The Appellant therefore  lodged
        a fresh application for revocation  which  was  refused  by  letter
        dated 14th October 2013 which triggered the  appeal  considered  by
        the First-tier panel.


     5. The panel rejected the Appellant's protection claim based upon  the
        adverse credibility findings of the previous  First-tier  Tribunal,
        the findings of Senior Judge Taylor, and the refusal of  permission
        to appeal by the Court of Appeal, and noted that there was  nothing
        in the evidence that caused them to find that those  determinations
        and judgments should be  interfered  with  and  that  although  the
        Appellant did not concede the issue of whether he would be at  risk
        on return it does not appear that substantive submissions were made
        by his representative relating  to  this  matter,  leading  to  the
        conclusion that the protection elements must be  dismissed  on  all
        grounds [17-26].


     6. The panel then considered  the  claim  based  upon  Article  8  and
        specifically focusing upon the relationship between  the  Appellant
        and his wife of nearly five years. The panel record in paragraph 30
        that Counsel for the Appellant had accepted that paragraph 339  (a)
        and (b) did not apply due to the length  of  his  sentence  and  so
        relied upon 390A which provides that in such circumstances it  will
        only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
        maintaining deportation will be outweighed by other factors [30].


     7. The panel clearly considered the nature of the family  relationship
        within the United Kingdom including the family circumstances.  They
        noted that  the  Appellant  told  his  wife  about  his  precarious
        immigration situation during the early stage of their  relationship
        [34] although her evidence was that she  did  not  think  too  much
        about  it.  The  extended  family  are  also  referred  to  in  the
        determination and the panel record submissions made in  which  they
        were asked to take into  account  the  various  changes  which  had
        occurred in  the  life  of  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  in  the
        intervening years between the determination  of  Immigration  Judge
        Chambers and the appeal hearing [39].


     8. The panel note in paragraph 42  of  their  determination  that  the
        Respondent herself had accepted that it was  "not  reasonable"  for
        the Appellant's wife to leave the United  Kingdom  as  set  out  in
        paragraphs 104-106 of the refusal letter.  In relation to the  risk
        of reoffending the panel note the Appellant's assertion that he  is
        at a low risk of re-offending although also find this to have  been
        undermined by the fact he was convicted of an  offence  of  driving
        without insurance since released from custody [45].


     9. In paragraph 46 of the determination the panel state:


                46.      In  reaching  our  final  conclusions  we  have  no
   hesitation in stating                 that if this appeal related to  the
   Appellant alone we would have                 found that  there  were  no
   reasons for us to interfere with the  decision                    of  the
   Secretary  of  State  to  remove  the  Appellant  to  Iraq.  The  offence
     he committed was a particularly serious one and we  find  that  he  has
          persistently minimised his role in what  happened  to  the  extent
   that                even  taking  into  account  the  delays  which  have
   occurred in reaching                  a final conclusion we could not say
   that there were any exceptional               circumstances which applied
   to his case alone.


    10. In paragraph 48 the panel found that the circumstances of his  wife
        could be said to be exceptional and found they  was  satisfied  she
        had good personal reasons for saying that she would not go to  Iraq
        with her husband, although they must  analyse  that  response  with
        care in determining  how  much  weight  they  should  give  to  her
        circumstances in the proportionality exercise. The panel  proceeded
        to examine such issues [49-52] before concluding in paragraph 53:


              53. Overall we are satisfied that the Respondent's interest in
   deporting               the Appellant from the United Kingdom is, in  the
   circumstances of                 his case compelling.  Although  we  have
   taken full account of the                 circumstances of his wife as we
   find them to be, we are not satisfied                  that they are such
   as   to   place   their   family   life   in    jeopardy.    We    remind
   ourselves that Article 8 does not give a  couple  the  right  to  dictate
          where they should enjoy their family life  together  and  for  the
   reasons                 we have given we are satisfied that it is open to
   the Appellant's wife                  to make the choice to move to  Iraq
   to be with her husband  without                 their  Article  8  rights
   being infringed. For the reasons we have given                   we  find
   the appeal must be dismissed.


    11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it  was  said  to  be
        arguable for the reasons asserted in the  grounds  challenging  the
        determination that the panel might have  failed  properly  to  take
        into account relevant matters and evidence in  the  proportionality
        exercise including, whether in the circumstances, it was reasonable
        to expect the Appellant's wife to accompany him to Iraq.



Error of law finding


    12. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr O'Ryan submitted that the Secretary of
        State accepted that it was wrong to go behind  any  concession.  He
        submitted  that  part  13  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applies  to
        deportation cases and contains a complete code and that the case of
        Huang  sets  out  the  legal  test  that  should  be  applied  when
        undertaking a proportionality assessment.  He  submitted  that  the
        effect on the Appellant's wife was considered and as  a  result  it
        accepted it was not reasonable to expect her to  go  to  Iraq.  The
        panel make a note of this in the determination but it  is  asserted
        it should have been properly considered.


    13. Mr O'Ryan also submitted that there was an issue regarding the time
        the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom which is  relevant  to
        the proportionality of the disruption of his family life since  the
        matter was considered by Judge Taylor. The Appellant  has  remained
        with his wife, has not been removed,  and  it  was  submitted  less
        weight should therefore be given to the legitimate aim relied upon.


    14. Mr O'Ryan also referred to the fact that a  certificate  to  enable
        the Appellant to marry had been granted  and  in  relation  to  the
        event that led to the Appellant's conviction,  it  was  once  again
        submitted that the Appellant was not culpable  or  responsible  and
        that the matter  was  no  more  than  an  accident.   It  was  also
        submitted that there was further evidence from the wife relating to
        her health condition and that her sister has had a heart transplant
        since the last hearing. There is a close  relationship  with  other
        extended family members and Mr O'Ryan submitted that had the  panel
        considered such evidence they would have made a different  decision
        to allow the appeal. When pressed upon the nature of the  error  he
        was alleging the panel made Mr O'Ryan stated that the error was  as
        to the weight given to the evidence as a result of the  failure  to
        consider relevant elements of the skeleton argument.


    15. I accept there has been delay in the  conduct  of  this  matter  as
        demonstrated by the chronology set out above.   On  behalf  of  the
        Secretary of State it was submitted such delay  was  only  for  two
        years as the four year period was due to litigation  including  the
        Appellants own judicial review application. I find the  panel  were
        fully aware of the period of any delay and their treatment of  this
        element of the chase has not  been  shown  to  be  tainted  by  any
        material legal error.


    16. I also note that the Appellant before this  Tribunal  continued  to
        attempt to absolve himself of any responsibility  for  the  offence
        for which he has been convicted and sentenced  and  which  involved
        the death of three individuals. The Appellant was  convicted  by  a
        court of law in  accordance  with  the  relevant  legal  principles
        against which he did not  appeal.  Not  only  was  this  a  serious
        incident but he was discovered by the police to have  been  driving
        without insurance  on  another  occasion  after  his  release  from
        custody which appears to be indicative of the Appellant's  attitude
        towards the law and members of society in general.


    17. The panel's findings in relation to the protection elements of  the
        appeal are wholly sustainable and no legal error has been proved in
        relation to the same.


    18. In relation to the submission that the principles set out in  Huang
        take precedence, whilst this may have been the  position  prior  to
        the amendment of the Immigration Rules on 9th July 2012 this is not
        the situation appertaining at the date of the  hearing  before  the
        panel. Part 8 of the Rules was amended to contained, with immediate
        effect, the Secretary of State's view (as approved  by  Parliament)
        as to how Article 8 shall be assessed in a deportation case.  In  a
        case involving the revocation of a deportation order paragraph  390
        states that the application must be considered in light of all  the
        circumstances including (i) the grounds  on  which  the  order  was
        made, (ii) any representations made in support of revocation, (iii)
        to the interests of the community,  including  the  maintenance  of
        effective immigration control,  and,  (iv)  the  interests  of  the
        applicant,  including  any  compassionate  circumstances.  As   the
        Appellant claims that his deportation will be contrary to the  UK's
        obligations under Article 8 it was necessary to consider  paragraph
        398 and 399 and 399A which the panel did. As it was  accepted  that
        the requirements of these paragraphs could not be met  or  applied,
        the Rules provide that it is only in the exceptional  circumstances
        that the public interest in maintaining  the  deportation  will  be
        outweighed by other factors.


    19. The key finding of the panel was that the Appellant had  failed  to
        establish that such circumstances existed. Guidance on the  correct
        interpretation of the terminology has been provided in the case  of
        MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 in which the main issue concerned
        the position when the appellant  could  not  succeed  substantively
        under paragraphs 398 or 399 of the rules on a deportation  and  the
        determinative  question   is   whether   there   are   "exceptional
        circumstances" such that the  public  interest  in  deportation  is
        outweighed by other  factors.   The  Court  of  Appeal  accepted  a
        submission  for  the  SSHD  that  "the  reference  to   exceptional
        circumstances serves  the  purpose  of  emphasising  that,  in  the
        balancing exercise, great weight should  be  given  to  the  public
        interest in deporting foreign criminals who do  not  satisfy  paras
        398 and 399 or 399A.   It is only exceptionally that  such  foreign
        criminals will succeed in showing that their rights  under  article
        8(1) trump the public interest in their deportation" (paragraphs 39
        and 40).  The Court went on to say: "In our view, [this] is not  to
        say that a test of exceptionality is being applied.  Rather  it  is
        that,  in  approaching  the  question  of  whether  removal  is   a
        proportionate interference with an individual's article  8  rights,
        the scales are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of  deportation  and
        something very compelling (which will be "exceptional") is required
        to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  removal"  (paragraph  42).
        Although the Court disagreed with the Upper Tribunal in  MF's  case
        on  the  question  of  form,  it  did  not  disagree  in  substance
        (paragraphs 44 and 50).  It differed from  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
        considering that the Rules did mandate or direct a  decision  maker
        to  take  all  relevant  criteria  into  account  (paragraph   44).
        Accordingly, the new rules applicable to deportation  cases  should
        be seen as "a complete code ... the exceptional circumstances to be
        considered in the balancing exercise involve the application  of  a
        proportionality test as required by the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence"
        (ibid).   "Even if we were wrong about that, it would be  necessary
        to apply a proportionality test outside the new rules as  was  done
        by the Upper Tribunal.   Either  way,  the  result  should  be  the
        same". What the  Court  said  about  the  test  of  "insurmountable
        obstacles" can be seen as obiter but it did say that if that  means
        "literally obstacles which it  is  impossible  to  surmount,  their
        scope is very limited indeed.  We shall confine ourselves to saying
        that we incline to the view that, for the reasons stated in  detail
        by the UT in Izuazu [[2013] UKUT 00045] at paras 53 to 59,  such  a
        stringent approach would be contrary to article 8".


    20. In Kabia (MF: para 298 -  "exceptional  circumstances")  2013  UKUT
        00569 (IAC) it was held that: (i) The new rules relating to article
        8  claims  advanced  by  foreign  criminals   seeking   to   resist
        deportation are a complete code and the  exceptional  circumstances
        to be considered in the balancing exercise involve the  application
        of  a  proportionality  test  as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
        jurisprudence: MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at para 43; (ii) The question being
        addressed by a decision maker applying the new  rules  set  out  at
        paragraph 398 of HC 395 in considering a claim founded upon article
        8 of the ECHR and that being addressed by the judge who carries out
        what was referred to in MF (Article 8 - New Rules)  Nigeria  [2012]
        UKUT 393 (IAC) as the second step in a  two-stage  process  is  the
        same one that, properly executed,  will  return  the  same  answer;
        (iii) The new rules speak of "exceptional  circumstances"  but,  as
        has been made clear  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria),
        exceptionality is a likely characteristic of a claim that  properly
        succeeds rather than a legal test to  be  met.   In  this  context,
        "exceptional" means circumstances in which deportation would result
        in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  individual  or  their
        family such that a deportation would not be proportionate".


    21. No legal error is proved in relation to the fact a  certificate  of
        approval to marry was issued as following  challenges  to  previous
        refusals to issue such certificates in the High Court the Secretary
        of State cannot now say who can and cannot get married. There is no
        legal power to prevent issuing such certificates and so the fact  a
        certificate is issued cannot be determinative in an appeal.


    22. It is clear that there has been a period of delay not wholly  as  a
        result of the failure by the Secretary of State. There is already a
        deportation order in force and it is  important  to  remember  that
        this is a revocation application. The panel directed themselves  as
        to the issues they need to consider including  the  nature  of  the
        relationships with family members in the United Kingdom.


    23. The panel specifically found that the Appellant's wife was aware of
        his precarious immigration status and indeed specifically find that
        if this was a case involving the Appellant alone  they  would  have
        had no hesitation but to dismiss the appeal.  They  considered  and
        addressed the issues surrounding the family members following which
        the panel decided that the decision was proportionate as the family
        could return to live in Iraq.


    24. In relation to the concession in the refusal letter,  at  paragraph
        104 the decision maker states:


              As a British citizen, it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
   your client's wife           to accompany her husband to  Iraq.  However,
   it would be open to her to            do so should she so  wish.   Whilst
   you  submit  that  your  client's  wife  is               suffering  from
   depression   at   the   prospect   of    her    separation    from    her
   husband, it is considered that as a British citizen she could continue to
              access the services provided by the  National  Health  Service
   should she              requires them. She would also  continue  to  have
   the help and support of               her family members who are resident
   in the UK.


    25. It is accepted as a general principle that a  legal  error  can  be
        made by going behind the concession without  advising  the  parties
        and hence  enabling  them  to  make  representations.  Whether  the
        decision was one that was probably open to the panel  for  them  to
        make on the facts depends whether, if the family was to  be  split,
        this would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
        individuals or their family such  that  deportation  would  not  be
        proportionate.  Having considered the facts of this case in  detail
        I make the following findings:


              a.  That the panel clearly considered all  the  evidence  they
   were asked to                consider with the degree of care required in
   an appeal of this nature,                 often referred to  as  that  of
   anxious scrutiny.


              b.  That the panel gave adequate reasons for their findings on
   relevant                 issues   which   enables   a   reader   of   the
   determination  to  understand                how  they  arrived  at   the
   conclusions they did.


              c.  That the finding that it was open to the Appellant's  wife
   to return               to Iraq with her husband may appear  on  a  first
   reading to be                    contrary to the concession made  by  the
   Secretary of State that it is not                  reasonable for her  to
   do    so,     but     no     such     finding     contrary     to     any
   concession  has  in  fact   been   made.   In   paragraph   53   of   the
     determination the panel state "we are satisfied that  is  open  to  the
          appellant's wife to make the choice  to  move  to  Iraq  with  her
   husband                 without article 8 rights being infringed".   This
   in fact mirrors the                   decision maker's view  that  whilst
   it may not be reasonable as the               wife as a  British  citizen
   cannot be compelled to leave, that is a choice                   open  to
   her.


              d.  That even if this is, in reality, a family sitting case it
   has not been                 shown on the evidence  that  the  effect  of
   removing the Appellant                alone to Iraq and leaving his  wife
   and other family members in the               United Kingdom will  result
   in unjustifiably harsh consequences.  It is                 accepted that
   there will be consequences and that the Appellant and                 his
   wife may consider them to be harsh  but  the  facts  of  this  case  fail
     to establish that  any  such  consequences  cannot  be  justified.  The
          Appellant is the subject of an automatic deportation  order  which
          requires the Secretary of State to  remove  him  from  the  United
              Kingdom as a result of his acts of criminality and  conviction
   for three               counts of manslaughter. This is  a  very  serious
   case and one which,                   when considering  all  the  factors
   that need to be considered by the                  Rules,  it  cannot  be
   said that the finding the appeal should be                      dismissed
   is  one  outside  the   range   of   findings   that   the   panel   were
   entitled to make on the facts.


              e.  The appellant has failed to discharge the burden of  proof
   upon him                to show that (i) the relative weight attached  to
   the evidence was not a                matter for  the  panel,  (ii)  that
   their  conclusions  are   perverse,                      irrational,   or
   contrary  to  the  law   and   evidence,   or   (iv)   that   any   legal
   error material to the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  has  been  made.


    26. It cannot be legal error to fail  to  consider  issues  that  arise
        after  the  hearing  such  as  the  Appellant's   wife's   sister's
        deteriorating medical condition.  If this has occurred that will be
        a matter upon which advice can be taken although as the position in
        law is that the deportation order should remain even if this family
        are split the Appellant's wife will be available to  care  for  her
        sister  with  other  family  members  together  with   the   health
        professional services in the United Kingdom, if required.


Decision

    27. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.




   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4th July 2014












