
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA020262014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th May 2016                               |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State, appeals with permission, the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on 9th November
    2015 allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made on 2nd October 2014 to make a deportation order against
    him.

 2. I make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
    to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 3. Whilst the Secretary of State brings this appeal, I intend to refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  for  ease  of
    reference.

 4. The background to the appeal is set out in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs  [1  to  11].   The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria who claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom  in
    or about 1982.  He was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  17th
    September 1996.

 5. Between February 1997 and March 2014, the Appellant  received  thirteen
    convictions for 22 offences including damaging property, possession  of
    controlled drugs, resisting or  obstruct  a  constable,  attempting  to
    obtain property by deception, burglary, theft on a non-dwelling  house,
    failing to attend for assessments following tests of class A drugs  and
    destroying or damaging property.  The full  offending  history  of  the
    Appellant is set out by the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraphs  [26  to
    29].

 6. There is no dispute between the parties that the  Appellant's  criminal
    history  falls  into  two  chronological  phases  namely  that  between
    February 1997 and April 2003 he accrued a  number  of  convictions  but
    between 2003 and June 2013 there was a period of ten  years  where  the
    Appellant committed no further offences.  Between June  2013  and  June
    2014 the Appellant was convicted of  a  number  of  offences  including
    burglary and theft of a non-dwelling, destroying and damaging property,
    theft and shoplifting and those  offences  whilst  dealt  with  at  the
    magistrates' court resulted in sentences of imprisonment in 2013 and on
    3rd June 2014, a period of eight months' imprisonment.

 7. As a result of the offending history of the Appellant, the Secretary of
    State made a deportation order against him on 2nd  October  2014.   The
    reasons for that decision was set out in an accompanying  letter  dated
    14th October 2014.  The Secretary of State  made  a  deportation  order
    against him by virtue of Section 5(1) of the Immigration  Act  1971  on
    the basis that the Secretary of State  deemed  his  deportation  to  be
    conducive to the public good, within the meaning  of  Section  3(5)  of
    that Act.  The Secretary of State took  into  account  the  history  of
    criminal offending that I  have  referred  to  and  concluded  for  the
    reasons given, that deportation  would  not  breach  his  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR and that his claim did not meet  the  Immigration
    Rules under paragraphs 396-399A of the Immigration Rules.

 8. The Appellant appealed that decision (on 4th November 2014) on  grounds
    relating to the length of his lawful residence in the UK, relying  upon
    his family life with his partner and children and his private life.  He
    asserted that he had no family to return to in Nigeria and thus removal
    would be a breach of his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 9. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal and in  a  determination
    promulgated on 9th November 2015 the judge allowed the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules and in particular paragraph 399(a).

10. The findings of the judge can be summarised as follows.  The judge made
    reference to his criminal history falling into two chronological phases
    from February 1997 to April 2003 and  at  [95]  referred  to  the  five
    convictions during that period and that the most serious conviction  at
    that stage, was for  obtaining  property  by  deception  for  which  he
    received a sentence of six months.  The judge recorded that  there  was
    no evidence as to the circumstances of the  convictions  but  that  the
    Respondent took no action upon them.  At [83] he appeared to remain  in
    employment at that time.  The judge  also  recorded  at  [83]  that  in
    2009/2010 the relationship between the Appellant and his partner  broke
    down and that he went to live with his mother but remained  in  contact
    with the children as in their lives and they spent  weekends  with  him
    and their grandmother.  At [83] the judge set out the circumstances  of
    the Appellant's life at that time, noting  that  he  appeared  to  have
    suffered a breakdown which had led to him misusing drugs.  This was the
    background to what the judge described as the second phase of offending
    which began in 2013.  At [83] the judge found that  the  offences  were
    committed to obtain drugs and that was  consistent  with  the  type  of
    crimes that had  been  committed  (theft,  burglary  and  shoplifting).
    However the deepening concern was reflected in the increased  sentences
    of imprisonment.  Thus between 2003  to  2013  the  Appellant  remained
    crime free but between June 2013 and June  2014,  he  had  committed  a
    number of offences, the  last  of  which  resulted  in  the  period  of
    imprisonment of eight months.

11.  In relation to the last offences, the judge had no evidence as to  the
    value of the thefts concerned and as  to  the  circumstances  of  those
    offences themselves.  However, it was noted that the Secretary of State
    relied upon the Appellant as a  persistent  offender  and  it  was  the
    persistence rather than the severity of  the  offences.   At  [96]  the
    judge recorded that the circumstances of  the  crimes  were  consistent
    with the Appellant's account and that the judge accepted his motivation
    for the offending history.

12. As to the circumstances  of  the  Appellant,  the  judge  rejected  his
    account that he was in a  subsisting  relationship  with  his  partner.
    However in relation to his children, the judge found that  he  had  two
    children one who is over 18 and one who was a minor   (both  who  lived
    with their mother).  The judge found that they had lived together as  a
    family until 2010 and had finally separated  in  or  about  2012.   The
    Appellant had visited and picked them up to go to school but there  had
    been a lessoning of contact between them as a  result  of  having  been
    homeless [see 83x].  The Appellant's partner had  not  visited  him  in
    prison and she did not attend the court [78] although she had  provided
    a written statement.  The judge did not find  that  he  had  resumed  a
    relationship with her nor that there was any realistic prospects  of  a
    resumption.  The judge found that the mother  had  been  the  one  with
    responsibility for the children in recent years [87] but  accepted  the
    evidence that even after separation, the Appellant had been a  constant
    presence in their lives.

13.  The judge identified the question under paragraph 399(a) at  [76]  and
    concluded at [86] that despite  the  separation  of  the  parents,  the
    Appellant's relationship with the children remained significant and  of
    fundamental importance to their lives. The conclusion was that this was
    not a superficial parental relationship.

14. At [87] the judge made reference to the evidence that D was doing  well
    at school, that  his  mother  had  been  the  one  with  full  parental
    responsibility for the children during the last three  years  and  that
    there was no evidence that the Appellant's absence from the family home
    had any detrimental impact on D.

15. At [97] on balance the judge found the impact on  D  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" that there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship  and  that
    the judge was -

         "persuaded that upon release the efforts of all involved (including
         the partner) would be to restore  the  close  relationship  between
         father and son.  Clearly this  is  in  the  best  interests  of  D,
         primary consideration.  The considerable  public  interest  in  his
         deportation in this case  lessoned  by  the  relatively  low  level
         nature of offending, and the fact  that  the  motivations  for  its
         persistence are now reduced.  He is now drug  free  and  there  are
         promises, albeit rather vague, from his family to  support  him  on
         release."

16. The judge went on to make reference to the  lack  of  any  post-release
    plan but considered that  was  as  a  result  of  the  Appellant  being
    unrepresented and that whilst the judge had approached the evidence  of
    the Appellant with some caution, that the judge was  persuaded  by  the
    evidence that overall the -

         "seriousness of his situation had hit  home  by  the  time  of  the
         hearing and that both realised the importance of  his  getting  his
         life back on track and that this would be the 'last chance'".

     At paragraph [100],  the  judge  found  that  the  appeal  was  "finely
    balanced" and concluded as follows:-

         "My conclusion that this Appellant should be given a second  chance
         has turned on the impact of his deportation on D, when set  against
         the type and seriousness of offending.  In doing so I have taken  a
         lenient view of the  re-offending,  explained  as  it  is  in  part
         (although not excused) by circumstances at the  time.   I  conclude
         that my determination of this appeal is open to me on the evidence,
         but equally it may  be  argued  that  the  opposite  conclusion  is
         permissible."

17. Thus the judge allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    paragraph 399(a).

18. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and on
    15th December 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge King granted permission.

19.  The  appeal  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Appellant   is
    unrepresented before the Tribunal  as  he  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal thus the procedure was explained to him and he was  given  the
    opportunity to make submissions  to  the  Tribunal,  having  heard  the
    submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State.  He was  able  to
    take notes whilst those submissions were being given and was given  the
    opportunity to ask any questions at any time if he did  not  understand
    the procedure being adopted.

20. On behalf of the Secretary of State, the Presenting Officer relied upon
    the grounds.  She submitted that the judge  allowed  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 399(a) of the Rules having found  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person who is to be
    deported.  However, she submitted that the judge failed to evaluate why
    it was unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    Appellant.  In this context she referred the Tribunal to paragraph [87]
    and the evidence therein which she submitted was inconsistent with  the
    conclusions that the judge made that the Appellant's removal  would  be
    unduly harsh.  In that paragraph, the evidence recorded that the  child
    was doing well at school, that it was  his  mother  who  had  had  full
    parental responsibility for the children during the  past  three  years
    and that there was no evidence that the Appellant's  absence  from  the
    family home had any detrimental impact upon the child.  Whilst  it  was
    acknowledged he would miss his father and that the  effect  of  a  long
    physical separation may be harsh it had not been shown  to  be  "unduly
    harsh".  Thus she submitted that the judge failed to  engage  with  the
    relevant threshold as set out in  KMO  (Section  117  -  unduly  harsh)
    [2015] UKUT 543 at paragraph [26] and that it disclosed  "a  very  high
    standard" and thus no consideration  had  been  given  as  to  how  the
    Appellant's  family  life  engaged  that  threshold  and  overcame  the
    interests in deportation.  She submitted in essence the judge had begun
    the consideration but did not finish the evaluative exercise.

21. In this context also she submitted that the judge demonstrated a flawed
    approach to this consideration and in particular the  public  interest.
    At paragraph [90] of the determination the judge made reference to  the
    public interest being "lessened" when the offences  did  not  represent
    other than a limited threat to the public at large.  In  this  context,
    she submitted that the judge failed to take into account the persistent
    nature of his offending and that it  was  in  the  public  interest  to
    deport and that the judge had considered this in the wrong way  as  set
    out at that paragraph.

22.  Furthermore, the judge's conclusion that it was in  the  child's  best
    interests to "restore" the relationship also served to demonstrate that
    the judge had not properly considered or evaluated  the  issue  of  "it
    being unduly harsh" because at the time of the  hearing  the  Appellant
    was separated from his family and had not lived with them for a  number
    of years.  The judge had accepted that he had not reconciled  with  his
    partner and that at best the weekends  they  have  spent  together  was
    historic (see paragraph [86]).  Thus they had  not  been  living  as  a
    family and that the function of  the  balancing  exercise  was  not  to
    "promote" or fortify the interests of the child but to  weigh  them  in
    the balance (see paragraph 50) of the  decision  BL  (Jamaica)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 357.

23. She also relied upon other matters  set  out  in  the  written  grounds
    including the risk of re-offending and the lack  of  evidence  in  this
    respect.

24. The Appellant gave reasons as to why his partner had not  been  present
    at the hearing, namely that she had had an operation on  her  hand  and
    that she had provided some evidence in her handwritten letter.  He said
    that since the decision that  they  are  reunited.   He  described  his
    present circumstances in that he was completely drug free and  that  he
    had resumed contact with his family members.  He also made reference to
    the up-to-date circumstances of his child and that since  the  decision
    had been made there had been difficulties in his behaviour.

25. He reiterated in his submissions that he had lived with his family  for
    fourteen years and that in accordance with the history he had lived  as
    a family until their separation as set out in  the  determination.   He
    made reference to the judge's  findings  concerning  the  circumstances
    which had led to his offending history in 2013 and  that  the  offences
    were committed as a result of his addiction to drugs and being homeless
    and having had no income.

26. He made reference to his relationship with the children as found by the
    judge at [86] and that his relationship with them was  significant  and
    fundamental to their lives.  He further submitted that  whilst  it  had
    been stated that the mother had full parental responsibility,  that  he
    also had parental responsibility.

27. The submissions in essence made by the Appellant were  that  the  judge
    had considered all the relevant issues and that the decision should  be
    upheld.

Decision on error of law:

28. I have given careful consideration to the submissions that I have heard
    from both the parties and in the light of the determination.

29. The effect of the provisions relating to  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is that by Section 32(4)  Parliament  had  decided  that  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is conducive to the public  good.   By
    Section 32(5), the Secretary of State is obliged to make a  deportation
    order subject to  Section  33.   Section  33  identifies  a  number  of
    exceptions, which if applicable, have the consequences that sub-Section
    32(4) and (5) will not apply.

30. On the present facts, the only exceptional relevant is whether  removal
    would breach his rights under the ECHR.

31. The Immigration  Rules  reflect  the  statutory  obligation  to  deport
    foreign criminals whilst recognising that there may be cases where  the
    making of a deportation order would be incompatible with Article 8 (see
    Rules 398, 399 or 399A).

32. The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds has  been
    brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant is a foreign criminal as defined by Section  117D(2)(a),  (b)
    or (c).  If so, does he fall within  paragraphs  399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules and if not, are there compelling  circumstances  over
    and beyond those falling within paragraphs 399  or  399A  relied  upon,
    such  identification  to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness   of   the
    criminality and taking into account the factors in  Section  117B  (see
    decision of Chege (Section 117D, Article 8; approach) [2015] UKUT 165.

33. On the facts of the case there is no dispute that the Appellant  was  a
    foreign criminal; he was not a British citizen and  by  reason  of  his
    offending history was properly characterised as a "persistent offender"
    (see determination at [73 and 74]).  Thus the issue  before  the  judge
    was whether he could fall within paragraphs 399 or 399A.

34. There is no dispute that the  judge's  findings  demonstrated  that  he
    could not meet the requirements of paragraph 399A (relating to  private
    life).  The judge found at [75] and [83] and  [84]  that  he  had  been
    lawfully in the UK since he was a child and was  settled,  having  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain in 1996 and  that  he  had  lawfully
    lived in the UK for most of his life (see  339A(a)).   The  judge  also
    found at [83] that he was integrated in the UK for the  reasons  given.
    However, the judge found that he could not  conclude  that  there  were
    very significant obstacles to his reintegration  into  the  country  to
    which he was to be deported for the reasons given at [84].

35. Thus the issue turned on  paragraph  399(a).   That  section  reads  as
    follows:-

         "399 This paragraph applies if paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

               a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British citizen: ...

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                          in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                          deported;

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                          in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                          deported ..."

36. On the findings of facts made by the judge, paragraph  399(b)  did  not
    apply as he did not find that he was in a subsisting relationship  with
    his partner.

37. Insofar as the grounds that the Secretary  of  State  submit  that  the
    judge failed to assess whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  child
    to live with the Appellant in  the  country  to  which  he  was  to  be
    deported, it is plain from reading the determination that as the  judge
    did not accept that the Appellant and his partner were in a  subsisting
    relationship (see [78]) and that they  had  not  lived  together  since
    their separation, and that the judge proceeded on the  basis  that  the
    best interests were for the child to remain with his mother and sibling
    in the UK [see 85].

38. Furthermore insofar as the grounds also make reference to  whether  the
    evidence amounted to "very compelling circumstances"  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation, this was a  case  in  which  the  judge
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules under  paragraph  399(a)
    and therefore the question of compelling circumstances did not arise.

39. The points raised in the grounds and relied upon by  the  Secretary  of
    State relate to the judge's consideration of the issue  of  the  public
    interest and that the judge erred in law when considering the issue  of
    whether the removal of the Appellant would be "unduly harsh".

40. I have therefore considered those submissions.  The judge correctly set
    out the law  at  paragraphs  [10  to  14]  of  the  decision  and  when
    considering the public interest at [88 and 89] made  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules as a "complete code", which  properly  reflected  the
    jurisprudence set out in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  119  and
    the SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 at paragraphs [39 to 40].

41. Whilst the judge at [74] identified that the starting point is that the
    public interest requires his deportation, the judge at  paragraph  [90]
    made reference to the decision of KMO  (Section  117  -  unduly  harsh)
    Nigeria [2015] UKUT  00543  and  in  particular  paragraph  9  of  that
    judgment.  The judge went on to state:-

         "Accordingly in KMO the Upper Tribunal held that in that  case  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  had  accorded  insufficient  weight  to   the
         considerable fraudulent activity for  which  the  foreign  criminal
         received a single sentence of twenty months,  the  public  interest
         should be increased, rather than diminished.  My interpretation  of
         this is that, conversely, it is open to a judge  to  conclude  that
         the public interest may in fact be lessoned where the  offences  in
         question do not represent other than a limited threat to the public
         at large and consist in the main of petty offending  involving  the
         theft of items of small value from shops."

42. I find that the paragraph above is inconsistent with the  statement  of
    principle set out in Section  117C  that  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest and the judge began the  assessment
    having lost sight of the opening statement  of  principle  set  out  in
    Section 117(C)(1).  In effect by saying that it was diminished offended
    that principle and the starting point from which to begin.

43. There is also no consideration within the determination of  the  recent
    jurisprudence relating to the importance of the public  interest.   The
    context to the new Rules is the great weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  (see  SS
    (Nigeria) and MF (Nigeria) as cited and LC (China) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1310).  The cases  emphasise  not  only  the  great  weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals
    and the importance of the policy in that  regard  given  by  Parliament
    under the UK Borders  Act  2007  but  also  that  the  public  interest
    includes the related questions  of  public  confidence  reflecting  the
    protection of the public from re-offending, the  issues  of  deterrence
    and  public  revulsion.   This  is  not  reflected   in   the   judge's
    determination at [90] when it is considered only in the context of  the
    offences representing a "limited threat to the public at large".

44. It also fails to take into account the relevance of the persistence  of
    the offending as reflected in the description at  paragraph  [100]  and
    the "lenient" view of his re-offending.  It was not simply by reference
    to the individual characteristics but by the amount and the duration of
    the offences and the particular disregard as shown for the law.

45. The judge was not  assisted  in  this  case  as  when  considering  the
    offences themselves no evidence had been provided to  the  Tribunal  of
    the circumstances of the offences, including the burglary offences  and
    the value of the money/items stolen (see [95]) and thus  the  reference
    at [90] that  offences  consisted  in  the  main  of  "petty  offending
    involving the theft of  items  of  small  value  from  shops"  did  not
    necessarily accurately reflect the totality of the offending.

46. As to the risk of  re-offending,  there  was  no  documentary  evidence
    either to assist the  judge  in  reaching  any  conclusion  as  to  the
    likelihood of re-offending (see [83]).   However,  the  judge  did  not
    provide reasons as to why, against the background  of  such  persistent
    offending, that he would not re-offend, as at the time of the  decision
    he was still in custody and this was a material consideration that  had
    not been taken into account when reaching the conclusion at  [97]  that
    that was an issue which reduced the public interest.

47. The judge also did not address on what basis or why the  separation  of
    the child concerned from his  father  would  be  "unduly  harsh".   The
    separation of a child may in particular  circumstances  be  harsh,  but
    those circumstances do not approach on the findings of the judge to  be
    "unduly harsh".  The evidence set out at [87] was that  the  child  was
    doing well at school, and that it had been his mother who had  had  the
    full responsibility for the children (since separation and  whilst  the
    Appellant had been in custody which was during the  last  three  years)
    and that there was no evidence that the Appellant's  absence  from  the
    family home had had any detrimental impact upon the  child.   Thus  the
    evidence did not identify anything other than that which normally would
    be the position of a child who was separated from a father with whom he
    had a close relationship.  This is underlined  by  the  fact  that  the
    phrase "unduly harsh" anticipates an evaluation being undertaken as  it
    is not  just  the  nature  and  quality  of  the  relationship  because
    paragraph  339(a)  requires  there  to  be  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship before considering whether it would be "unduly harsh".

48. Furthermore, as the Secretary of State submits,  the  test  of  "unduly
    harsh" as set out in MAB and referred to in KMO  at  [26]  is  that  it
    involves more than "uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome
    or  merely  difficult  or  challenging  consequences  and   imposes   a
    considerably more elevated or higher threshold."  The consequences  for
    an individual will be "harsh" if they are "severe" or "bleak" and  they
    will be "unduly" so if they are "inordinately" or  "excessively"  harsh
    taking into account all the circumstances of the individual.

49.  Whilst  the  judge  sought  to  take  into  account  some   of   those
    circumstances, for the reasons set out above, the judge  erred  in  law
    when reaching the overall decision.  I therefore set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

50. I have had to consider whether the decision should be re-made or  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  In this respect I have considered
    the submissions made by each of the parties.   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that further fact finding and analysis would be required  and
    therefore the First-tier Tribunal should carry this out.

51. I have also considered the representations made by  the  Appellant  who
    has stated that the circumstances are such that they have changed since
    the hearing in October; that he is no longer in custody, he states that
    he has  re-established  the  relationship  with  his  partner  and  the
    children and also makes reference to current material that is  relevant
    to the circumstances of the child concerned which he would seek to rely
    upon.

52.  Furthermore, I note that the judge  did  not  have  the  advantage  of
    information from  the  Probation  Service  or  from  the  police/courts
    dealing with the circumstances of  the  offences  themselves  and  that
    information should be obtained by the Secretary of State.  Furthermore,
    the Appellant to date has been unrepresented and the adjournment  would
    also provide him with time to seek to obtain representation.  There  is
    some reference in the determination to assistance given  to  him  by  a
    charity who may be  able  to  provide  further  assistance  to  him  if
    approached now.

53. For those reasons, I have reached  the  conclusion  that  the  decision
    cannot stand and I therefore set it aside. The evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant and the witnesses is a matter of record and  is  set  out  at
    paragraphs [45 to 61] and is preserved.  The appeal will be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for an analysis of the issues and  for  further
    findings of fact to be made on any up to date evidence.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  of  law  and  is
therefore set aside.  The decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date: 31/5/2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
