

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/02236/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 July 2014                               |On 24th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          The Hon Mr Justice Lewis
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MC
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
instructed
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Lloyd, counsel instructed by Debridge
solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State, who was the respondent before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, has been granted permission to appeal against  the  decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin, sitting with a  non-legal  member
      of that tribunal. The panel, by a determination promulgated on 12  May
      2014, allowed the respondent's appeal against a deportation order made
      by the Secretary of State ("SSHD") pursuant to s32 of the  UK  Borders
      Act 2007 as a consequence of the respondent's  conviction  before  the
      Guildford  Crown  Court  on  15  February  2013  of  two  offences  of
      possessing a controlled drug of Class A with  intent  to  supply.  For
      those offences he was sentenced to 30 months imprisonment for each, to
      be served concurrently. He  has  now  served  that  sentence  and  was
      released from immigration detention, on bail, on 13 March 2014, having
      been held continuously in detention since his  arrest  on  1  November
      2012.


   2. An anonymity order has been made by the First-tier Tribunal and, there
      having been no application by either party  to  vary  that  order,  it
      remains in place. Therefore, we shall refer to the respondent as MC.

   3. MC, who was born on 12 December 1970, is  a  citizen  of  Jamaica.  He
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 September 2000 and was admitted  as
      a visitor for just 6 months. He overstayed that leave and has remained
      here ever since without  any  further  leave  to  remain  having  been
      granted.

   4. On 30 October 2001 he made an  asylum  claim  which  was  refused.  MC
      appealed  against the removal decision that was made subsequently as a
      consequence but that appeal was dismissed on 12 August  2002,  MC  not
      being found to be credible in his account of being at risk  on  return
      to Jamaica as a result of having witnessed a gang related murder.

   5. He renewed that application  for  international  protection  in  2010,
      submitting an application under the Legacy arrangements but that claim
      was rejected also in December 2010.

   6. MC's case before the First-tier Tribunal  was  founded  upon  a  claim
      advanced under article 8 of the ECHR on  the  basis  that  as  he  had
      established family life with his partner, Ms H, and her son who was  4
      years old at the date of the decision to make a deportation order, his
      removal would bring about an interference  with  rights  protected  by
      article 8 and that, as it was in the best interests of the child  that
      he remained in the United Kingdom as part of  the  family  unit,  that
      interference would be disproportionate to the  lawful  and  legitimate
      aims being pursued in seeking his removal, notwithstanding the serious
      nature of the offences committed.

   7. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal on the basis that, although
      MC could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  applicable  immigration
      rules, the SSHD was wrong to find  that  there  were  not  exceptional
      circumstances  such  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation  was
      outweighed.

   8. As the challenge to the determination of the  Fist-tier  Tribunal  now
      pursued by the SSHD is on the  basis  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
      approach to the assessment of the article 8 claim, it  is  helpful  to
      set out the legal framework in some  detail  and  to  examine  how  it
      should be applied.

   9. Sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  provide,  so  far  as
      material:
           "32. Automatic deportation
           (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-
           (a) who is not a British citizen,
           (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
           (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.
           (2) Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a  period  of
           imprisonment of at least 12 months.
           ...
           (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act
           1971 (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive
           to the public good.
           (5) The Secretary of State must  make  a  deportation  order  in
           respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33). ...'
           33. Exceptions
           (1) Section 32(4) and (5)-
           (a) do not apply where an  exception  in  this  section  applies
           (subject to subsection (7) below), and
           ...
           (2) Exception 1 is where removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
           pursuance of the deportation order would breach-
           (a) a person's Convention rights, or
           (b)  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
           Convention."
  10. The relevant Immigration Rules are, so far as relevant, as follows:
           362. Where Article 8 is raised in  the  context  of  deportation
           under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim  under  Article  8  will
           only succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 9  July
           2012 are met, regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to
           deport or the deportation order, as appropriate, was served.
           ...
           396. Where a person is liable  to  deportation  the  presumption
           shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in
           the public interest to deport where the Secretary of State  must
           make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK
           Borders Act 2007.
           397. A deportation order  will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
           removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
           Convention. Where deportation would not  be  contrary  to  these
           obligations, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
           the public interest in deportation is outweighed.
           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and
           (a) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good because they have been convicted of  an  offence
           for which they have been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
           of at least 4 years;
           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good because they have been convicted of  an  offence
           for which they have been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
           of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,
           their offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
           offender who shows a  particular  disregard  for  the  law,  the
           Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
           paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will  only
           be in exceptional circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
           deportation will be outweighed by other factors.
           399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and
           (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
           (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
           7 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
           decision; and in either case
           (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           UK; and
           (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for  the
           child in the UK; or
           (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  settled  in
           the UK,  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and
           (i) the person has lived in the UK with valid leave continuously
           for at least the 15 years immediately preceding the date of  the
           immigration decision (discounting any period  of  imprisonment);
           and
           (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
           partner continuing outside the UK.
           399A. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least  20
           years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
           (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no  ties
           (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which
           he would have to go if required to leave the UK; or
           (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he  has  spent  at  least
           half of his life  living  continuously  in  the  UK  immediately
           preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting  any
           period of imprisonment) and he has no  ties  (including  social,
           cultural or family) with the country to which he would  have  to
           go if required to leave the UK.
           399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave  may  be
           granted for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall be
           given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State deems
           appropriate. Where a person who has previously  been  granted  a
           period of leave under paragraph 399B would not fall for  refusal
           under paragraph 322(1C),  indefinite  leave  to  remain  may  be
           granted."
  11. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:
           "Right to respect for private and family life
           1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
           life, his home and his correspondence.
           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic well-being of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
           protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the
           rights and freedoms of others."
  12. Thus, as MC is a foreign criminal, as defined by s  32(1)  of  the  UK
      Borders Act 2007, his deportation is, by virtue of s 32(4) of the Act,
      conducive to the public good and the  SSHD  must  make  a  deportation
      order because of the mandatory requirement of s 32(5)  unless  one  of
      the exceptions set out in s.33 apply.  The exception relied upon by MC
      is his claim that deportation  would  result  in  an  infringement  of
      rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR, because  it  would  involve
      him being separated from his partner and her son, as they would remain
      in the United Kingdom and not accompany him to  Jamaica  to  carry  on
      family life together there.


  13. In those circumstances the focus is upon the  immigration  rules  that
      set out how such claims are to be  assessed.  Those  rules  provide  a
      structured approach to assessment of the claim. First, the presumption
      is that deportation is in  the  public  interest  unless  one  of  the
      exceptions applies, including in  particular  that  removal  would  be
      contrary to obligations in the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights. Secondly, where the claim is that  removal
      would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR, and  if  the  circumstances  fall
      within para. 398, the SSHD considers whether paras 399 or 399A  apply.
      Thirdly, if those paras. do not apply, the SSHD will go on to  examine
      what  has  been  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  claimant  to  see  if,
      notwithstanding that the claim does not fall within paragraphs 399  or
      399A, there are compelling circumstances such that the pressing public
      interest in ensuring that foreign criminals are deported should  yield
      to  those  particular  circumstances  of  the  case.   The  compelling
      circumstances  constitute  the  exceptional  circumstances  that   may
      outweigh the public interest  in  deportation.  This  is  approach  is
      confirmed by the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  at
      paras. 42 to 44. This is also consistent with the approach  repeatedly
      confirmed by Strasbourg jurisprudence.

  14. Although the SSHD accepted  that  MC  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with the child of  his  partner,  and  that  the
      child was a British citizen, the claim did not fall  within  para  399
      because there was, of course, another family member - his mother - who
      was able to care for him in the United Kingdom, as she had done during
      his period of imprisonment. Thus, the  issue  at  the  heart  of  this
      appeal was whether MC's claim disclosed the exceptional  circumstances
      demanded by para 398 as well as domestic and European law such  as  to
      outweigh the public interest in deporting foreign  criminals.  In  the
      decision letter, the SSHD carried  out  a  meticulous  examination  of
      everything advanced on MC's  behalf  and  explained  why  it  was  not
      accepted that any such exceptional circumstances had been established.




  15. It is important that the vocabulary used in the rules of  "exceptional
      circumstances" is understood correctly, as was explained by the  Court
      of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192:

           "43. The word "exceptional is often used to denote  a  departure
           from a general rule. The general rule in the present context  is
           that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paragraphs  399
           and 399A do not apply, very compelling reasons will be  required
           to outweigh the public interest in deportation. These compelling
           reasons are the "exceptional circumstances".


           "44........ the new rules are  a  complete  code  and  that  the
           exceptional circumstances to  be  considered  in  the  balancing
           exercise involve the application of a  proportionality  test  as
           required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence..."

      In reaching that conclusion, and  in  expressing  agreement  with  the
      approach identified by Sales J in R (Nagre) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
      (Admin), the Court of Appeal made clear that, particularly in  respect
      of "precarious" family life cases, those being where the  family  life
      was established where there was no leave to remain as is the case with
      MC, although not just in those circumstances:

           "...in  approaching  the  question  of  whether  removal  is   a
           proportionate  interference  with  an  individual's  article   8
           rights, the scales are heavily weighted in favour of deportation
           and something very compelling (which will be  "exceptional")  is
           required to outweigh the public  interest  in  removal.  In  our
           view,  it  is  no  coincidence  that  the  phrase   "exceptional
           circumstances" is used in  the  new  rules  in  the  context  of
           weighing the competing factors for and  against  deportation  of
           foreign criminals."


  16. It follows from this that the assessment of the article 8 claim,  when
      carried out correctly under the rules, is a complete assessment of the
      claim. Where the particular circumstances relied upon by the applicant
      are not accommodated within the provisions of paragraphs 399  or  399A
      of the rules, the search required to be carried out by  para  398  for
      compelling circumstances such as to render  the  proposed  deportation
      disproportionate and so contrary to  rights  protected  by  article  8
      should be sufficient.


  17. In approaching the article 8 claim in that way, it can  be  seen  that
      the starting point is a statutory presumption that the public interest
      requires the deportation of a foreign criminal and that the assessment
      of the claim is to be informed by the SSHD's view of where the  public
      interest lies, as set out in the immigration rules and the requirement
      of primary legislation that the SSHD must make a deportation order  in
      respect of a foreign criminal unless a statutory exception applies.

  18. The task of a judge determining an appeal  against  the  making  of  a
      deportation order  is not to substitute his or her own view  of  where
      the public interests lies or of what is capable  of  amounting  to  an
      exception to  the  mandatory  obligation  upon  the  SSHD  to  make  a
      deportation order. The role  of  the  judge  is  to  ensure  that  the
      decision is one that  is  lawful  and  made  in  accordance  with  the
      immigration rules. That means that all  material  considerations  have
      properly  been  taken  into  account  and,  if  the  particular  claim
      discloses  circumstances  of  a  compelling  nature   that   are   not
      accommodated for by consideration within the rules and have  not  been
      taken into account by the  SSHD,  to  strike  a  balance  between  the
      competing interests in play. In striking that balance, the judge  must
      bear in mind that the scales do not begin set at a level. The starting
      point is that the  public  interest  requires  the  deportation  of  a
      foreign criminal. That is why something very compelling is required.

  19. In her determination, Judge Colvin set out the immigration history and
      summarised the case advanced before her by MC. He  said  that  at  the
      time of committing the offences  of  possession  Class  A  drugs  with
      intent to supply, actions for which he was now  "incredibly  ashamed",
      he was living with his partner and her son. He became involved in  the
      supplying of controlled drugs because he needed to raise money to fund
      legal services in relation to regularising his immigration status.  He
      was determined  not  to  reoffend  in  the  future.  He  accepted  his
      punishment and was a model prisoner. He was a practicing Christian and
      hoped to be able to marry his partner. He had lost  contact  with  his
      relatives in Jamaica.

  20. The judge set out a summary  of  the  oral  evidence  concerning  MC's
      relationships with his partner  and  her  son.  They  had  been  in  a
      relationship since 2010. He had developed a  close  relationship  with
      the child who treated him as if he were his father. He played  a  full
      parental role in respect of the child. Both the child and his  partner
      would "face a lot of turmoil and upheaval"  if  he  were  deported  to
      Jamaica. MC's partner said that her son would be devastated. Financial
      constraints would mean that visits to Jamaica could probably only take
      place every two years or so. Another witness,  who  is  the  partner's
      sister, gave oral evidence to the effect that MC was not the  type  of
      person to involve himself in drugs offences and his removal to Jamaica
      would be a big set back for the child.

  21. The judge then considered the case of the SSHD.  She  noted  that  the
      sentencing remarks of the  Crown  Court  Judge  illustrated  that  the
      offences committed by MC were serious ones, as  is  reflected  in  the
      sentence of 30 months. The SSHD accepted that MC was in a genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with his partner's  son,  to  whom  the  judge
      incorrectly  referred  as  MC's  "step-son",  and  that   there   were
      insurmountable obstacles preventing family life  being  maintained  in
      Jamaica with both MC's partner and her child, but noted  that  contact
      could  be  maintained  by  occasional  visits  and  other   means   of
      communications. As for MC's private life, the SSHD noted that  MC  had
      not lived in the United Kingdom for 20 years and that for most of  the
      time spent in this country he was  unlawfully  present.  Nor,  in  the
      context of his relationship with his partner, had be been present  for
      15 years. He had family members  in  Jamaica  and  so  there  were  no
      exceptional circumstances such as to outweigh the public  interest  in
      deportation.

  22. At paragraph 30 of her determination the judge said this:

           "It  is  accepted  on  the  evidence  that  the  appellant   has
           difficulties  in  meeting  all  the   requirements   under   the
           immigration rules even though it is accepted by all parties that
           he has a genuine and  sustainable  relationship  both  with  his
           partner and G, his step-son. It means that essentially  we  must
           determine  the  appeal  under  Article  8  more  generally  when
           applying the test of exceptional circumstances."


      That is a wholly incorrect approach which in  itself  discloses  legal
      error such as to render the judge's decision unsustainable. It is  not
      the case that MC had difficulty in meeting the rules. The position was
      that he did not do so. The judge appears to be applying a "near  miss"
      principle that is legally incorrect. MC did not fall within  paragraph
      399. That was because there was another family member able to continue
      to care for the child - the child's mother. He had not  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom with valid leave for 15 years preceding  the  decision.
      His relationship with the partner and her child had been  taken  fully
      into account by the SSHD, both in considering whether MC  fell  within
      399 or 399A  and  in  looking  to  see  if  his  claim  disclosed  any
      exceptional circumstances. The fact that MC failed  to  succeed  under
      the rules was not, as the judge thought, a reason to carry out her own
      assessment  of  the  very  same  circumstances,  unfettered   by   the
      considerations of the SSHD's view of the  public  interests  arguments
      set out within the rules.

  23. The  judge  went  on  to  identify  the  following  factors  that  she
      considered to speak in MC's favour:


        a. His length or residence in the United Kingdom;
        b. The fact that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
           his partner and her  son  that  could  not  be  continued  after
           deportation as they would remain in this country;
        c. That MC had  no  "pattern  or  history  of  offending"  and  the
           commission of these offences was "an aberration probably  caused
           by the family's lack of finances" and  that  the  offending  was
           "out of character";
        d. He represented a low risk of reoffending;
        e. The judge considered that there was "little doubt" that the best
           interests of the child is to maintain a close relationship  with
           MC, again incorrectly referred to as the child's step-father.


  24. That led the judge to conclude as follows:

           "The question therefore  is  whether  there  are  countervailing
           matters that outweigh  these  best  interests  of  the  child...
           Clearly, the serious nature of the drug offences  in  which  the
           appellant was involved and for which the  statutory  presumption
           means that he should be deported in the  wider  public  interest
           especially as a deterrent factor - factors that are to be  given
           significant weight. We have set out our views on this above. The
           assessment of proportionality does not  condone  or  lessen  the
           seriousness of these offences and the need to  show  deterrence.
           We have, however, come  to  the  view  that  the  offences  were
           uncharacteristic for the appellant and there is a low risk  that
           anything like this will happen again. We also find  that  he  is
           truly remorseful.


           We have reached the conclusion after careful  deliberation  that
           it would be disproportionate to deport  the  appellant  in  this
           case. We would not wish to repeat all the matters set out  above
           that have informed this decision but, suffice to say, that it is
           the appellant's length of time in the UK, his overall  behaviour
           of being a  committed  family  man  and  the  long-term  welfare
           interests of his step-son that tip the balance in his favour  of
           being allowed to remain in the UK..."

  25. There are a number of difficulties with that conclusion and the  route
      taken to arrive at it.


  26. First, the reasoning at the heart of the decision  is,  with  respect,
      simply misconceived. Each factor identified above  by  the  judge  had
      been specifically and carefully taken into account by the SSHD in  the
      refusal letter, clear cogent and frankly unassailable reasons given to
      demonstrate that, even taken together  they  could  not  outweigh  the
      public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  this  particular   foreign
      criminal. Therefore, what the judge has done is  to  simply  disregard
      the structured approach of the rules and to  repeat  the  exercise  of
      balancing the public interest arguments with MC's article 8 claim  but
      without having regard to  the  SSHD's  views  upon  where  the  public
      interest lie, as set out clearly in the requirements of paragraphs 399
      and 399A.

  27. In particular, the reliance placed by the judge upon the fact that  MC
      had no prior history of offending and that he represented a  low  risk
      of reoffending discloses a significant misunderstanding of  the  legal
      framework. MC is someone whose deportation is conducive to the  public
      good because he is a foreign criminal in respect of whom the SSHD must
      make a deportation order unless an exception applies, which  the  SSHD
      found it did not. The fact that he had not  offended  before  then  or
      that he is said to represent a low risk of further offending does  not
      in any way at all reduce the  importance  or  cogency  of  the  public
      interest in his deportation.  He  faced  deportation  because  of  the
      offences that he committed and not because those offences were part of
      a series of offences previously committed or possibly to be  committed
      in the future. He does not cease to  be  a  foreign  criminal  because
      there is no reason to believe that he will reoffend in future.

  28. Similarly, full account had been taken by the SSHD  upon  the  effects
      upon both the partner and the child of being separated from MC, as  is
      illustrated by the focus in the rules upon whether there was a  family
      member available to care for a child with  whom  the  applicant  as  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship.  It  is  implicit  in  the  rules
      themselves that the consequence  of  severing  such  relationships  is
      factored into the assessment.

  29.  In any event, the summary provided by the judge, which must be  taken
      to be her understanding of the position, of the  respondent's  reasons
      for rejecting MC's claim that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances
      such as to found an exception to the mandatory making of a deportation
      order is wholly inadequate. In considering the claim under  paragraphs
      399 and 399A the SSHD took into account her duty under s.  55  of  the
      Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, noted that the  child's
      mother cared for the child while MC was  in  prison,  that  the  child
      would find separation emotionally difficult; and that the relationship
      with both the partner and her child was commenced at a  time  when  MC
      had no leave to remain.


  30. The SSHD considered at length in the  decision  letter  whether  there
      were any exceptional circumstances such  as  to  outweigh  the  public
      interest in deportation. That detailed analysis of all that MC had  to
      say included this, having made clear that the  legitimate  aims  being
      pursued were not just the prevention of crime but also the maintenance
      of effective immigration control:

           "It is acknowledged that [the child]  may  find  the  separation
           from you difficult, but at 4 years of  age  and  having  already
           been separated from you while  your  were  incarcerated,  it  is
           asserted  that  the  emotional  impact,  particularly  with  the
           support of his mother, would be minimal; this is not  considered
           to outweigh the public interest in seeing you deported...


           It is also acknowledged that your partner... may find separation
           from you difficult, but it is  considered  that  she  has  coped
           while you are serving  your  custodial  sentence  and  she  will
           continue to cope if you are deported..."

  31. The SSHD also considered the other material now relied upon, including
      letters of support by others known to MC.

  32. Ms Lloyd, who appeared for MC, was invited more than once  during  the
      course of her submissions to identify anything that the  judge  relied
      upon in reaching a different conclusion in her assessment outside  the
      rules that had not already  been  fully  considered  by  the  SSHD  in
      carrying out the assessment within the rules but she was unable to  do
      so. It was an error of law for the judge to set aside  the  assessment
      of the SSHD under the rules and to determine the appeal upon the basis
      of her own assessment based upon precisely the same considerations but
      not informed by the requirements of the immigration rules when all  of
      those considerations were matters fully accommodated by the provisions
      of the rules. The judge erred also in considering  to  be  exceptional
      circumstances which were not in any way at all exceptional and all  of
      which had  already  been  taken  into  account  by  the  SSHD.  It  is
      impossible to identify  any  aspect  of  MC's  relationship  with  his
      partner and her son which would not be expected to be present  in  any
      such "family group".

  33.  For those reasons we set aside the decision to allow the  appeal  and
      will remake the decision.

  34. Ms Lloyd advanced submissions on MC's  behalf,  effectively  repeating
      the case put before the First-tier Tribunal. There is no need  for  us
      to repeat those submissions because they are all considered in  detail
      above. We have looked also at the  statements  and  other  documentary
      material put before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  including  the  OASys
      report that indicates a very low risk of reoffending and  the  witness
      statements an letters of support.

  35. However, nothing advanced on  MC's  behalf  comes  anywhere  close  to
      outweighing the public  interest  in  his  deportation  as  a  foreign
      criminal. The offences committed by  him  were  very  serious  indeed.
      Although he had no previous convictions and pleaded guilty,  receiving
      full credit  for  that  in  the  sentencing  exercise,  he  was  still
      sentenced to a substantial term  of  imprisonment,  That  is,  though,
      entirely unsurprising as he was found in possessing of  100  wraps  of
      crack cocaine. That the weight of the public  interest  considerations
      was very substantial indeed is reflected in  the  decision  letter  in
      which the SSHD said this:

           "In September 2007 at the Bournemouth  Labour  Party  Conference
           the  Prime  Minister  made  a  commitment  that  those   foreign
           nationals involved in gun crime or the  production,  importation
           and supply of drugs would not be allowed to remain in the United
           Kingdom...By the very nature of your offence you preyed  on  the
           vulnerability of those who have an addiction to these drugs  and
           had no regard for the impact these drugs have on the fundamental
           interests in society. The Prime Minister and  the  Secretary  of
           State remain committed to reducing the levels of  crime  related
           to the use and sale of drugs which by their very nature  have  a
           disproportionate effect on society as a whole..."

  36. Drawing all of this together we reach the following  conclusions.  Not
      only is MC a foreign criminal in respect of whom  there  is  a  strong
      public interest in his deportation, but the offences he committed were
      particularly serious ones, both in terms of the nature and  the  scale
      of the offending. He has only ever been given a short period of  leave
      to be present in the United Kingdom. He overstayed that leave so  that
      for most of the time he has been here he has  been  either  unlawfully
      present or detained in prison. He formed the relationships upon  which
      he now seeks to rely while present without leave.  He  does  not  fall
      within paragraphs 399 or  399A  of  the  immigration  rules,  for  the
      reasons given above and his claim discloses nothing at  all  that  can
      properly be regarded as  amounting  to  a  compelling  or  exceptional
      reason for concluding that his wish, and that of his partner  and  her
      son, to remain together in the  United  Kingdom  should  outweigh  the
      public interest in his removal. Even accepting that the best  interest
      of the child would be served by him continuing to have MC  present  as
      part  of  the  family  group  and  recognising  that  is  a  paramount
      consideration, it is not the  paramount  consideration  and  does  not
      prevail in this case.


  37. For these reasons MC's appeal against the deportation  order  will  be
      dismissed.


 Conclusions:

    The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the  determination  is
    set aside.

    We re-make the decision in the appeal by substituting a fresh  decision
    to dismiss the appeal.



                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    22 July 2014

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

