
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02176/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 4th July 2016                     |On 3 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                              Adnan Kadir Karim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 11th July 1978.  The  appeal
    has a long history but suffice it to say that the Appellant  originally
    appealed a decision of the Respondent made on 3rd April 2013 to  refuse
    to revoke a deportation order made on 3rd April 2013.  That appeal  was
    originally heard by a Panel (the Panel) chaired by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal V Osborne.  The Panel dismissed the  appeal.   Thereafter
    the Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision and  eventually  and
    on 20th July 2015 the Court of Appeal ordered the appeal to be remitted
    to the Upper Tribunal for it to be decided  there  whether  the  appeal
    should  be  reconsidered  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Court of Appeal was satisfied that the decision  of  the
    Panel contained an error on a point of law.

Hearing

 2. As a consequence of the decision of the Court of Appeal the matter came
    before me on  4th  July  2016.   I  heard  brief  arguments  from  both
    representatives who agreed that the appeal should  be  heard  again  in
    full in the First-tier Tribunal.  I therefore made  such  a  direction.
    There is no need for me to give  any  reasons  for  that  direction  in
    accordance  with  Rule  40(3)(a)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Notice of Decision

The Court of Appeal having found an error of law  in  the  decision  of  the
Panel that decision is set aside.

The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  basis  that
none of the findings of fact or as to credibility made by the Panel will  be
preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

