
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: dA/02404/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2015                              |On 27 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE MALES
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                REGGIE OLIVER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Moore  which  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent before us, Reggie Oliver, against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to deport him. The First-tier decision was made on the  ground
    that deportation would infringe Article 3 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights. Although there was reference at the hearing  and  in  the
    determination to arguments under  Article  8,  it  is  clear  that  the
    decision was that on the facts  of  the  case,  and  in  particular  Mr
    Oliver's mental condition, deportation would infringe Article 3.

 2. Although the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  include  arguments
    under Article 8 those do not arise on this appeal. Mr  Oliver  did  not
    succeed on Article 8 and it is clear that in view  of  the  convictions
    which he has there is a strong  public  interest  in  his  deportation.
    However, that deportation will only be lawful if it will  not  infringe
    Article 3 which  is  concerned  with  the  infliction  of  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment and which, where it applies, is absolute.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal found that Mr Oliver is a  national  of  Guinea
    born on 27 December 1969, and in so finding rejected his claim to be  a
    Dutch national. He is  liable  to  automatic  deportation  following  a
    conviction for robbery  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  six  years'
    imprisonment.

 4. He came to the United Kingdom in 1995. The offences  of  which  he  was
    convicted were committed in September 2004 and April - June  2006  when
    he was sentenced to six years imprisonment.  Subsequently  in  February
    2007 he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment  for  an  offence  of
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm.

 5. On the occasion of his sentence the sentencing judge referred to  nasty
    offences involving robbery of people that Mr Oliver  had  targeted  who
    had obtained funds and were in the process of  taking  them  home.  The
    youngest of the victims was 62. The oldest was something of  the  order
    of 87.  The judge continued:

         "So you targeted vulnerable  people  and  were  able  to  rob  them
         without using extensive force because of the targets that  you  had
         chosen. You had followed them home and you have  robbed  them  when
         they were at a vulnerable position."

 6. Following the service of his  sentence  Mr  Oliver  was  detained  from
    January 2010 under powers contained in the Immigration  Acts,  although
    we understand that since the determination by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    he has been released on bail. This may be of some significance,  as  we
    shall explain at the  end  of  this  decision,  although  there  is  no
    evidence before us about any change in his circumstances  and  we  must
    proceed on the basis of the facts as found by the First-tier  Tribunal.



 7.  There  was  conflicting  evidence  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    concerning Mr Oliver's psychiatric and medical condition. A  number  of
    psychiatric reports were provided on which the judge was  addressed  at
    some length. The reports conflicted. Some of them were  to  the  effect
    that  Mr  Oliver  was  suffering   from   significant   mental   health
    difficulties and was at risk of self-harm or even suicide  while  other
    reports suggested that he was feigning these symptoms. The most  recent
    report before the judge was a report of 6  May  2014  from  Dr  Maloney
    which the judge describes as being of  a  comprehensive  nature  and  a
    report of particular significance. Dr  Maloney  described  Mr  Oliver's
    behaviour as "now highly disturbed and potentially  dangerous  to  self
    and  others   (self   cutting,   fire   setting)   requiring   constant
    supervision". He said that overall it was "possible that he [that is Mr
    Oliver]  may  have  had  a  schizotypal  personality   or   schizotypal
    personality traits, not previously overtly manifest  but  now  severely
    exacerbated due to stress. This picture is not unequivocal - and it  is
    not my preferred  diagnosis  -  but  this  needs  to  be  part  of  the
    differential diagnostic diagnosis".

 8. Dr Maloney  rejected  the  suggestion  that  the  symptoms  were  being
    manipulated by Mr Oliver. His preferred diagnosis was  that  Mr  Oliver
    was suffering from schizophrenia, ought to be detained in a psychiatric
    hospital and was not fit for discharge to the community as he  appeared
    highly disturbed and his behaviours were potentially dangerous both  to
    himself and to others.

 9. Having reviewed all of the medical reports the First-tier   judge  said
    this at paragraph 40:

         "Taking into account all  the  medical  reports  before  me,  I  am
         satisfied that this appellant is  suffering  from  a  schizophrenic
         mental disorder and that he is a  risk  to  himself  and  to  other
         members of the public. There appears to be a deterioration  in  his
         mental health condition."

10. Although the evidence was conflicting, it has not been  suggested  that
    the judge was not entitled to make this finding of fact.

11. The judge then turned to consider the situation which Mr  Oliver  would
    face if he were deported to his home country  of  Guinea.  He  reminded
    himself that the public interest requires deportation unless there  are
    very compelling circumstances otherwise, although in  fact  that  is  a
    consideration  which  would  be  relevant  in  conducting  a  balancing
    exercise under Article 8. For Article 3 purposes the question is simply
    whether removal would infringe Article  3  by  reason  of  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment.

12. The judge reviewed the  evidence  about  mental  health  facilities  in
    Guinea. He found that those facilities were limited; that  two  of  the
    three drugs which formed part of the medication regime  for  Mr  Oliver
    were not available in Guinea; that research had been unable  to  locate
    providers for other drugs currently  taken  by  him  and  that  even  a
    suggested alternative to one of those drugs, Mirtazapine, was something
    which the judge could not be satisfied would be appropriate.  He  found
    that Guinea had in the whole country only one  mental  health  hospital
    with three psychiatrists and six  nurses  and  that  there  was  little
    available treatment for Mr Oliver based on the medication that  he  had
    taken and was required to take. He said that  "Medical  facilities  are
    clearly very poor which would be likely to expose this appellant  to  a
    further risk of self-harm or harming others due to  his  mental  health
    condition".

13. He referred then to the evidence  from  Dr  Pierzchniak  who  had  been
    unable to endorse a diagnosis of schizophrenia and commented that  this
    confirmed his view that this was a difficult case on which the views of
    professional psychiatrists and medical persons had been polarised.

14. We set out in full paragraph 43  of  the  judge's  determination  which
    encapsulated his essential reasoning on the Article 3  point:

         "From all the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the appellant
         is likely to suffer from a mental disorder,  namely  schizophrenia,
         and that over time there has been a deterioration in  his  physical
         and mental condition. The appellant clearly needs a high  level  of
         support and at the present time is on a 'constant watch'. He cannot
         live in the community and requires treatment as an  in-patient.  He
         is at risk to himself and a risk to members of the public.  If  the
         appellant is removed to Guinea there is no reasonable likelihood of
         him receiving the treatment that  he  would  require  in  order  to
         address his mental illness. Furthermore, I am  not  satisfied  that
         there would be effective mechanisms in place  in  Guinea,  such  as
         would reduce the risk of  suicide for this appellant, or  the  risk
         of other self harm due to his  disturbed  unpredictable  behaviour,
         and the further likelihood of a deterioration in his  mental  heath
         and suicide risk if deported to Guinea."

15. It was for those reasons that the judge concluded that the  deportation
    would infringe Article 3. He did so having set out at an earlier  stage
    of  his  determination  the  relevant  authorities.  He  recognised  in
    accordance with the decision in Bensaid v United Kingdom, a decision of
    the Strasbourg Court (Application number 44599/98, 6 May 2001), that in
    principle an  Article  3  claim  could  succeed  in  a  case  involving
    suffering associated with a relapse in an existing mental  illness  and
    that the risk of suicide could  fall within  Article  3,  although  the
    facts of that case where it  was  found  that  there  was  in  fact  no
    infringement of Article 3 are somewhat  different  from  those  in  the
    present case. The judge referred also to the decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal in J v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ 629  where  the  court
    laid down a framework for the analysis  of  a  suicide  risk  case,  in
    particular setting out at paragraphs 26 to 32 six questions which ought
    to be asked, the answers to which would inform the question whether  an
    Article 3 claim could succeed.

16. Those questions make clear that the treatment which an  applicant  will
    suffer must attain a minimum level of severity in order for  Article  3
    to be engaged, that in the context of what was referred to as a foreign
    case the threshold  is  particularly  high  and  that  a  question  "of
    considerable relevance" is whether the receiving state  "has  effective
    mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide". The Court of Appeal observed
    that if there  were  effective  mechanisms  that  would  weigh  heavily
    against an applicant's claim that removal would violate his  Article  3
    rights. It must follow that if there are no such  effective  mechanisms
    that will be a factor, and sometimes an important factor, in favour  of
    a  claim  that  removal  will  violate  Article  3  rights.  The  judge
    recognised the importance of that factor.

17. He referred also to the case of GS and  EO  (Article  3  health  cases)
    India [2012] UKUT 397 (IAC) a decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  dealing
    with the issue whether and if so in what circumstances Article 3  would
    be infringed by the removal of somebody from the United  Kingdom  to  a
    country where they would be unable to receive life  sustaining  medical
    treatment which was available in  the  United  Kingdom.  That  decision
    recognised that the fact that life  expectancy  would  be  dramatically
    shortened by a withdrawal of medical treatment in the  receiving  state
    was in itself incapable of amounting to a highly exceptional case  that
    engaged the Article 3 duty. Since the First-tier decision in this case,
    GS and EO has gone to the Court of Appeal  (see  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40)
    which has affirmed the decision and underlined the point that in  cases
    concerned with the relative availability of medical treatment here  and
    in the receiving state the  absence  of  medical  facilities  will  not
    amount to an infringement of  Article  3  except  in  very  exceptional
    circumstances and that the position remains as determined in the  House
    of Lords case of N v Secretary of State [2005]e He  UKHL 31, [2005] 2AC
    296.

18. It may be thought that there is some tension between the two  lines  of
    authority, on the one hand the cases concerned with medical  facilities
    here and elsewhere, and on the other the suicide cases. In the  medical
    cases  the  absence  of  available  treatment  abroad  will  only  very
    exceptionally engage Article  3,  whereas  in  the  suicide  cases  the
    availability of effective mechanisms to reduce the risk is at any  rate
    a relevant consideration. That point was addressed in GS in  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a passage which does not appear to have been  commented  on
    in the Court of Appeal,  at  paragraph  85(9)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision. The Tribunal observed that in the suicide cases it  may  well
    be the case that "the removal of the individual creates or enhances the
    risk of suicide and so [those cases] are not concerned  solely  with  a
    natural underlying disease or illness which, although treatable in  the
    UK, would not  be  treated  in  the  individual's  home  country."  The
    Tribunal commented that that distinction might well justify a different
    approach in applying Article 3 in suicide cases, but that  the  appeals
    then before the Tribunal did not  raise  that  question,  being  purely
    concerned with medical facilities. In view of the narrow factual  point
    on which this appeal is brought, explained below, it is  not  necessary
    for us to grapple with this issue in this appeal either.

19. It was in the light of those authorities that the  judge  addressed  in
    paragraph 43 the questions which the case of J requires to be addressed
    in suicide cases. Having addressed those questions he made the findings
    which we have set out more fully earlier that "there is  no  reasonable
    likelihood of [Mr Oliver] receiving the treatment that he would require
    in Guinea in order to address his mental illness" and that "there would
    [not] be effective mechanisms in place in Guinea, such as would  reduce
    the risk of suicide ... or the risk of other  self  harm  ...  and  the
    further likelihood of a deterioration in his mental health and  suicide
    risk".

20. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  to  this  Tribunal  contend
    that this case does not satisfy the very high  threshold  envisaged  in
    Article 3 cases and that the decision to deport does not  infringe  the
    absolute rights protected by Article 3 of the Convention because "there
    is provision available to [Mr Oliver] in Guinea", albeit  "not  of  the
    same standard as in the UK". The Secretary of State submits that  while
    the facilities may not be of the same standard as in the United Kingdom
    there is no obligation upon the state to offer  treatment  indefinitely
    to those who are subject to immigration control.

21. In our judgment this submission fails to recognise the strength of  the
    findings which the First-tier Tribunal has made. These findings are not
    to the effect that there is provision available to Mr Oliver in Guinea,
    albeit not of the same standard as in the United  Kingdom,  but  rather
    that there is for all practical purposes no such treatment available to
    him at all. There is "no reasonable likelihood  of  him  receiving  the
    treatment that  he  would  require  in  order  to  address  his  mental
    illness". This ground of appeal is essentially a challenge to a factual
    finding which the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  made  which,  on  the
    evidence, he was entitled to make. It does not disclose  any  error  of
    law.

22. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal go on to say that the  judge
    has wrongly distinguished the present  case  from  that  of  Bensaid  v
    United Kingdom without an adequate basis  for  doing  so.  In  Bensaid,
    however, the Strasbourg court acknowledged  that  return  of  a  person
    suffering from long term psychotic illness could  in  principle  breach
    Article 3, but found on the facts that it did not do  so:  despite  the
    considerable difficulties which the applicant in that case  might  face
    in his home country in availing himself of treatment, it was ultimately
    speculative whether or not he would be  able  to  do  so.  It  was  not
    proved, therefore, that treatment was not available.  The  position  is
    different here where the judge has made the positive finding  which  we
    have set out. It follows that the grounds  of  appeal  do  not  in  our
    judgment demonstrate any error by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  which
    would justify us in setting aside his determination.

23. It seems to us that in principle the cases  recognise  the  possibility
    that a condition such as this individual has are  capable  of  engaging
    Article 3 so that his  removal  would  amount  to  an  infringement  of
    Article 3. Whether or not such arguments could be made, as to which  we
    say nothing, no argument has in fact been addressed to us  which  would
    demonstrate that, on the particular findings of fact made in this case,
    the judge's conclusion that a  removal  would  be  an  infringement  of
    Article 3 is wrong in law. The only  argument  advanced  was  that  the
    judge's factual finding was wrong.

24. For that reason we have to dismiss this appeal, but before leaving  the
    case we should say this. There was an  application  to  the  First-tier
    Judge by the Home Office representative for an adjournment of the First-
    tier hearing on the ground that a further medical  report  was  awaited
    which it was hoped might  resolve  definitively  the  disputed  medical
    evidence. The First-tier Tribunal Judge refused that application for an
    adjournment.

25. In opening the appeal before us today Mr Walker  sought  permission  to
    amend the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal to  contend  that  the
    refusal of the adjournment was itself  a  material  error  of  law.  We
    refused that application to amend on the basis that it  was  made  much
    too late, and in any event that it was a matter for the  discretion  of
    the First-tier Judge.  We  record,  however,  that  in  the  course  of
    discussion of that amendment we were told that since the  determination
    by the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Oliver has been  released  on  bail  and
    that there now exists a more up-to-date medical  report.  We  have  not
    been shown that report and do not know what it says but it may  be,  we
    say no more than that, that the fact that he has been released on  bail
    would indicate that there is some improvement in his condition. At  all
    events, there may be some ground for thinking that  Dr  Maloney's  view
    that Mr Oliver was not fit to be released to the community in  view  of
    the danger which he posed to himself and others may no longer apply.

26. We make clear that the decision that we have given  is  concerned  with
    the determination made by the First-tier Tribunal  which  is  dated  19
    October 2014. It is limited to a decision that on the  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and the findings made by the judge there is  no
    error of law  in  the  judge's  determination  that  deportation  would
    infringe Article 3. However, if it is the case that circumstances  have
    changed materially and that Mr Oliver's condition now is in fact better
    than it appeared to be on the basis of that evidence, that is a  matter
    which the Secretary of State may well wish  to  take  into  account  in
    determining any period of leave that should be given to  Mr  Oliver  in
    the light of our decision. Our decision, on the  basis  which  we  have
    explained, is simply that this appeal is dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained  no  error  of  law  and
stands.

Mr Oliver's appeal remains allowed on human rights grounds.


No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed        Date 16 March 2015

Mr Justice Males

