
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02004/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 December 2014                         |On 9 December 2014             |
|Oral judgment                              |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                Mr Yaya Conde
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Symes, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bartlett, promulgated on  25  September  2014  following
    hearings at Taylor House on 18 March, 25 June and 9 September 2014,  in
    which  that  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's   appeal   on   both
    Immigration Rules and human rights grounds against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State dated 20  September  2013  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order made against him.

2.   The pleaded grounds contain six separate  heads  of  challenge  to  the
    determination and although the Tribunal is grateful  to  Mr  Symes  for
    focusing his submissions on those he considers to be most  relevant  to
    the issues and in recognition of the fact that the  grounds  in  places
    merge into each other, I will go through  each  matter  separately  but
    attempting to avoid repetition wherever possible.

3.    The  starting  point  in  any  challenge  of  this   nature   is   the
    determination itself.  It is a lengthy, detailed document containing  a
    number of headings which assist the reader to understand the issues  in
    the mind of the judge when deciding the merits of the case.  There  is,
    for example, a detailed discussion of the applicable  law  in  what  is
    another time of flux following the passing of the 2014 Act and relevant
    provisions and there impact upon the Immigration Rules.

4.   Ground 1 noted that the appeal was brought  in  relation  to  paragraph
    390 of the Immigration Rules.   Paragraph  390  is  the  relevant  Rule
    setting out the criteria to be considered when an application  is  made
    for the revocation of a deportation order.  Paragraph 390  states  that
    any such application will  be  considered  in  the  light  of  all  the
    circumstances including the following:

    (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;


    (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;


    (iii)    the interests of the community, including the  maintenance  of
         an effective immigration control;


    (iv) the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including  any  compassionate
         circumstances.

5.   I find no arguable merit in the submission that paragraph 390  was  not
    in the mind of the judge.  There is specific reference to paragraph 390
    in paragraph 127 of the determination and  to  the  fact  that  in  the
    judge's mind all relevant issues set out in that paragraph of the Rules
    have been properly considered. This is supported by a  reading  of  the
    determination.

6.   The judge also noted in paragraph  72  that  it  was  agreed  with  the
    appellant's representative at the commencement of the hearing that  the
    issue in respect of Article 8 would turn upon whether  the  failure  by
    the respondent to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom  over  a
    period since 24 June 2008 amounted to a  disproportionate  interference
    in his private life.  If that is  the  basis  on  which  the  case  was
    advanced by the appellant and  the  basis  on  which  the  issues  were
    considered by the judge, no material misdirection  or  legal  error  is
    established.

7.   The judge clearly took care  to  ensure  that  the  appellant  had  the
    opportunity to put forward the evidence he intended  to  rely  upon  as
    demonstrated by the number of hearings and adjournments for the reasons
    set out in the papers.  All evidence and information made available was
    clearly considered with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and the
    judge has given reasons for the findings made.  Whether those  findings
    are tainted by legal error is a matter that is at the forefront  of  my
    mind.

8.   The passage of time referred to by Mr Symes in  relation  to  paragraph
    391A was also a  matter  of  which  the  judge  was  clearly  aware  by
    reference to his recording of the chronology  of  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom and what has occurred since.  The Rule does not say  that  that
    is a determinative issue as in fact the last line of 391A is  that  the
    passage of time since the person was deported may (my emphasis) also in
    itself amount to such a change of  circumstances  such  as  to  warrant
    revocation of the order.  The word 'may' shows it is  not  an  absolute
    but a discretionary issue that the Tribunal needed to  consider  and  I
    find they did.  There is no arguable merit in the challenge on ground 1
    as pleaded.

9.    In  relation  to  ground  2,  this  deals  with  the  reason  why  the
    deportation order has never been enforced and relates  to  difficulties
    that it is accepted the Secretary of  State  has  had  in  securing  an
    emergency travel document (ETD) to secure the  appellant's  removal  to
    Guinea.

10.  The witness evidence of the claimant, and I look at  his  statement  at
    page 13 of his bundle referred to me by Mr  Symes,  confirms  that  the
    appellant did go to the Guinean Embassy in Kilburn on 14 July  2011  as
    he wanted someone there to be a  witness  of  what  had  happened.   He
    states in that statement that he went there to try and secure a  travel
    document but was told that the embassy did not have enough evidence  to
    prove that he is Guinean and so  they  could  not  give  him  a  travel
    document.  There appears nothing unlawful or perverse in a state entity
    saying that unless you prove you are a national of this state  we  will
    not recognise you as such or  give  you  a  document  permitting  entry
    through our borders.

11.  The judge noted the progress made, or lack  of  it,  and  came  to  the
    conclusion when considering the evidence in the round that  one  reason
    that no progress had been made and additional information not  provided
    was  because  the  appellant  was  deliberately  being  obstructive;  a
    'failure to cooperate finding'.  The grounds submit  that  that  was  a
    finding not open to the judge suggesting it was in some way perverse or
    irrational.

12.  The judge's starting point  was  the  determination  of  Judge  Whiting
    referred to in paragraph 84 of the determination under challenge  whose
    findings were not challenged.  The Judge records it was  common  ground
    that the findings of fact made by Judge Whiting were being relied  upon
    in the appeal  process.   A  number  of  specific  findings  were  made
    including a finding that the claim before Judge Whiting  regarding  the
    grounds on which the appellant sought  international  protection  as  a
    refugee lacked credibility.  Judge Whiting effectively found  that  the
    appellant had attempted to secure such status on grounds that  had  not
    been shown to be truthful.

13.  The First-tier Judge whose decision is under challenge noted  that  the
    appellant wished to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  accepted  the
    respondent's contention  that  it  was  not  in  the  appellant's  best
    interest to be truthful with regard to his circumstances.

14.  I accept there appears to be conflict between an  individual  going  to
    the embassy to try and secure a travel document to enable him to return
    home and a finding that he was not doing everything he could to  secure
    such return as he wished to remain in the United Kingdom.   It  is  not
    irrational to  conclude  that  a  person  who  has  made  a  claim  for
    international protection might have been doing that to secure leave  to
    remain or to prevent removal.  Such a finding has been made in relation
    to this individual.

15.  The fact the appellant does not  want  to  return  to  Guinea  and  his
    evidence as to a complete lack of knowledge as to the  details  of  the
    whereabouts of cousins  and  uncles,  and  his  claim  in  general,  is
    specifically commented upon in paragraph 90 of the determination.   His
    evidence before the judge has not  been  found  to  be  credible  on  a
    balance of probabilities, effectively a finding that the appellant  had
    not made out or discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required
    standard to show that he had  done  everything  he  possibly  could  be
    expected to do to assist the Guinean Embassy  in  proving  that  he  is
    entitled to an ETD.

16.  That finding cannot be said to be  perverse  or  irrational  as  it  is
    clear from his witness evidence that having  gone  to  the  embassy  in
    2011, and being told  that  insufficient  evidence  was  available,  he
    appears to have done very little.  There was no evidence  that  he  had
    done anything of any great consequence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to resolve that issue.  He was therefore a person who had been found to
    have lied, a person who it appears did make  an  attempt  to  secure  a
    travel document in 2011, but a person  who  thereafter  had  done  very
    little or nothing to actively cooperate with the Guinean authorities to
    enable an ETD to be secured.

17.  Although not a document in existence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    Elder Rahimi has now written to the Guinean Embassy in a  letter  dated
    24 October 2014 setting  out  details  of  the  paternal  and  maternal
    family.  There was insufficient material before the First-tier Tribunal
    to show that that information in such detail had been  provided  or  to
    show that his aunt who was contacted after the  adjournment  could  not
    provide information to assist the Guinean authorities.    Even  if  the
    finding as to adverse intent to the appellant's detriment is harsh,  it
    arguably was one available to the judge on the basis of the information
    made available to him.  The finding  is  that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof upon him to  the  required  standard  to
    show he had done all he could  reasonably  be  expected  to  do.   That
    finding is a sustainably  finding  not  affected  by  any  legal  error
    material to the decision on the facts of his case.

18.  In relation to Mr Symes' submission that the relevance of  the  adverse
    finding could be to the proportionality balance outside the Rules, i.e.
    that the judge's mind was so  tainted  by  such  a  finding  that  what
    follows is unsustainable, I  do  not  find  such  an  assertion  to  be
    substantiated when the determination is read in full.

19.  Ground 3 refers to  adverse  findings  against  the  appellant  to  the
    effect that he had deliberately withheld information to  the  Guineaian
    Embassy.  I have dealt with that above and do not need to repeat  those
    findings.

20.  Ground 4 relating to the challenge to  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant would at least know the districts in which  the  cousins  and
    uncles resided is noted but again that crosses  over  the  boundary  of
    observations I have made previously.  What is also of interest is  that
    in the letter Elder Rahimi recently wrote to the embassy, although  the
    current whereabouts of the family members are stated to be not known or
    deceased, the districts in which  they  were  born  is  included  which
    appears to be information known to the appellant  and  communicated  to
    his solicitors.  I do not find that it has been established in ground 4
    as pleaded that there is any material error that  would  enable  me  to
    interfere with the decision made.

21.  Ground 5 challenges the nationality issues.

22.  Ground 6 challenges the reliance by the First-tier Judge  on  the  case
    of AR & FW suggesting that it needed to be distinguished on  its  facts
    from the instant case. That was a  case  submitted,  according  to  the
    determination, by the appellant himself or  his  representatives.   The
    judge did distinguish that case on the facts and made perfectly  lawful
    and credible findings as to why the weight he was invited to place upon
    the findings of the Court of Appeal in that case was not as  Mr  Hodson
    had suggested.

23.  Ground 7 is generalistic  and  lacks  specificity.   If  one  looks  at
    paragraphs 34 and 35 there is a challenge to the Article  8  assessment
    which is stated to be flawed independently of other reasons identified,
    but in light of the fact that I find that the judge  did  consider  all
    the material with the required degree of care, that that  material  was
    insufficient to make out the case that was advanced  to  the  judge  in
    relation to time in the United Kingdom or private life,  and  that  the
    judge did give adequate reasons for findings made, I am  not  satisfied
    it has been made out on an arguable basis or otherwise that  the  judge
    did not undertake the Article 8 proportionality assessment properly.

24.  As it is a properly  undertaken  proportionality  assessment  the  only
    basis of challenge is on public law grounds and no public  law  grounds
    have been established sufficient to enable me to  interfere  with  this
    decision.  The Court of Appeal have made it clear on numerous occasions
    that the Upper Tribunal should not interfere with the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, whether they would make the decision in  the  same
    terms or not, unless there is clear evidence of a material legal error.
     The test is whether the decision made was within the  range  of  those
    the judge was permitted to make on the evidence available to  him.   It
    is my finding that it has not been established on the facts  that  this
    decision was outside the range of permissible findings.

25.  For that reason no error  material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal has been established  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  today.   The
    determination must stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson





