
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02238/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                             Mr muchai wainaina
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp of Counsel instructed by Liberty & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, born on 29  June  1989,  is  a  citizen  of  Kenya.   He
    appeals with permission against the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) (Judge Sanderson, Mr F Jamieson JP) against  a  decision
    of the respondent dated 18 February 2013 to make  a  deportation  order
    under s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 on the basis  that  he  was  a
    foreign criminal.

2.   The immediate basis for this decision was  the  appellant's  conviction
    on 3 September 2007 at Winchester Crown Court for possessing a Class  A
    drug (crack cocaine) with intent to supply, for which he was  sentenced
    to  three  years'  detention  in  a   young   offenders'   institution.
    Previously he had a caution in May 2004 for aggravated vehicle  taking,
    and six months' sentence (conditionally discharged) for  possession  of
    cannabis.  Subsequently he was cautioned in June 2010 for possession of
    cannabis and convicted in March 2010 of driving a  motor  vehicle  with
    excess alcohol, using a vehicle whilst uninsured and  driving  a  motor
    vehicle without a licence, for which  he  was  fined  and  his  licence
    endorsed and he was disqualified from driving for twelve months.  On 15
    November 2012 he was convicted of an offence of attempted  robbery  and
    sentenced to a period of twelve months' imprisonment suspended for  two
    years and he was made the subject of a supervision order.  He was  also
    convicted on the same occasion of failing to surrender to custody at an
    appointed  time,  for  which  he  was  sentenced   to   three   months'
    imprisonment.  On 18 September 2013 he was convicted of  destroying  or
    damaging property, battery and failing to surrender to  custody  at  an
    appropriate time.  He was sentenced to a fine and a  period  of  twelve
    weeks' imprisonment.

3.   Before the FtT the appellant relied on Article 8 ECHR, citing the  fact
    that he had been in the UK since June 1995, only a few  days  short  of
    his 6th birthday, his family life ties with his parents and sister  who
    are British citizens and his relationship with his partner, Ms Victoria
    Taylor and their child T, born in May 2013, both of  whom  are  British
    citizens, the couple having lived together since February 2011.  At the
    date of the hearing before the FtT the couple were expecting  a  second
    child.  In his oral evidence the  appellant  said  he  had  lost  touch
    completely with his country of  birth  and  would  be  unable  to  cope
    without the support of close family in Kenya.  He said he was  employed
    with ABR Energy Household Energy Solutions.  He said he  regretted  his
    criminal conduct but was now a changed man.  He had completed a  number
    of programmes whilst in custody.

4.   The FtT also heard evidence from his partner who  confirmed  that  they
    had met in April 2010 and were in a serious relationship and planned to
    marry in the near future.  She said she had never been  to  Kenya,  did
    not speak the  language  and  would  find  it  extremely  difficult  to
    communicate with people there.  She could not relocate there;  all  her
    ties were with family and friends and community in the UK.  She  needed
    the appellant to be involved in her children's lives.  If  her  partner
    were to be deported she would go with him; otherwise the children would
    not have a father.

5.   The appellant's mother, Ms Agnes Muhoro, also gave evidence.  She  said
    she had sustained a neck injury in October 2004 which resulted  in  her
    being permanently disabled.   She  believed  her  disability  may  have
    unsettled the appellant.  Her son, the appellant, had been living  with
    her until 2010.  In 2009 he had helped her with household chores.  Most
    of the time he was living with her he was out.  In  evidence  she  gave
    concerning her relationship with the appellant and others she said that
    to her knowledge the appellant had never communicated with  any  family
    members in Kenya directly or indirectly except one uncle he had  spoken
    to briefly in 1999.  She had four brothers in Kenya and her 67 year old
    mother.  She herself had been back to Kenya twice since her arrival  in
    the UK in 1993 - once in February 2009 and once in June/July 2012.  She
    said the appellant speaks a little Swahili.

6.   The FtT next heard from the appellant's sister, Wambui  Munchal.   Like
    her mother, his sister thought the appellant had expressed considerable
    remorse for his crimes.  Finally the FtT  heard  from  the  appellant's
    partner's mother.  She said that the appellant had matured  and  become
    more responsible since he became a father.

7.   The FtT first considered whether the appellant met the requirements  of
    paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules.  It accepted  he  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son  T,  but  did
    not consider it had been shown that it would be unduly harsh for  T  to
    live in Kenya or for T to live in the UK  without  the  appellant.   It
    took into account the factors that had been raised as  identifying  the
    child's best interests in remaining in  the  UK.   At  [62]  the  panel
    stated:

         "62. In assessing the child's best interest we have regard  to  s55
             of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  ZH
             (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] 2 AC 166.  We are  obliged  to  treat
             the best interests of the child as  a  primary  consideration.
             We note that while British citizenship is a trump card, it  is
             of particular importance in the assessment of the child's best
             interests that the child will lose the advantages  of  growing
             up and being  educated  in  their  own  country,  culture  and
             language if required to move abroad.  It is submitted  on  the
             appellant's behalf that deprivation of the benefits of British
             citizenship including educationally  and  culturally;  removal
             from the nuclear family; lack of  evidence  that  the  child's
             father/parents would have somewhere  to  live  or  an  income;
             providing for a new baby in a state of homelessness; the  lack
             of financial support and lack of  contact  with  relatives  in
             Kenya over a period of 19 years, bar one conversation 15 years
             ago; the unreasonableness of requiring a mother of  a  British
             citizen to relocate outside the EU;  the  mortality  rate  for
             under 5's in Kenya and the considerable health risks to street
             homeless children cumulatively  render  it  unduly  harsh  for
             Tristan to move to Kenya."

8.   The panel concluded that properly  considered  the  appellant  had  not
    established that the child T's best interests required the appellant to
    remain in the UK because the child T was only 16  months  old  and  the
    appellant's partner had clearly stated in cross-examination that if  he
    were removed to Kenya she would go with him with the children.  In this
    way in the best interests of the child to remain with both his  parents
    could be fully respected.  Further, the panel found that it  could  not
    accept the appellant's evidence or that of his witnesses that he  would
    not have somewhere to live in Kenya: "He  has,  we  find,  deliberately
    underplayed the extent of his contact with family members in  Kenya  in
    order to strengthen his case for remaining in the  UK."   Nor  did  the
    panel accept that the partner's mother would stop  providing  financial
    support to the couple.  The panel's  conclusion  was  that  the  family
    would not be homeless in Kenya and neither T nor  the  expected  second
    child would be left in  a  vulnerable  position.   In  light  of  these
    findings the panel decided that the question of  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for T to remain in the UK without the  appellant  did  not
    arise.

9.   The panel then considered  whether  the  appellant  could  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 339A.  It was prepared  to  accept  that  the
    appellant was socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the  UK  but
    concluded that he  had  not  shown  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration back into Kenyan society.   In
    this regard the panel reiterated the earlier finding that  it  did  not
    accept the appellant lacked contact with family in Kenya and noted that
    the grandmother's accommodation had been seen as  suitable  enough  for
    his mother and sister  when  they  had  visited.   It  considered  that
    because the appellant had been brought up by his mother  who  is  fully
    aware of Kenyan culture she would have imparted family  experiences  to
    him.

10.  The panel  also  considered  whether  the  appellant  could  show  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those set out in paragraphs 339
    and 399A.  It accepted that the appellant enjoys family life  with  his
    partner and child but concluded that taking into  account  factors  for
    and against, both of which were rehearsed earlier in the determination,
    the appellant had not shown the existence of  such  circumstances.   In
    relation to his criminal conduct, it accepted that his  conviction  for
    being in possession of Class A drugs with intent  to  supply  was  more
    than seven years ago, but noted that  his  record  showed  he  had  not
    "learned the lesson about drugs" even after a period of  detention  and
    that he had a history of repeated offences including one  of  attempted
    robbery:

         "Even though it was claimed that the appellant had changed after he
         had been released from detention and following  the  birth  of  his
         child that is not borne out by his  behaviour  since  he  committed
         further offences for which he was convicted on 18 September 2013."

11.  The panel referred to displays of anger as a theme running through  the
    appellant's criminal history.   It  noted  that  the  OASys  assessment
    assessed the appellant  as  "posing  a  low  risk  of  reoffending.  It
    considered this "surprising ..." because his history of offences marked
    him out as a person who committed offences  on  a  yearly  basis".   It
    concluded:

         "We do not accept the opinions set out in the OASys Assessment that
         the appellant only poses a low risk of reoffending.   He  does  not
         appear to have learned his lesson."

    It concluded that there was a clear public interest in his deportation.

Grounds of Appeal

13.   The  grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the  panel  had  failed  to
    appreciate the appellant's Article 8  rights  in  full;  had  erred  in
    finding that it would not be unduly harsh for his  son  T  to  live  in
    Kenya, notwithstanding the mortality rate for under 5's; had  erred  in
    concluding that the appellant had deliberately underplayed  the  extent
    of his contact with family members in Kenya; had  erred  in  concluding
    that it would be the "choice" of the appellant and his  partner  as  to
    whether she would relocate with him  to  Kenya,  (since  she  would  in
    reality be "forced out" of  the  UK  under  the  guise  of  immigration
    control); had erred in finding his mother would  have  imparted  Kenyan
    culture to him;  and  had  erred  in  finding  that  his  grandmother's
    accommodation in Kenya would be sufficient for him  and  his  wife  and
    children.  In relation to the  OASys  Report  it  was  noted  that  the
    assessment that the appellant would be at low risk of  reoffending  had
    not been disputed by the Crown Court judge.

14.  To the written grounds, Mr Fripp, with my permission added the  further
    ground that in assessing the appellant's circumstances,  especially  in
    relation to the best interests of the child, the  judge  had  erred  in
    focusing on the likely situation  of  the  appellant  immediately  upon
    return rather than  in  the  longer  term  encompassing  the  education
    facilities the children would have  to  encounter  when  they  went  to
    schools which  were  nowhere  near  the  quality  of  UK  schools.   He
    submitted that the  panel  had  also  underplayed  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's integration into UK society, a  country  in  which  he  had
    lived since aged 5.

My Assessment

15.  I do not propose to deal with grounds  in  the  order  they  have  been
    enumerated, but their principal content will be covered.

16.  As a prelude to what follows, I  would  observe  that  several  of  the
    grounds amount to more disagreements with the panel's findings of fact.
     In the absence of any identification of perversity, it is difficult to
    see how these grounds can succeed - as Mr Fripp's submissions  for  the
    most part acknowledged.  The panel  had  written  statements  from  the
    appellant, his partner, his mother and his partner's mother  and  heard
    oral evidence from each of them which was tested in  cross-examination.
    It was entirely within the range of reasonable responses for the  panel
    to reach a number of findings adverse to the  appellant  in  particular
    (i) that he had underplayed the extent of his connections  with  family
    members in Kenya; (ii) that his mother would have imparted knowledge of
    Kenyan culture experiences to him; and (iii) that that  it  was  likely
    his partner's mother would continue to support the couple in  Kenya  as
    she had done in the UK.

17.  In relation to (i), the grounds propound the argument  that  the  panel
    had no evidential basis for its conclusion.   That  argument  overlooks
    that the panel properly took as its starting point that the  burden  of
    proof was on the  appellant  ([46])  and  that  having  considered  the
    evidence put  forward  by  the  appellant  and  witnesses  it  was  not
    satisfied they had given a true picture.  Part of that body of evidence
    was the fact that the appellant's family in the UK and extended  family
    members in Kenya had kept up contact in more ways than one.  It  was  a
    reasonable inference from that body of evidence  that  the  appellant's
    connections were more significant than was being suggested.

18.  As regards (ii) and (iii), a similar point can be made.   The  evidence
    of family connections, coupled with the fact  that  the  appellant  had
    lived with his mother until 2010 and spoke  a  little  Swahili,  was  a
    sufficient and evident basis for the panel's finding on this matter. It
    was a reasonable inference from the finding that the  partner's  mother
    had given the couple  financial  support  in  the  UK  that  she  would
    continue to do so if they relocated to Kenya.

19.  In respect of the panel's finding of fact, the only matter on which  it
    might be said it had gone beyond  the  evidence  was  in  the  apparent
    finding as regards accommodation at [68] that  the  appellant  and  his
    wife and children could live in his grandmother's house even though  it
    was described by the appellant's mother as comprising one room and  one
    bedroom ([33]).  However, read in the context of the  assessment  as  a
    whole it is clear that the Tribunal considered  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect that the appellant would be able to obtain support from  "family
    members" in Kenya and that  he  and  his  wife  would  also  have  some
    financial support from his partner's mother.  In that broader  context,
    the panel's findings considering accommodation are free of legal error.

20.  Another main theme of the grounds concerns the panel's assessment  that
    it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's  partner  and  son  to
    live in Kenya.  Here also, I consider the grounds fail to identify  any
    legal error on the part of  the  panel.   In  light  of  the  partner's
    evidence in cross-examination, it was open to  the  panel  to  conclude
    that in the event that he is deported, his partner would choose  to  go
    with him in order to maintain the unity of the family.  It was  clearly
    not her evidence that if the appellant were returned to Kenya, she  and
    the children would remain in the UK.  However much this choice would be
    one constrained by a premise his partner did not accept (that he  would
    be deported), it was a real choice.   Once  the  panel  had  reached  a
    conclusion about the likely residence of the partner and  children,  it
    was entirely correct, and in line with established case law principles,
    for it to conclude that the principal answer to the question  regarding
    the best interests of the child was to say  that  those  lay  with  the
    child(ren) remaining with his (their) parents ([63]).  I see  no  force
    in the contention that the panel  should  have  regarded  the  evidence
    relating to the mortality rate in Kenya for under 5's  and  the  health
    risks to homeless  street  children,  as  any  sort  of  comparator  of
    relevance to the appellant's case, when, on the panel's findings  there
    would be family support both from family members in Kenya and the UK.

21.  As already noted, I gave Mr Fripp permission to extend  the  ground  so
    as to argue that the panel had wrongly confined its assessment  to  the
    situation the appellant and his  family  would  face  immediately  upon
    relocation to Kenya.  Mr Jarvis is right to say that no Tribunal can be
    expected to look as far into the future as ten years (a period Mr Fripp
    said was salient because of Immigration Rules on  re-entry).   However,
    it can be expected to consider what  is  reasonably  foreseeable.   But
    that it seems to me is precisely what this panel  did.   Indeed  it  is
    implicit in its entire analysis that  it  was  considering  whether  he
    could overcome obstacles to his reintegration into  Kenyan  society  in
    the longer-term; see [66]-[68].

22.  The grounds submit that the panel erred in failing to  agree  with  the
    findings of the OASys Report which described the appellant  as  at  low
    risk of reoffending.  It was clearly  open to the  panel,  however,  to
    reach different findings as regards the risk of reoffending as long  as
    it sufficiently explained why: see Vasconcelos (risk -  rehabilitation)
    Portugal [2013] UKUT 378.  The panel in this case made it  sufficiently
    clear that it differed from that assessment  because  on  the  evidence
    before it in September 2015, he had not "learned his lesson" ([72]).  I
    note that the Crown Court sentencing judge who had  this  OASys  Report
    before him made his sentencing remarks in September 2007 and that since
    then the  appellant  had  offended  several  times,  most  recently  in
    September 2013.

23.  The panel's conclusions that the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under
    paragraphs 399 or 399A were free of legal error.

24.  Mr Fripp was realistic enough to accept that  if  the  appellant  could
    not succeed under paragraphs 399 or 399A he could not succeed under the
    provision in paragraph 398 which requires an  applicant  to  show  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those identified in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A.  I would point out that the appellant  could  not  derive
    any additional assistance from ss117B-D of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 because he could not bring himself within  s117C(4)
    or (5).  He could not do so for the same reasons as he could not  bring
    himself  within  the  Immigration  Rules.   Further,  there   was   one
    significant s117B consideration - s117B(4) - that  meant  that  in  the
    Appellant's case little weight could be attached  to  his  relationship
    with  his  partner,  namely  that  he  knew  when  they   began   their
    relationship that he was under active threat of deportation; indeed  on
    his own account he told her as much.  The First-tier Tribunal does  not
    appear to have taken this point against the appellant but if it had  it
    would only have added to the  weight  of  factors  demonstrative  of  a
    strong public interest in his deportation.

25.  In light of the above considerations I am entirely satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal dealt with the appellant's Article 8 rights in full
    and reached entirely sustainable conclusions.

26.  For the above reasons:

    The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.

    Its decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
