

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02009/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 October 2015                     |On 12 January 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             derrick Opare Okai

                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant:         Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the respondent:        Ms G Loughran, counsel instructed by
                       Birnberg Peirce & Partners, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
   decision to deport him as a foreign criminal pursuant to section 32(5) of
   the UK Borders Act 2007, following  his  conviction  for  conspiracy  and
   theft  of  a  vehicle,  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to   12   months'
   imprisonment.  The Secretary of State did not consider that the  claimant
   could bring himself within Exception 1 in subsection 33(2)  of  the  2007
   Act on human rights grounds.

Background

2. The claimant is a Ghanaian citizen who came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
   1983 when he was 4 years old.  In 1998 he was granted indefinite leave to
   remain, along with the rest of his family. Also  in  1998,  the  claimant
   lived in the United States for just under a year, before returning to the
   United Kingdom. He has 3 sisters, one older and two younger.  The rest of
   his family are now British citizens. The claimant's evidence is  that  he
   has no memory of Ghana.

3. The claimant has a criminal history.  In  October  1996,  while  still  a
   minor, he first came to adverse attention when he was reprimanded by  the
   Metropolitan Police for going equipped for theft.

4. In February 1997, the  claimant  had  a  son,  probably  with  his  first
   partner, although no birth certificate has been produced  in  respect  of
   that child.  The child lives with the claimant's  first  partner  and  is
   said to be a British citizen.

5. In December 1997, the claimant was again reprimanded by the  Metropolitan
   Police, this time for common assault.

6. The claimant's adult criminal history began in  November  1998,  when  he
   was convicted at Snaresbrook Crown Court of obtaining and  attempting  to
   obtain property by deception.  He was given a community service order: he
   was 19 years old.

7. In May 2002, at Maidstone Crown Court, the claimant was  again  convicted
   of obtaining property by deception,  attempting  to  obtain  property  by
   deception,  and  theft  by  employee.   He  was  sentenced  to  2  years'
   imprisonment and was released from HMP Elmley in February 2003.

8. In August 2002, the claimant and his first partner had twin  children,  a
   son and a daughter.  He is not named on the  birth  certificates  but  in
   2006 Dartford County Court made a contact order in  his  favour  and  the
   paternity of those children is not now  in  dispute.   They  are  British
   citizens.

9. In April 2004, at  Bexley  Heath  Magistrates  Court,  the  claimant  was
   convicted of destroying or damaging property of  an  unknown  value,  and
   failing to surrender to custody at an appointed time.  He was  fined  and
   ordered to pay compensation.  In  May  2004  at  Dartford  and  Gravesham
   Magistrates Court he was again  convicted  of  failing  to  surrender  to
   custody at the appointed time, and fined.  In January 2005, at  Maidstone
   Crown Court, he was convicted of obtaining and/or  attempting  to  obtain
   property by deception and a further offence of failing  to  surrender  to
   custody at the appointed time, and sentenced to 12 months'  imprisonment.
   The Secretary of State says she sent a deportation warning letter to  the
   claimant in prison, but he says he did not receive it.

10. In October 2006, with the partner who is now his wife, the claimant  had
   a daughter.  The claimant's wife and his former partner do  not  get  on,
   but he maintains a relationship with all 7 of his children and makes sure
   that they have grown up knowing each other.  In June 2007, he married the
   child's mother, and in January 2008, they had another daughter.

11. On 16 October 2008, the claimant was  convicted  at  Thames  Magistrates
   Court of persistently soliciting a woman for prostitution  from  a  motor
   vehicle, and causing annoyance or nuisance to others.  He was fined,  and
   ordered to pay costs.

12. In 2010, the claimant and his wife separated.   On  13  July  2011,  the
   claimant was convicted of conspiracy to steal vehicles.  He was exporting
   stolen cars through his business, but the sentencing Judge accepted  that
   he was not the moving force in the conspiracy, which  the  claimant  says
   was driven by  financial  difficulties  he  had  at  the  time.   He  was
   sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment,  triggering  the  foreign  criminal
   provisions of the 2007 Act. The claimant did not allow  his  children  to
   visit him in prison as he considered it  would  be  too  distressing  for
   them.

13. In January 2012,  the  claimant  was  released  from  prison  and  began
   personal contact with his children again, having them all  to  stay  with
   him on alternate weekends.  He was released to his mother's address,  but
   his relationship with his wife revived and they began  to  live  together
   again.

14. The claimant and his wife reconciled in late 2011 or early  2012,  after
   the claimant's release from prison, and in November 2012 they had another
   daughter, and in January 2014, they had a son together. Unfortunately, at
   some time in 2013, the relationship between the  claimant  and  his  wife
   failed, and he has now filed for divorce.  All his children with his wife
   are also British citizens.

15. The Secretary of State in her deportation decision considered  the  best
   interests of all 7 children but concluded that  they  would  remain  with
   their  mothers,  who  are  their  primary  carers,  and  that  there  was
   insufficient evidence in relation to them to outweigh the public interest
   in deporting the claimant as a foreign criminal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the claimant and  his  witnesses  to
   be consistent and credible.  At the hearing, the claimant told the First-
   tier Tribunal Judge that he was in the second year of a  BA  in  Business
   Management  and  working  part  time  as   a   driver   for   Sainsbury's
   supermarkets.  He was hoping to join their  graduate  training  programme
   and work towards an honest job in management so that he could provide for
   his children.  He  saw  his  children  on  alternate  Saturdays  and  was
   provisionally due to return to Court in June 2015 in respect of an  order
   about arrangements for, presumably, the children of his marriage.

17. The First-tier Tribunal decision recorded the claimant's evidence  about
   the children as follows:

         "21. The worst result of his deportation would  be  the  effect  it
         would have on his children and  his  relationship  with  them.   He
         could not pretend that he would be unable to survive  in  Ghana  if
         deported, but he has lived in the United Kingdom for as long as  he
         can remember.  His  whole  life  is  here  including  his  parents,
         siblings, nephews, nieces, cousins, friends, and most  importantly,
         his  children.   The  thought  of  being  separated  from  them  is
         unbearable and would be devastating for all of  them.   They  would
         lose their father at a crucial time in their  lives  and  he  fears
         that the half-siblings would lose touch  with  each  other  because
         their mothers do not get on.

         22.  The [claimant] said that he realised that his own actions  had
         brought about the prospect of deportation, which had  been  hanging
         over him  for  nearly  4  years  now,  but  his  rehabilitation  is
         continuing and he plays an active and important role in  the  lives
         of his children. ...

         "40. ... The evidence, which  I  accept,  clearly  shows  that  the
         [claimant] has played a  significant  role  in  the  lives  of  his
         children since they were born.  He  continues  to  do  so  and  has
         maintained regular  contact  with  them  by  agreement  with  their
         mothers.  Recently, he has gone to Court with a view to formalising
         the arrangements.  I accept that he has a close bond  with  all  of
         the children and that he actively brings the two groups of children
         together, to meet and socialise with each other,  to  their  common
         benefit, in spite of the fact that their respective mothers do  not
         get on well.  I am satisfied also  that  the  children  enjoy,  and
         benefit from, contact with the [claimant] and that it is  in  their
         best interests, as a primary consideration,  for  that  contact  to
         continue, particularly as the [claimant] has been  taking  positive
         steps to rehabilitate himself and has  not  committed  any  further
         offence since 2011.  In all these circumstances,  I  find  that  it
         would be unduly harsh for the children to be separated  from  their
         father by remaining in the United Kingdom while he is  deported  to
         Ghana. ..."

18. Evidence from the claimant's eldest son, now almost 20  years  old,  was
   that the claimant was not his father, but his  step-father,  having  come
   into the boy's life when he was 5 years old.  He would be unable to visit
   the claimant in Ghana because he was still doing coursework  at  College,
   had just got a job, and would lack both time and money for a visit.   The
   claimant's natural children were all young and would not be  able  to  go
   either. A friend of the claimant, and also his uncle, emphasised that  he
   had turned over a new leaf and was a good father.  There  would  be  real
   difficulties for the children if he were deported.  They were still  very
   young and he was an important part of their lives.

19.  The  Judge  found  that  the  claimant  had   a   subsisting   parental
   relationship with all six of his  natural  children,  all  of  whom  were
   British citizens, and that the requirements of paragraph  399(a)(i)  were
   met.  The Secretary of State did not contend  that  the  children  should
   relocate to Ghana, rather, that it would not be unduly harsh for them  to
   remain in the United Kingdom without him. The Judge made findings of fact
   to the contrary and allowed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

20. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal. She  argued  that
   insufficient weight had been given to  the  claimant's  lengthy  criminal
   history before the index offence, or the  nature  of  the  index  offence
   itself; that insufficient weight had been given to his  antecedents,  the
   index  offence,  and  his  other  conduct,  save  for  his  attempts   to
   rehabilitate himself; that the possibility of  the  children  maintaining
   contact  with  him  by  modern  means  of  communication  had  not   been
   considered, and given  the  comments  about  financial  difficulties,  no
   consideration had been given to the claimant's ability to support himself
   in the United Kingdom and not revert to crime for financial reasons.  The
   Secretary of  State  relied  on  paragraph  117  B  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

21. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  assessment  of
   what might be 'unduly harsh' was flawed, in the  light  of  the  guidance
   given by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at  paragraph  43,  and  Kabia  (MF:
   paragraph 398 -'exceptional circumstances') [2013] UKUT 00569 (IAC).

22. That is the basis on which this appeal came before me.

Upper Tribunal hearing

23. I heard oral submissions from both parties, which  are  recorded  in  my
   record of proceedings.  The claimant attended the hearing  with  his  new
   partner.

24. For the claimant, Ms Loughran observed that the claimant  had  committed
   no further offences  since  his  release  in  July  2011  and  had  shown
   considerable remorse for his last offence, including cooperating with the
   police and giving them the names of his  co-conspirators.   The  claimant
   was fully integrated into the United Kingdom. The respondent had  delayed
   between the deportation warning in  November  2011  and  the  deportation
   decision in October 2014. The delay was plainly material,  especially  as
   the claimant was not detained during those  3  year:  in  that  time  the
   claimant and his wife had two more children.

25. For the Secretary of State, Mr Melvin argued that the delay in making  a
   deportation decision was of very little relevance.   The  Judge  had  not
   explained why the effect of deportation would be "unduly harsh"  for  the
   claimant's children and had failed to direct himself by reference to part
   5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

26. I reserved my decision, which I now give.





Discussion

27. There is a plain error of law in the Judge's decision in the failure  to
   engage with Part 5A  and  the  statutory  presumptions  therein,  and  in
   particular, the provisions of section 117C.  As I understand it,  it  was
   not the claimant's case that he could bring himself within the provisions
   of section 117C(4) because he  agreed  that  he  could  reintegrate  into
   Ghana, if that were the only consideration. Accordingly,  the  Judge  did
   not err in failing to consider paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules in
   detail, because the test there is the same and the claimant  himself  did
   not rely on it.

28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did consider whether  the  effect  of  the
   claimant's deportation on his children would be "unduly harsh": he did so
   under paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules, which mirrors the  terms
   required  by  Exception  2  at  section  117C(5)  of   the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

29. However, the Judge failed to direct himself by reference to  two  recent
   decisions of the Upper Tribunal on the meaning of "unduly harsh", in  KMO
   (section 117 - unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC)  and  MAB  (para  399;
   "unduly harsh") [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC). In KMO, the guidance given by  the
   Upper Tribunal was as follows:

         "The  Immigration  Rules,  when  applied  in  the  context  of  the
         deportation of a foreign criminal, are a complete  code.  Where  an
         assessment is required to be made as to whether a person meets  the
         requirements  of  para  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  that
         comprises an assessment of that person's claim under article  8  of
         the  ECHR,  it  is  necessary  to  have  regard,  in  making   that
         assessment, to the matters to which the Tribunal must  have  regard
         as a consequence of the provisions of s117C. In  particular,  those
         include that the more serious the offence committed, the greater is
         the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  a   foreign   criminal.
         Therefore, the word "unduly" in the phrase "unduly harsh"  requires
         consideration of whether, in the light of the  seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the foreign criminal and the public  interest
         considerations that come  into  play,  the  impact  on  the  child,
         children or partner of  the  foreign  criminal  being  deported  is
         inordinately or excessively harsh."              Emphasis added




30. In MAB, the Upper Tribunal held that:

         "1. The phrase "unduly  harsh"  in  para  399  of  the  Rules  (and
         s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not  import  a  balancing  exercise
         requiring  the  public  interest  to   be   weighed   against   the
         circumstances of the individual (whether child or  partner  of  the
         deportee).  The  focus  is  solely  upon  an  evaluation   of   the
         consequences and impact upon the individual concerned.

         2. Whether the consequences of deportation will be  "unduly  harsh"
         for an individual involves more than "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and   challenging"
         consequences and imposes a considerably  more  elevated  or  higher
         threshold.

         3. The consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if  they  are
         "severe" or "bleak" and they  will  be  "unduly"  so  if  they  are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account  of  all
         the circumstances of the individual. (MK  (section  55  -  Tribunal
         options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC)  at  [46]  and  BM  and
         others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG  [2015]  UKUT
         293  (IAC)  at  [109]  applied.)"                          Emphasis
         added

31. Whilst there is some perceived conflict between MAB and KBO in  relation
   to whether a balancing exercise must be carried out (a  matter  which  is
   before the Court of Appeal with a decision  expected  later  this  year),
   what is clear from both decisions is that "unduly harsh" is a  very  high
   standard,  meaning  "inordinately  or  excessively  harsh".   I  am   not
   satisfied from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  that  such  was  the
   standard applied to the facts in this appeal, nor  that  the  Judge  took
   proper account of all of the claimant's offending history and the  public
   interest in deportation, as required by sections 117A  and  117C  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

32. It follows that there is a  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision.
   Following discussion with the parties' representatives at the hearing,  I
   consider that the appeal decision will need to be remade  in  the  First-
   tier Tribunal, with no findings of fact or credibility preserved.

DECISION

33. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be
   remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Date:         11 January 2016           Signed        Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


