


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02238/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 15 July 2014                             |On : 16 July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before



                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               muchai wainaina

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Braier, instructed by Liberty & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (SSHD)
against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Vaudin   d'Imecourt
allowing Mr Wainaina's appeal against the respondent's  decision  to  deport
him from the United Kingdom.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereafter refer to the  Secretary
of State as the respondent and Mr  Wainaina  as  the  appellant,  reflecting
their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Kenya, born on 27 June 1989.  He  entered  the
United Kingdom on 18 June 1995 and was granted temporary admission  to  join
his mother who subsequently applied for asylum with him  as  her  dependant.
His mother's application was refused on 4  May  2000  but  she  was  granted
exceptional leave to remain until 4 May  2004.  The  appellant  was  granted
leave in line. On 5 March 2005 he was granted indefinite leave to remain.

On 3 September 2007 the appellant was convicted of possession of a  Class  A
controlled drug with intent to supply and was sentenced to three years in  a
young offender's institute. He claimed asylum on 7 April  2009.  On  5  June
2010 he was cautioned for possession of a Class B controlled drug and  on  5
March 2012 and 15 November 2012 he was convicted of various other  offences.
On 18 February 2013 he was made the subject of a  deportation  order  signed
against him but service of the order and the reasons for deportation  letter
was unsuccessful. On 18 September 2013 he was  convicted  of  destroying  or
damaging property, battery and failing to surrender to custody and  received
a sentence of 12 weeks imprisonment.

On 1 November 2013 the reasons for deportation letter and deportation  order
were served on the appellant. In the  decision  of  31  October  2013,  that
section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied,  the  respondent  rejected
the appellant's asylum claim and found that paragraphs 399 and 399A  of  the
immigration rules did not apply to him and that there  were  no  exceptional
circumstances outweighing the public interest in  his  deportation  for  the
purposes of Article 8 of the ECHR. With regard  to  paragraph  399,  it  was
noted that the appellant had not  claimed  to  have  a  spouse,  partner  or
children.

The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  was  heard  on  13
May 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Vaudin  d'Imecourt.  At  the  hearing,
evidence was produced before the judge of the appellant's relationship  with
a  British  national,  Victoria  Jane  Taylor,  which  it  was  claimed  had
commenced in April 2010 and from whom he had had  one  child,  with  another
baby expected in December 2014. The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
immigration rules on the grounds that the requirements of  paragraph  399(b)
applied, since the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
a British citizen, that he had lived in the United Kingdom with valid  leave
continuously for at least 15 years  immediately  preceding  the  application
and that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
outside the United Kingdom.

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal against that decision  on
the grounds  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
concluding that the appellant met the exceptions  to  paragraph  399(a)  and
(b). In particular with regard to  paragraph  399(b)  the  grounds  asserted
that there had been a failure to give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that
there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  outside  the
United Kingdom. It was also asserted  that  there  had  been  a  failure  to
consider the Secretary of State's public interest policies.  Permission  was
granted on 8 June 2014.

At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis applied to amend the  grounds  so  as  to
include the ground that the judge had wrongly decided  the  question  of  15
years valid leave, since the appellant's period of leave had commenced  only
in May 2000 and since a period of "valid leave" did  not  include  temporary
admission.

Mr Braier objected to the amendment on the  grounds  that  the  Home  Office
Presenting Officer, at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  had
conceded the period of 15 years valid leave and the only  issue  before  the
judge had been that of "insurmountable obstacles" in  paragraph  399(b)(ii).
The concession had been one of fact and it could not therefore be raised  as
an error of law on the judge's part. Further, the respondent  ought  not  to
be able to amend the grounds, given that there had  been  ample  opportunity
to do so prior to today's date.

Whilst the late application to amend the grounds was not to be condoned,  it
seemed to me that the amendment had to  be  permitted  since  there  was  no
doubt that there had been an error of law in  the  Tribunal's  consideration
of the period of valid leave under paragraph 399(b).  Likewise,  whether  or
not there had been a concession made on behalf  of  the  respondent  at  the
hearing before the Tribunal  (and  it  was  certainly  not  clear  from  the
determination that any such concession had in  fact  been  made),  the  fact
remained that it was legally wrong. I produced to the parties  the  reported
decision of the Upper Tribunal in Pembele v Secretary of State for the  Home
Department (Paragraph  399(b)  (i)  -  valid  leave  -  meaning)  Democratic
Republic of Congo [2013]  UKUT  310,  in  which  the  very  issue  had  been
determined. That was  a  binding  decision  and  clearly,  therefore,  Judge
Vaudin d'Imecourt was wrong to  have  found  that  the  appellant  had  been
living in the United Kingdom with valid leave for 15 years and was wrong  to
find that the requirements of paragraph 399(b) had been met.

In  the  circumstances,  given  that  the  judge,  having  found  that   the
requirements of the immigration rules had been met, did not go  on  to  make
any other findings of fact, it was agreed by all  parties  that  the  matter
had to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  considered  afresh.  It
was for the First-tier Tribunal to hear the appeal de novo and to  make  its
own findings in regard to paragraph 399A and,  if  appropriate,  exceptional
circumstances under paragraph 398 of the rules.

DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
on the grounds that the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which
is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is  such
that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it   is
appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  dealt  with
afresh, before any judge aside from Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt.





















                               Signed                                  Date
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
