
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02226/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                   R E K A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Gore, of Counsel instructed by Messrs R Spio &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ghana born on 14 May 1982 appealed  against
    a decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him following his conviction on 5 October 2012  for  inflicting
    grievous bodily harm and assault.  His appeal had been allowed  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal in a determination promulgated on 24 March 2014 but
    after a hearing on 15 July 2014 I set aside that decision and  directed
    that the appeal proceed to a hearing afresh.

2.   My decision set out the appellant's immigration  history  in  paragraph
    3, details of the appellant's conviction in the following paragraph and
    in paragraph 5 I refer to the appellant's relationship with  Ms  S.   I
    also noted the findings of fact made  by  the  Tribunal  below  and  in
    paragraphs 27 onwards gave my reasons for setting aside the decision.

3.   My decision was as follows:-

         "1.  The Secretary of State appeals,  with  permission,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal Morris and Mrs S Hewitt  JP  lay  member)  who  in  a
             determination promulgated on 24 March 2014 allowed the  appeal
             of R E K A against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to
             make a deportation order against him on 2 September 2013 under
             the provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2005.


         2.   Although in the appeal before me the Secretary of State is the
             appellant I will for ease of reference refer  to  her  as  the
             respondent  as  she  was  the  respondent  in  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.  Similarly I will refer to R E K A as the  appellant
             as he was the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal.


         3.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 14 May  1982  who
             entered Britain on 12 November 1998 with entry  clearance  for
             settlement as  the  dependant  of  his  mother.   In  2000  he
             returned to Ghana.  He came back to Britain in  November  2001
             before returning to Ghana the following month and then  coming
             back to Britain on 21 November 2003.  Although  on  return  he
             was initially only given six months' leave  to  enter  he  was
             granted indefinite leave to remain on 16 January 2004.


         4.   On 4 September 2012 he was convicted at Croydon Crown Court of
             inflicting grievous bodily harm and assault by beating.  On  5
             October 2012 he was sentenced to 27  months'  imprisonment  on
             the  first  count  and  two  months'  imprisonment,   to   run
             concurrently, on the second count.  On 2 November 2012 he  was
             served with notice of liability to automatic  deportation  and
             on 2 September 2013 the  deportation  order  against  him  was
             signed.


         5.   Since 2007 the appellant has been and continues  to  be  in  a
             relationship with Ms S.  Ms S has a daughter, J S O ("J")  who
             was born on 19 January 2006.   Although  Mrs  S  was  born  in
             Jamaica she and J are both British citizens.


         6.   In the determination the Tribunal  set  out  in  paragraphs  6
             onwards the relevant legal framework starting with Rules  398,
             399 and 399A.  They then set out the terms of Sections 32  and
             33 of the 2007 Act and Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship,
             and Immigration Act 2009.


         7.   They noted the terms of the respondent's reasons letter  dated
             2 September 2013 giving the reasons  why  the  respondent  had
             decided to deport the appellant.  They  then  noted  that  the
             appellant had been convicted of a serious offence, noting that
             the appellant's repeatedly punched  the  victim,  a  neighbour
             with whom he was in dispute and then two days  later  attacked
             him in the street punching and kicking him so that the  victim
             suffered  some  conjunctival  haemorrhaging   which   required
             extensive surgery.


         8.   They referred to the fact that the appellant had been assessed
             and made subject to the minimum level  of  Multiagency  Public
             Protection Arrangements ("MAPPA level 1") noting that this was
             a system designed for the  protection  of  the  public.   They
             noted the  respondent  stated  that  the  appellant  had  been
             assessed as a person  who  had  to  be  monitored  under  risk
             management strategies and that this was an indication that  he
             was viewed as a risk to the public.


         9.   In paragraphs 18 onwards of the determination the Tribunal set
             out their findings of fact.  They concluded that the appellant
             could not benefit from the provisions of paragraph  399(a)(ii)
             and (b) of the Rules as J could remain in Britain  with  Ms  S
             and therefore there was another family  member  who  would  be
             able to care for her in Britain if the appellant were returned
             to Ghana.  They noted it  was  accepted  that  Ms  S  and  the
             appellant were in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  but
             because the appellant had not lived  in  Britain  continuously
             for at least fifteen years immediately preceding the  date  of
             decision he could not benefit from the provisions of paragraph
             399(b)(i).  Having noted that the appellant could not  benefit
             from the provisions of paragraph 399A they concluded that  the
             appellant could not benefit from the terms of the  Immigration
             Rules.


         10.  In paragraph 21 of the  determination  they  referred  to  the
             decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Farquharson  [2013]  UKUT
             00146 (IAC) which they stated listed the factors which  needed
             to be considered by the decision maker  and  on  appeal  by  a
             judge before a proper exercise of discretion under  Article  8
             could be made.


         11.  The Tribunal then set  out  the  various  factors  which  they
             considered relevant  including  the  age  and  length  of  the
             appellant's  residence in Britain, his connections  with  this
             country and his personal history including character,  conduct
             and employment record.  They considered  that  he  had  had  a
             record of steady employment in Britain and that there  was  no
             evidence that he had ever been a burden on the state  or  that
             he did not take his duties to support his family seriously.


         12.  They noted the seriousness of the appellant's crime  but  also
             stated that the trial judge had  specifically  mentioned  that
             the appellant was a young man of previous good character.   No
             recommendation for his deportation had been made  and  he  had
             been given credit for his late change of plea to guilty on the
             day of trial.   They  stated  that  the  appellant  had  shown
             considerable remorse since he had committed  the  offence  and
             had written to the  victim  and  the  victim's  family.   They
             accepted the depth of his remorse.  They noticed that  he  had
             been assessed as a minimum MAPPA level.


         13.  They went on to say that it  was  clear  from  the  sentencing
             remarks that the offences for which the  appellant  was  found
             guilty had arisen out of an ongoing neighbour dispute and that
             that had not been challenged by the respondent.


         14.  They noted the close relationship between the appellant, Ms  S
             and J and that the appellant had provided a stable home for J.
              Moreover, he has close  relationships  with  his  mother  and
             sisters here.


         15.   Having   stated   that   there   were   clear   compassionate
             circumstances in the case and  noted  various  representations
             which had been made the  Tribunal  went  on  to  set  out  the
             structured approach given  by  Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill  in
             Razgar [2004] EWCA Civ 368 and referred  to  the  judgment  of
             Hale LJ in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.


         16.   The  Tribunal  noted  the  judgment  of  Lord  Hope   in   DS
             (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 305 that even if it was  in  the
             child's best interests to remain in Britain that was  not  the
             end of an assessment and would not  necessarily  prevail  over
             other factors including the maintenance of proper  immigration
             control.


         17.   They  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  in  effect  J  's
             stepfather and that the family had a strong  relationship  and
             went on to conclude that the removal of  the  appellant  would
             not be proportionate taking into account  the  fact  that  the
             appellant had not had a previous criminal  record,  his  crime
             related  to  a  very  particular  set  of  circumstances,  the
             appellant had previously been of good character, he was making
             plans to avoid further confrontation and all his  family  were
             either working, studying or both.


         18.  They considered that the respondent had not taken into account
             the protected rights  of  Ms  S  let  alone  those  of  J  and
             therefore  concluded  that  notwithstanding  the   appellant's
             offences it was not necessary  or  proportionate  for  him  to
             return to Ghana.


         19.  The Secretary of State appealed. The very lengthy  grounds  of
             appeal referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  MF
             (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  They referred  to  the
             fact that the Court of Appeal had stated that  the  new  Rules
             were  a  "complete  code"  and  that  having  found  that  the
             appellant could not meet the  terms  of  paragraphs  399,  and
             399(a) and (b) of the Rules the Tribunal then found  that  the
             appellant's circumstances were exceptional  and  compassionate
             so as to make his deportation disproportionate.   They  stated
             that the Tribunal had not shown that there was something  over
             and above the  provisions  set  out  in  paragraph  399(a)  or
             paragraph 399(b) to succeed under  exceptional  circumstances.
             They referred to the judgment in A D Lee [2011] EWCA  Civ  348
             where  it  had  clearly  been  thought  that  it   was   still
             appropriate to deport a foreign criminal where that would mean
             that a family was broken up.


         20.  The grounds referred to the judgment in  SS  (Nigeria)  [2013]
             EWCA Civ 550 which emphasised the weight to be placed  on  the
             deporting of foreign criminals.


         21.  It was also stated  that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  give
             adequate reasons for their finding that the appellant had  few
             ties in Ghana.  There was nothing to indicate  that  he  could
             not readapt to life there.  It was stated that  the  reasoning
             of the Tribunal was inadequate and they had failed to  give  a
             proper assessment to take into account  the  consideration  of
             society's revulsion against serious crime and  the  deterrence
             of other foreign criminals.  In this regard they  referred  to
             the judgment in AM [2012] EWCA Civ 1634.


         22.  Permission to appeal was granted, the Judge of the  First-tier
             Tribunal stating that it was arguable that the panel  did  not
             have regard to the wider public interest in the deportation of
             foreign criminals and the principle  of  deterrence  and  that
             therefore had not taken into  account  material  factors  when
             reaching their conclusions.


         23.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Ms Ong  relied  on  the
             grounds of appeal  stating  that  the  Tribunal  fundamentally
             erred by  not having regard to the wider public  interest  and
             the deterrent effect of the deportation of those who committed
             serious crime.  She referred to the judgment in AM and  stated
             that there was no indication that the Tribunal had had  regard
             to the public interest in this case and that  therefore  their
             proportionality exercise was in error.


         24.  In reply  Ms  Spio-Aidou  argued  the  Tribunal  had  properly
             considered the Rules and made clear and  unequivocal  findings
             of fact regarding the appellant's credibility and  his  strong
             family life with Ms Scarlet and J.  She referred to the length
             of time the appellant had lived in Britain,  his  work  record
             and his relationships not only with his immediate  family  but
             also with his mother and sisters.   She  emphasised  that  the
             judge had referred to the appellant  as  being  of  previously
             good character.


         25.  She went on to refer to the particular  circumstances  of  the
             dispute between the appellant and his neighbour and then  said
             that in any event the appellant had  taken  courses  in  anger
             management and conflict  resolution  whilst  in  prison.   She
             stated that his stepdaughter could not leave Britain and  that
             the appellant's partner and daughter were both  British.   She
             referred to the provisions of Section 55.


         26.  She argued that the Tribunal  had  made  a  properly  balanced
             consideration of all  relevant  factors  and  that  they  were
             entirely entitled to reach the  conclusions  which  they  had.
             The  conclusion  which  they  reached  was  indeed  the   only
             conclusion that they  could  reach  given  the  circumstances.
             They had properly considered relevant case law and  she  asked
             me to find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
             determination.  They  were  entirely  entitled  to  use  their
             discretion to reach the conclusion which they had.


         Discussion


         27.  In many ways this is a thorough and balanced determination and
             indeed the various findings of fact which  the  Tribunal  made
             regarding the appellant's relationships, his work  record  and
             the  fact  that  he  had  committed  no  other  offences  were
             conclusions which were open to them.


         28.  However there is, I consider a disjunction between the  First-
             tier Tribunal's consideration of the facts in this case  under
             the Rules and the way in which they then went on  to  consider
             the position of the appellant applying the structured approach
             set out in Razgar.  The judgment of MF Nigeria makes it  clear
             that the Rules should be regarded as a complete code and  that
             should the terms of the  Rules  not  be  met  it  is  only  in
             exceptional circumstances that an appellant's appeal should be
             allowed.  It is not the case that  a  Tribunal,  having  found
             that an appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules
             should then go on to conduct  a  separate  exercise  in  which
             proportionality  is  considered.   The  consideration  of  the
             appellant's rights under Article  8  as  incorporated  in  the
             Rules reflects the test of whether or not the  deportation  of
             an appellant would be disproportionate and concludes  that  it
             would   be   only   be   disproportionate    in    exceptional
             circumstances.


         29.  In effect the Rules reflect the increasing  awareness  of  the
             public interest in the deportation  of  foreign  criminals  as
             indicated in the judgments in SS Nigeria, DS India and A D Lee
             - the latter two judgments making it clear that even where  an
             appellant has a child that is not a determinative factor.


         30.  In this case the appellant committed a very serious crime with
             serious consequences for the victim.  The Tribunal, who do not
             appear to  have  considered  the  terms  of  the  pre-sentence
             report, should have placed particular  weight  on  the  public
             revulsion at such a crime.  I consider that it  is  not  clear
             that they did so and  moreover  they  did  not  point  to  any
             exceptional factors in this case which  would  mean  that  the
             deportation of the appellant would be disproportionate.


         31.  They placed weight on the appellant's relationship with J whom
             they stated was the appellant's stepdaughter.  Of  course  the
             reality is that she is not.  There is nothing to indicate that
             although, clearly, the  removal  of  the  appellant  would  be
             likely to be distressing for J,  she  could  not  be  properly
             looked after by Ms S if the appellant were deported.


         32.  Moreover  the  Tribunal  did  not  appear  to  find  that  the
             appellant had any ties with Ghana despite the fact that he had
             spent effectively the period between 2000 and 2003 there.


         33.  In all I consider that the fact  that  the  Tribunal  did  not
             consider the issue of the deportation of the appellant  within
             the structured approach set out in MF Nigeria  is  a  material
             error and that was compounded by the fact that  they  did  not
             place appropriate weight on the fact that the  deportation  of
             an appellant who commits a serious  crime  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         34.  For these  reasons  I  set  aside  the  determination  of  the
             Tribunal and I direct  that  the  appeal  proceed  to  hearing
             afresh."


4.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Ms Gore  first  argued  that  my
    decision did not apply to the appellant as it referred to someone  name
    "R E K A".  She therefore argued that the appeal was still at the error
    of law stage.  I pointed out to  her  that,  in  fact,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had made an anonymity order in this case and that therefore my
    decision was headed with the appellant's initials rather than his  full
    name.

5.   Ms Gore then went on to state that I should set aside my  own  decision
    setting aside the Tribunal arguing that the grounds of appeal before me
    had not properly challenged the detail of the findings of the  Tribunal
    and that in setting aside the decision I had taken  account  of  issues
    which were not raised in the grounds  of  appeal.   She  also  made  an
    alternative  argument  which  was  that  Judge  Brunnen,  in   granting
    permission to appeal,  had himself gone outside the  issues  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal and that when he had stated  that  "much  of  the
    grounds amounts to disagreement  with  the  panel's  conclusion  in  an
    attempt to re-argue the appeal" he had in fact found that the  Tribunal
    had not made any arguable error of law and that therefore he  had  been
    wrong to go on to state it was arguable that the  panel  did  not  have
    regard to the wider public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals.

6.   I consider that there is no merit in either of those arguments  as  the
    grounds of  appeal,  which  were  wide-ranging  with  regard  to  their
    challenge to the facts, did focus on the issue of  proportionality  and
    the appropriate application of paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Rules.  In
    any event I pointed out to Ms Gore that should she wish to challenge my
    decision to set aside the determination then that was  a  matter  which
    should be challenged in an application to the Court  of  Appeal  rather
    than before me at this full, adjourned hearing.

7.   Ms Gore then stated that paragraph 28 of my decision  was  in  conflict
    with what I wrote in paragraph 34.  I stated that I did not agree  with
    that assertion and that I had made it  clear  that  the  appeal  should
    proceed to a hearing afresh.

8.   Ms Gore stated that she did not wish  to  call  the  appellant  who  in
    fact, at that stage of the proceedings, had not attended, and that  she
    wished only to make submissions.

9.   She argued that despite the fact  that  I  had  said  that  the  appeal
    should proceed to a hearing afresh I should be bound by the findings of
    fact of the First-tier Tribunal and then went on to  argue  that  under
    the terms of paragraph 398C of the Rules I should find that the  appeal
    should have been allowed.  She accepted that  the  terms  of  paragraph
    399(a) and (b)  did  not  apply  but  stated  that  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 398(c) being aligned to Article 8  jurisprudence  meant  that
    all factors should  be  taken  into  consideration.   She  referred  to
    paragraphs 44 and 45 of the judgement of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
    (Nigeria) [2913] EWCA Civ 1192 and went on to refer to  the  Tribunal's
    findings of fact asserting that they had found that the  appellant  had
    close  relationships  here,  particularly  with  his  partner  and  her
    daughter. She stated that although the appellant and his  partner  were
    not married the Tribunal had been correct to  refer  to  his  partner's
    daughter as the appellant's stepdaughter. She referred to the behaviour
    of the appellant's neighbour, whom he had attacked, in  the  run-up  to
    the attacks.  She stated that the fire  brigade,  the  police  and  the
    local council had been aware of  the  ways  in  which  the  appellant's
    neighbour had made the lives of the appellant and his partner difficult
    and that the neighbour had been abusive towards the appellant's partner
    and on one occasion had punched the appellant causing his  nose  to  be
    broken.

10.  While she stated that it was accepted that the  appellant's  crime  was
    serious she emphasised that the appellant had  never  been  in  trouble
    before, he  had  had  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  he  had  been
    attempting to relocate his family away from the neighbour at  the  time
    of the attack.  Since the attack the appellant's partner has  been  re-
    housed.

11.  She emphasised that the  judge,  when  sentencing  the  appellant,  had
    stated that he was of previous good conduct and that taking  all  these
    facts together I should conclude that there were exceptional factors in
    this  case  and  that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  would   be
    disproportionate.

12.  In reply Mr Walker referred to the terms  of  the  pre-sentence  report
    and to the fact that  the  appellant  had  received  lengthy  custodial
    sentences.   It was wrong, he argued for Ms Gore to make light  of  the
    appellant's offences.  He stated that the Tribunal had not given proper
    weight to the public interest  in  the  removal  of  those  who  commit
    serious criminal offences and urged me to do  so  and  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

13.  In reply Ms Gore emphasised that she did not wish to make light of  the
    appellant's offence  but  stated  that  the  factors  relating  to  the
    appellant's circumstances fully outweighed the public interest  in  his
    deportation.  Again she emphasised the appellant's remorse stating that
    the Tribunal had clearly taken that into account.  She emphasised  that
    the appellant had not offended before the index offences and that since
    release he has not offended.  While she accepted  the  provocation  was
    not a defence which could be taken into account in the  criminal  court
    she stated that it was appropriate that it should be taken into account
    by me.   She  referred  to  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    partner's child having a male role figure.  Again she emphasised  there
    were exceptional factors in this case.

Discussion

14.  I was surprised that Ms Gore decided not to  call  the  appellant,  his
    partner or other members of his family to give evidence before me.  The
    reality is that in my decision I set aside  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and directed that the appeal proceed to  a  hearing
    afresh.

15.  Nevertheless I have considered the statements from the  appellant,  his
    sisters and his mother and his partner.  I accept that there  is  clear
    evidence that the appellant and Ms S have lived together for many years
    and there is no evidence that  the  appellant  committed  any  offences
    before the index offences nor indeed  has  he  committed  any  offences
    after leaving prison.  I accept that he plays a paternal role  for  his
    partner's daughter.  I also accept that the appellant has been in  work
    here although it appears that some of his  work  may  have  been  on  a
    temporary basis - I refer to the letter of 30 July  2012  from  Croydon
    Benefits Department to Ms S.  It is also relevant  that  the  appellant
    entered Britain at the age of 16 in 1998.  At the age of 18 he returned
    to Ghana and effectively came back in November 2003 at the age  of  21.
    In the first 21 years of his life he therefore spent eighteen years  in
    Ghana and spent three years there as an adult.  He is now aged 32.

16.  The Offender Management Information Report summarises the  risks  which
    the appellant posed to others stating that "risk is towards those  whom
    Mr A feels have aggrieved him in some way.  The risks are physical harm
    or injuries".  The banding risks of re-convictions showed that as being
    low.

17.  The OASys Assessment gives graphic details of the  appellant's  offence
    and noted that the appellant had stated that he regretted his  actions.
    The report goes on to state at paragraph 2.14:-

         "This is Mr A's first conviction and he  has  demonstrated  remorse
         for his  actions.   However,  the  events  demonstrates  anger  and
         resulting violence resulting in significant harm to  Mr  B.   Mr  A
         also minimises his responsibility for the assault, stating  he  had
         not realised he could cause this harm and stating that due  to  his
         fear and anger at the time, Mr B's actions left him no  option  but
         to retaliate with violence."


18.  I note that the OASys Report records the appellant stating that he  had
    failed to obtain any GCSEs "due to being sent to Africa by his  parents
    for four years".  I also note that under the initial sentence  plan  of
    the OASys Assessment  it  states  that  the  appellant  is  capable  of
    changing and reducing offending and that he  is  motivated  to  address
    offending but that a factor that might inhibit change was if he  became
    angry in the belief that he or his partner had been treated unfairly or
    verbally or physically abused.

19.  Turning to the pre-sentence report on which Mr  Walker  relied  I  note
    the details of the attack but as  it  also  sets  out  the  appellant's
    comments on the attack I consider it appropriate to set it out in full.
     It states that:-

         "In relation to the 28th November Mr A claimed some  responsibility
         for the offence.  He explained that he was alone on  his  way  home
         having returned from spending  the  night  with  friends.   He  was
         making his way to the shop  to  purchase  cigarettes  and  had  not
         initially seen the victim, Mr B.  He claims that he had his  hoodie
         on his head and felt a blow to the back of his head causing him  to
         fall to the ground.  He then saw someone run  to  a  car  which  he
         believed to be Mr B.  He continued on his way and saw Mr B  further
         along the road.  He admitted assaulting Mr B stating that he  acted
         in self defence after  receiving  a  cut  to  his  nose  which  was
         bleeding, which could have been his eye.


         When questioned about the excessive force used he admitted to  have
         over reacted by 'failing to stop at the first kick',  but  said  he
         was 'angry' and was 'not thinking at the time'.  He stated that  he
         believed that the victim had a  sharp  object,  'a  knife',  as  he
         received a cut to his nose and his clothing had  ripped  marked  in
         them.  When asked about the stamping on Mr B's head  on  more  than
         one occasion and the repeated kicks to his head and body,  and  his
         intentions, he replied that he had seen the CCTV  footage  and  was
         unable to explain this, as it was  out  of  character  for  him  to
         behave  in  such  an  aggressive  manner.   After  the  assault  he
         confirmed that he left the scene  and  called  his  partner.   When
         asked about her arrival and her informing the paramedics that  'she
         had come to finish him off', he denied that she had said this.


         As a result of the assaults the hospital report  state  that  Mr  B
         suffered a number of injuries namely blood clots around  his  brain
         (subconjunctival haemorrhage) causing paralysis and  numbness  down
         one side of his body, swelling and  superficial  bruises  over  the
         head, face and right hand, tenderness over the  paraspinal  muscles
         of the  neck.   A  report  from  E  R,  a  Registered  Intermediary
         concludes that Mr B shows 'significant cognitive  dysfunction',  by
         being unable to 'follow and process complex language' and 'time'.


         Although Mr A accepts in part for the commission of these  offences
         he has also minimised his involvement stating that it was  him  who
         was attempting to calm and resolve matters.  He attempts to justify
         his actions by stating that his reasoning behind this  was  due  to
         him being angry and  not  thinking.   He  did  inform  me  that  he
         regretted his actions and was apologetic particularly  after  being
         faced with it via the CCTV footage.  He said that he has  tried  to
         stay out of trouble, does not  hang  around  with  gangs  and  felt
         genuinely 'touched' by his actions.  Mr A also said  that  he  felt
         evil, did not expect this to happen and wished he  could  apologise
         to his victim and his family for his actions.  He described himself
         as feeling lost and having suffered nightmares from his actions and
         the resulting effects as he did not mean for this to happen....


         Despite  this  being  Mr  A's  first  conviction  and  him   having
         demonstrated remorse his  actions  demonstrate  extreme  anger  and
         violence resulting in considerable harm to the victim he  has  also
         attempted to justify  and  minimise  his  behaviour,   blaming  the
         victim for his apparent anti-social behaviour.  It is my assessment
         that this offence was committed due to increasing animosity against
         the victim, Mr B.  Mr  A's  violent  behaviour  was  aggressive  in
         nature with the intent to cause harm.  Despite him  reporting  that
         he acted in self defence does not account for the  excessive  force
         used and what could be described as  a  savage  attack.   The  CCTV
         observation by PC S states that 'the victim had no time  to  defend
         himself'.  I would also assess that the trigger and motivation  for
         this offence was anger by Mr A believing that he had been assaulted
         by Mr B and the need for him to  express  his  anger  and  possible
         frustration."


20.  The OASys Report also refers to the appellant being sent to  Africa  by
    his parents for four years and that he returned between the ages of 21-
    22. At page E29 of the bundle is the appellant's list of his  employers
    and the work which he had undertaken. When he returned  to  Britain  he
    obtained employment with Sainsbury's and that he had later enrolled and
    attended Vauxhall College undertaking a  computer  science  maintenance
    course.  The appellant had told  the  Probation  Officer  that  he  had
    always worked and had a variety of employment working as  an  assistant
    manager at Sports Direct where he had been employed for four years, for
    Cancer Research as a street fundraiser, for Morrison's for  two  and  a
    half years and Telemarketing.  He had also been employed by both Parcel
    Force at nights and part-time at Allders but was no longer  working  at
    Allders as that company had closed down and at the time of  the  report
    that Parcel Force was his main and only employment.  The  OASys  Report
    refers to the appellant coming to Britain  at  the  age  of  13.   That
    however appears to be incorrect.  It appeared also that  the  appellant
    had said that the police had attended his home because  of  a  domestic
    violence incident on one occasion.

21.  The judge's sentencing remarks by His Honour Judge Waller refer to  the
    first incident where the appellant had punched Mr B in front of his two
    children.  They then discuss the second incident  and  the  results  of
    that on Mr B but state that the appellant had  been  of  previous  good
    character. Judge Waller and sentencing him to 30  months'  imprisonment
    reduced on count 1 to 27 months' imprisonment for the  serious  offence
    and two months' imprisonment for the  less  serious  offence,  being  a
    total of 27 months' imprisonment.

22.  This is an automatic deportation under the provisions of Section  32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.  It is clear from the judgment of the Court
    of Appeal in MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  that  the
    provisions of the Rules are  a  "complete  code"  but  effectively  the
    exceptionality provisions of Rule 398 are akin  to  those  which  would
    make a decision to remove disproportionate under Article 8 of the ECHR.
     Paragraphs 398 and 399 read as follows:-
         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and
         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             at least 4 years;
         (b   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
         (c)   . . .
          the Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
              whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it
              will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
              interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors.

           399.   This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

             (a)  the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                  20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
                  decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he
                  has no ties (including social, cultural  or  family)  with
                  the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
                  leave the UK; or

             (b)  the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least
                  half of his life living continuously in the UK immediately
                  preceding   the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no
                  ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
                  country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
                  the UK."

24.  I note the terms of the judgment of Rix LJ in DS  (India)  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 554 where he stated:-
         "In my judgment, when consideration is given to the manifold nature
         of that public interest  (see  N  (Kenya))  at  paragraph  87,  E-O
         (Turkey) [2008] EWCA Civ 671 at paragraph 19 and OH (Serbia) [2008]
         EWCA Civ 694 at paragraph 15, it cannot be said the  IAT  erred  in
         this respect.   The public interest in deportation  for  those  who
         commit serious crimes goes well beyond depriving  the  offender  in
         question from the chance to re-offend in this country:  it  extends
         to  deterring  and  preventing  serious  crime  generally  and   to
         upholding public abhorrence of such offending."
25.  I do not consider that the factors which I have set out above  relating
    to the appellant's relationship here, his work record and the fact that
    he has lived in Britain for some years outweigh the public interest  in
    the deportation of a man who has committed a serious violent crime.   I
    do not consider that there are any exceptional  factors  in  this  case
    that would mean that the general rule that  those  who  commit  serious
    crimes should be deported.  There are many positive features about this
    appellant not least the fact that the two crimes against Mr B appear to
    be isolated crimes and I accept that there  was  a  certain  amount  of
    aggravating behaviour by Mr B but I do not consider that these  factors
    make this an exceptional case within the terms of the Rule or  that  it
    would mean that the removal of the appellant would be disproportionate.
    I would add that given that the appellant has lived in Ghana until  the
    age of 16  and that he lived there for either three or four years as an
    adult I do not consider that he would have no ties with that country or
    would not be able reintegrate into that society.
26.  In reaching that conclusion I have taken into account the fact  that  I
    accept that the appellant has a relationship here with Ms S and  indeed
    with her daughter and indeed that the removal of the appellant will  no
    doubt affect J but the reality is that she had to live without him  for
    some time while the appellant was  in  prison.   Indeed  as  Sedley  LJ
    stated in AD Lee the result of criminality can be  the  break-up  of  a
    family.
27.  I therefore, having set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge  re-
    make the decision in this case  and  dismiss  this  deportation  appeal
    there and make a life there.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy           6 November 2014

