

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02013/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 November 2014                  |On 22 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before
                                 LORD BURNS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                               Ithayachandran
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Martin, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and immigration history

    1. The appellant as a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on  18  December
       1982. He appeals against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
       (Judge Randall and Mr Getlevog) promulgated on 7 July 2014 dismissing
       his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State made on  or
       about 25 September 2013 to deport him.


    2. The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom 7  January
       2010 entering illegally and avoiding immigration controls. He claimed
       asylum on 29  January  2010.  His  application  was  refused  by  the
       respondent on 15 June 2010. His appeal  was  dismissed  on  9  August
       2010. On 23 June  2011  the  appellant  failed  to  comply  with  his
       reporting conditions and was listed as an absconder.  On  21  October
       2011 he was arrested for stealing from his  employee  and  fraud  and
       remanded in custody. On 16 January 2012, at Oxford  Crown  Court,  he
       was convicted on  three  counts.  On  count  1,  he  was  accused  of
       dishonestly making false representations; on count  2,  of  being  in
       possession of a false or  improperly  obtained  or  another  person's
       identity document and on count 3, theft. On counts 1 and  2,  he  was
       sentenced to 8 months imprisonment. On count 3, he was sentenced to 4
       months imprisonment to run consecutively, making a  total  period  of
       imprisonment of 12 months.


The criminal offending

    3. In sentencing the appellant, the Judge said:


          "You have now admitted  three  offences;  one  of  fraud,  one  of
          possession of identity documents with an  improper  intention  and
          one of theft.


          The circumstances:


          As having arrived unlawfully in this country  and  having  applied
          for political asylum and finding it refused, that you disappeared.
          You then used your brother's documents to gain employment  because
          you knew you were not lawfully entitled to employment as a  failed
          asylum seeker, and  having  taken  that  employment  after  a  few
          months, you deliberately breached your position of trust with your
          employers by finding a means to obtain  cash  from  the  machines,
          which you did on several occasions, stealing from  your  employers
          �1774 in cash.
          It is perfectly clear that the combination of these  offences  and
          the offences in isolation clearly pass the custody  threshold  and
          you will receive a custodial sentence. I take into account in your
          favour the fact that you are hitherto of good character, that  you
          pleaded  guilty  to  those  offences,  though  not  on  the  first
          occasion, and I take into account the  totality  of  the  sentence
          that is  to  be  passed  upon  you,  in  shortening  the  sentence
          somewhat, though they will be consecutive to each other.
          I also do not have to consider the question of  whether  I  should
          recommend you for deportation, bearing  in  mind  the  sentence  I
          shall pass upon you  totals  12  months.  However,  if  I  had  to
          consider the issue,  I  would  be  recommending  it  to  the  Home
          Secretary that you be deported on completion of the custodial part
          of your sentence."


The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    4. The grounds of appeal assert that the decision to make a  deportation
       order against the appellant was unlawful because it was predicated on
       the fact that a  sentence  of  12  months  imprisonment  invoked  the
       provisions of paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the  Immigration  Rules
       which operated against the appellant in imposing a rule that it would
       only be in exceptional circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
       deportation was outweighed. It was this ground, Ground  1,  by  which
       Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein was persuaded had particular  arguable
       merit. In order to assess this appeal, it is  necessary  to  consider
       the provisions that  effect  deportation  in  the  case  of  criminal
       misconduct.


Statute law

    5. Subsections 3(5) and (6) of the Immigration Act 1971 (as  amended  by
       the British Nationality Act 1981 and the  Immigration and Asylum  Act
       1999) provide


          (5) a person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation
          from the United Kingdom if -
          (a) the Secretary of State deems deportation to  be  conducive  to
          the public good;


          (6) Without prejudice to the operation of subsection (5) above,  a
          person who is not a  British  citizen  shall  also  be  liable  to
          deportation from the United Kingdom if, after he has attained  the
          age of seventeen, he is convicted of an offence for  which  he  is
          punishable with imprisonment and on his conviction is  recommended
          for deportation by a court empowered by this Act to do so.


    6. The appellant was not the subject of a recommendation for deportation
       as the Judge's sentencing remarks made clear. It  is  true  that  the
       Judge  was  mistaken  as  to  his  understanding  of  the   statutory
       provisions because he clearly thought that a sentence  of  12  months
       resulted in automatic deportation which, for reasons that follow,  is
       not in the appellant's case correct. Be that as it may, the appellant
       was not  made  the  subject  of  a  recommendation  for  deportation.
       Accordingly, pursuant to the 1971 Act, the liability for  deportation
       arises if the Secretary of State deems it  to  be  conducive  to  the
       public good, s. 3(5)(a).


    7. The UK Borders Act 2007 provides for  the  automatic  deportation  of
       some criminals. Such an individual is defined  in  s.  32  (1)  as  a
       'foreign criminal',


       a) who is not a British citizen,
       b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
       c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.


       Subsection (2) in these terms:


          Condition 1 is  that  the  person  is  sentence  to  a  period  of
          imprisonment of at the least 12 months...


       Subsections (4) and (5) provide:


          (4) For the purpose of section  3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act
          1971, the deportation of a foreign criminal is  conducive  to  the
          public good.


          (5) The Secretary of  State  must  make  a  deportation  order  in
          respect of the foreign criminal (subject to section 33).


    8. Section 33 of the  United  Kingdom  Borders  Act  2007  provides,  as
       Exception 1, that the removal of a foreign criminal in pursuance of a
       deportation order must not breach the appellant's  rights  under  the
       Human Rights Act, which with reference to the circumstances  of  this
       case, means that the removal must not violate the appellant's Article
       8 rights to which due respect must be afforded.


    9. This might suggest that the  appellant  was  a  foreign  criminal  by
       reference to the 12-month sentence of imprisonment.  However, s.38  -
       Interpretation - contains  a crucial departure from this position:


          (1) In section  32(2)  [see  para.  7,  above]  a  person  who  is
          sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months...
             (b) does not include a reference to a person who is  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12  months  only  by
             virtue of being sentenced to consecutive  sentences  amounting
             in aggregate to more than 12 months...


       It is not suggested that the reference to 'consecutive sentences' (in
       the plural) excludes the circumstances in the case  before  us  where
       the appellant was subjected to a single consecutive sentence.


The Immigration Rules

   10. The Immigration Rules Part 13 dealing with Deportation provide:


         396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall
         be that the public interest requires  deportation.  It  is  in  the
         public interest to deport where Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007. [Inserted from 9 July 2012 with savings for  applications
         made before the date.]


         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and
             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
             of at least 4 years;
             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
             of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because, in  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of
             State, their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law,
         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors.


         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -
             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and
                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                 (ii) the child has lived in  the  UK  continuously  for  at
                 least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
                 immigration decision; and in either case
                    (a) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to
                    leave the UK; and
                    (b) there is no other family member who is able to  care
                    for the child in the UK; or
             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  settled
             in the UK, or in the UK with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and
                 (i) the person  has  lived  in  the  UK  with  valid  leave
                 continuously  for  at  least  the  15   years   immediately
                 preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting
                 any period of imprisonment); and
                 (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with
                 that partner continuing outside the UK.


         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -
             (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
             20 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the  immigration
             decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and  he  has
             no ties  (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
             country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
             UK; or
             (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent  at  least
             half of his life living continuously  in  the  UK  immediately
             preceding the date of the  immigration  decision  (discounting
             any period of imprisonment) and  he  has  no  ties  (including
             social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK.


The Criminal Casework Directorate's criteria for deportation

   11. That part of the Home Office which deals with deportation in the wake
       of criminal convictions has set out a policy which offers guidance to
       caseworkers when considering whether the removal of an individual  is
       conducive to the public  good.  It  does  not,  of  course,  need  to
       consider the circumstances that are already provided in s. 32 of  the
       2007 Act and paragraphs 398 and following of the  Immigration  Rules.
       Instead, it focuses upon lesser offending or  offences  of  the  type
       which the Secretary of State considers to be particularly damaging to
       the public interest. It is not disputed that, at the  material  time,
       the criteria for deportation included those who had been sentenced to
       a period of imprisonment of 12 months but made up  of  three  shorter
       sentences within a period of five years.  The  appellant's  offending
       pattern was capable of falling within the relevant criteria.


The issue before us

   12. It is common ground that, by reason of  the  two  concurrent  8-month
       sentences and the 4-month consecutive  period  of  imprisonment,  the
       appellant is not a foreign criminal, as defined, and is not therefore
       subject to the automatic deportation provisions contained in s. 32 of
       the 2007 Act. However, it is as a result of the  confusion  that  has
       arisen in the minds of decision-makers that this appeal comes  before
       the Upper Tribunal. Were it to be  established  that  the  respondent
       misconstrued the legal basis of her decision-making and had proceeded
       on the basis that the appellant was subject to automatic  deportation
       (to the disadvantage of the appellant), her decision would have  been
       unlawful. If the First-tier Tribunal had then failed to identify  the
       error,  this  would  amount  to  an  error  on  a   point   of   law.
       Alternatively, if the Upper  Tribunal  approached  the  appeal  on  a
       similar false premise, this, too, would amount to an error on a point
       of law requiring us to give consideration to whether the decision has
       to be re-made.


   13. This requires us to go through the various decisions and notices made
       or served by the respondent and to consider whether the  respondent's
       approach was lawful  and  then  go  on  to  consider  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's approach.


The  respondent's  16  May  2012  Notification  of  Liability  to  Automatic
Deportation
(ICD 3050)

   14. This was received by the appellant on 22 May 2012  and  is  variously
       described as the Notification of 16  May  and  22  May.   The  letter
       states:


          "The Secretary of State has noted your conviction on 14 March 2012
          at Oxford Crown Court for Fraud/Embezzlement [etc] and  for  which
          you were sentenced to 1 years, 0 months, 0 days and takes  a  very
          serious view of your offence.  In the light  of  your  conviction,
          you are liable to deportation under the Immigration Act 1971.  You
          may be subject to automatic deportation in accordance with section
          32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 unless you fall within one of the
          following exceptions set out in Section 33 of the UK  Borders  Act
          2007:..."


   15. This was clearly directed towards automatic deportation,  which,  for
       the  reasons  we  have  given,  was  wrong  in  law  and  skewed  the
       respondent's decision-making to the disadvantage of the appellant.


The respondent's letter of 25 October 2012 (ICD 0350)

   16. This is entitled 'Notice of Intention to Deport' and  was  issued  to
       the appellant giving him ten working days to reply.  The Notice seeks
       reasons why the appellant  should  not  be  deported.   It  does  not
       suggest that the decision is being exercised  on  automatic  grounds.
       Indeed, the tone of its  contents  suggests  that  the  answers  will
       inform the decision whether to deport or not, a position at  variance
       with automatic deportation.     In  the  respondent's  letter  of  25
       September 2013, this is described as  Notification  of  Liability  to
       Deportation on conducive grounds.  The contents do not  suggest  that
       the  appellant  was  required  to  demonstrate  he  fell  within   an
       exceptional category.  There was  no  purpose  in  serving  a  second
       Notification of Intention to Deport if the 16  May  2012  letter  had
       performed its allotted task.  Inferentially, it was  an  afterthought
       to the decision of 22 May 2012 and designed to stand in its place.


The respondent's letter of 25 September 2013

   17. This refers to the  earlier  letter  of  25  October  2012  which  it
       describes  as  seeking  reasons  why  the  appellant  should  not  be
       deported. It does not suggest that  automatic  deportation  is  being
       contemplated. The letter refers to the consecutive nature of the four-
       month period of imprisonment. The first paragraph entitled "Liability
       to Deportation" makes  no  reference  to  automatic  deportation  and
       concludes 'the representations received have been considered but  for
       the reasons set  out  below  on  it  has  been  concluded  that  your
       deportation  would  be  conducive  to  the  public  good'   expressly
       addressing deportation on conducive grounds.


   18. On the  second  page  of  this  letter  there  is  reference  to  the
       Notification of 22 May 2012 - 'Notification of Liability to Automatic
       Deportation'  -  and  then  to  the  letter  of  25  October  2012  -
       'notification of liability to deportation on conducive grounds'.  (In
       different parts of the same letter it refers to the 25  October  2012
       letter as both ICD 3050 and ICD 0350 but my copy  of  the  letter  is
       that it is an ICD 0350.)


   19. When we first considered the letter of 25  September  2013  in  which
       reference is made to  the  Notification  of  Liability  to  Automatic
       Deportation, we were concerned that the  respondent  was  approaching
       consideration of the application  as  falling  within  the  automatic
       deportation provisions. However, it is clear that  the  reference  to
       the 22 May  2012  letter  is  only  an  historical  recital  of  what
       occurred. On page 3 of the letter there is a reference  to  paragraph
       396 of the Immigration Rules but no reference  to  paragraphs  398(b)
       which refers to  deportation  being  conducive  to  the  public  good
       following conviction of an offence for which a sentence of  at  least
       12 months imprisonment was imposed or 398(c) namely  offending  which
       has caused serious harm or  where  the  individual  is  a  persistent
       offender who has shown  particular  disregard  for  the  law.  It  is
       therefore clear that the omission of these paragraphs  confirms  what
       the opening paragraph of the letter states, namely that the Secretary
       of State was treating this as a conducive deportation appeal  subject
       to  the  normal  presumption  in  favour  of  all  deportation  cases
       contained within paragraph 396.


The Notice of Decision of September 2013

   20. The Notice of Decision: Decision to make a Deportation Order which is
       undated but accompanied the letter of 25 September 2013 letter  (both
       are signed by the same person) provided that the decision  was  being
       made pursuant to s. 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act  and  expressly  provided
       that the Secretary of State deemed it to be conducive to  the  public
       good to make the deportation order. Accordingly, the appellant became
       liable for deportation pursuant to the Secretary of State's power  to
       make an order under s. 5(1) of the 1971 Act:


          Where a person is under  section  3(5)  or  (6)  above  liable  to
          deportation, then subject to the following provisions of this  Act
          the Secretary of State may make a deportation order against him...




       The making of  the  decision  gives  rise  to  the  right  of  appeal
       exercised by this appellant  under  s.  82(1)  and  (2)  (j)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002.


   21. It was on the basis of this reasoning that  deportation  was  put  in
       motion.


The respondent's supplementary reasons letter of 26 March 2014

   22. It is not entirely easy to understand  the  function  of  this  post-
       decision letter, coming as it does in the period running  up  to  the
       hearing before the panel which took place on 6 June 2014. It  may  be
       that it was felt necessary to revisit the appellant's earlier  asylum
       claim in the light of fresh  country  guidance.  However,  since  the
       appellant's  original   asylum   claim   had   been   comprehensively
       disbelieved, the rehearsal of  this  material  might  not  have  been
       entirely necessary. However, the decision maker referred to a January
       2014 witness statement made by the appellant to the  effect  that  he
       had attended various events in  the  United  Kingdom  which  included
       protests against the Sri Lankan government.  It may be that this  was
       considered, potentially, in the context of a  fresh  claim.  For  our
       purpose, however, the importance of the document lies in the decision-
       maker's treatment of the Article 8 claim.  Having  recited  paragraph
       396 of the immigration rules as they apply to all persons  liable  to
       deportation, including the appellant, the letter goes on to  consider
       paragraph 398  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  fact  that  the
       appellant had been sentenced to a period of one year's  imprisonment.
       The letter, therefore, falls into the trap set by s.38  of  the  2007
       Act and fails to realise that the appellant was not  subject  to  the
       provisions of paragraph 398 by  reason  of  his  4-month  consecutive
       sentence. There is no doubt, therefore,  this  supplemental  decision
       letter is legally flawed but it  is  not,  of  course,  the  decision
       against which  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  Tribunal.  For  our
       purposes, it  is  irrelevant  save  insofar  as  it  perpetuated  the
       confusion that had originally tainted this application  in  believing
       the appellant was subject to automatic deportation.  If,  of  course,
       this  led  to  the  panel  confusing  itself,  such   a   result   is
       understandable but, for the reasons we now live, this did not happen.


The First-tier Tribunal's determination

   23. In paragraph 3 of the panel's determination, reference is made to the
       letter of 16 May 2012 couched in terms that  this  was  an  automatic
       deportation case requiring the appellant to establish  that  he  fell
       within one of the exceptions in s. 33 of the  2007  Act.  The  panel,
       however, draws a distinction between the approach of May 2012 and the
       letter of 25 September 2013 served with the  Notice  of  Decision  to
       deport on conducive grounds thereby making it clear that this  letter
       pointed to the operation of s. 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act  and  not  the
       automatic deportation provisions found in s. 32 of the 2007 Act.  The
       panel  clearly  well  understood  the   approach   adopted   in   the
       supplementary reasons letter of 26 March 2014, classifying the letter
       as  'surprisingly'  reverting  to  consideration  of  the   automatic
       deportation  provisions  but  commenting  that  no  new   immigration
       decision had been served. This was, of course,  consistent  with  the
       March 2014 letter being be respondent's attempt to fend off  a  fresh
       claim.


   24. The panel then went on to set out the provisions of paragraphs 396 to
       399A of the Immigration Rules, amongst others, before focusing on the
       refusal letter of 25 September 2013 which is, as we have  found,  the
       letter  which  underpinned  the  deportation   decision   and   which
       approached the appellant's case as a conducive deportation case.


   25. In paragraph 6.5 of its determination,  the  panel  referred  to  the
       Criminal Casework Directorate's criteria for deportation and referred
       to the first limb of paragraph 396, that is, the general  presumption
       in favour of deportation for a person, like the  appellant,  who  was
       liable for deportation. Both these references are consistent with the
       panel  approaching  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  was  being
       considered on conducive grounds. This is reflected in  paragraph  3.5
       of the determination where the panel referred to the amended  grounds
       of appeal following the supplementary  refusal  letter  of  20  March
       2014. Unsurprisingly, the appellant submitted that the  Secretary  of
       State was in error in this letter in arguing the case on the basis of
       paragraph 398(b) of the Rules and arguing, correctly, that paragraphs
       398 to 399A did not apply at all.


   26. It cannot, therefore, be properly argued that the panel was not  well
       aware of the distinction that was being drawn between  a  deportation
       decision based on conducive grounds  and  the  automatic  deportation
       provisions. This is made plain in paragraph 27 in which  the  panel's
       reasoning is made explicit:


          "Section 32 of the UK Borders Act defines  a  'foreign  criminal'.
          The definition includes  a  non-British  citizen  sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of at least 12 months. Section 38(1)(b)  of
          the UK Borders Act states that a sentence of at  least  12  months
          custody  does  not  include   consecutive   sentences   that   are
          individually less than 12 months duration, but amount in aggregate
          to 12 months or more. Thus the appellant is not a foreign criminal
          as defined in s. 32(1); and the presumption pursuant to  s.  32(4)
          that for the purposes of s. 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act  1971,
          the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to  the  public
          could  does  not  apply,  as  the  appellant  is  not  a  'foreign
          criminal'. The respondent has not suggested that there  are  other
          reasons for treating the appellant as a foreign  criminal.  Indeed
          he refers in the refusal letter of 25 September to the IDIs  which
          state that 12 months imprisonment (including an  aggregate  of  12
          months from more than one offence) in the previous five  years  is
          the threshold for a conducive deportation.


   27. It is apparent from the foregoing that the panel  was  aware  of  the
       legal provisions that were to be applied.  It  repeated  Mr  Martin's
       submissions to that effect in paragraph 46 of the  determination  and
       concluded in paragraph 55 as follows:


          "As part of our looking at the casing in the round, we have  taken
          account of the fact that the  offences  in  question  cumulatively
          amount to 12 months imprisonment. We note that the  respondent  is
          not now proceeding under  the  automatic  deportation  provisions,
          even though he started out on that basis. But we also take account
          of the fact that the Judge in his sentencing remarks  stated  that
          he would have made a recommendation had he been required to do so.
          We apprehend that he was under the mistaken impression because the
          length of the sentences amounted  to  12  months  in  total,  this
          matter would proceed under the automatic deportation procedures in
          any event. It is a relevant factor that the sentencing  Judge  was
          indicating that, had he thought he needed to do so,  he  would  be
          recommending that the appellant should be deported."  [The italics
          are our own.]


   28. For these reasons we are satisfied that the approach adopted  by  the
       panel (notwithstanding the attempts by the Presenting Officer at  the
       commencement of the hearing and by the draftsman of the supplementary
       reasons for deportation provided on 26 March 2014 as well as  the  22
       May 2012 Notification of  Liability  to  Automatic  Deportation)  was
       never distracted by the respondent's siren calls  that  this  was  an
       automatic deportation case.  Nor,  importantly,  was  the  respondent
       herself in  the  letter  which  underpins  the  decision  to  make  a
       deportation order. Although the writer makes  reference  to  the  May
       2012 Notification of Liability to Automatic Deportation  letter,  the
       respondent does not rely  upon  it  as  informing  the  approach  she
       adopts. We consider the reference is part of the recital of the  case
       history and no more.  It is  apparent  to  us  that  the  appeal  was
       considered both by the respondent and by the First-tier Tribunal as a
       conducive deportation case, as indeed it was.


Conclusion

   29. For the reasons that we have given we are satisfied that neither  the
       respondent in the relevant decision and her supporting reasons letter
       nor the panel  in  its  determination  acted  unlawfully.  The  panel
       correctly concluded that the respondent had made a lawful deportation
       decision.


   30. In the course of the hearing before us no substantial arguments  were
       advanced  in  relation  to  Ground  2,  namely,  that   the   panel's
       consideration of the  Article  8  claim  was  wrong.  Although  Upper
       Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein  admitted  the  remaining  grounds  to  be
       arguable, it was Ground 1 (the lawfulness of the decision) upon which
       he  focused.  We  are  satisfied  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
       determination in relation to Article 3 was  legally  sustainable.  In
       paragraph 48 the panel concluded that neither the appellant's nor his
       wife's relationships with their respective  biological  families  and
       others amounted to family life. The First-tier  Tribunal  formed  the
       impression that the appellant and his wife were trying to  play  down
       the evidence of their knowledge of the situation in Sri Lanka.  This,
       the panel found,  militated  against  the  existence  of  exceptional
       circumstances in line with the decision of MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]
       EWCA Civ 1192. It found that the couple had  accommodation  available
       to it in Colombo and would not be returned in a state of destitution.
       It described how the parents of  the  appellant's  wife  visited  Sri
       Lanka; that this marriage was embarked upon in the full knowledge  of
       the appellant's conviction and  his  liability  to  deportation.  Its
       conclusion  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  not  breach   the
       provisions of the ECHR, including Article 8, was  properly  supported
       by  adequate  reasoning.   There  is  no  arguable  case  that   this
       conclusion was based on an error of law.


DECISION

       The panel made no error on a point of law and the original
       determination of the appeal shall stand.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                            10 December 2014

