
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02316/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 20 October 2014                         |On 18 November 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           ABDIRIZAK HUSSEIN SAID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss O Ukachi-Lois, Counsel, instructed by MKM
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, the Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 4 April 1982.  He  sought
    to appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 7 November  2013
    refusing to revoke the deportation made  against  him  on  15  November
    2006.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro and Dr  Okitikpi
    (non-legal member) on 25 March 2014.  The appeal was dismissed.

3.   It was the basis of the appeal that the appellant was  a  member  of  a
    minority clan and for that reason, including his prolonged absence from
    Somalia, would, upon return to Mogadishu, be at risk on account  of  is
    personal situation.  It was also contended  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would be in breach of his fundamental human rights.

4.   The Tribunal reminded itself of a previous decision in the case of  the
    appellant promulgated on 6 August 2007,  which  had  on  that  occasion
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  to
    make a deportation order.  It was the finding of that Tribunal that the
    appellant was a member of a majority clan,  namely  the  Hawiye.   That
    decision was followed under the guidelines set out in  Devaseelan.  The
    Tribunal in considering the risk upon return paid specific attention to
    the decision in AMM (Somalia) CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC).  The Tribunal
    did not find any  exceptional  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.

5.   The appellant sought to challenge the findings that were  made  by  the
    Tribunal, contending that the Tribunal had acted in error in  a  number
    of  respects  and  had  also  by  its  comments  to   the   appellant's
    representative, Mr Mac, demonstrated a lack of impartiality  such  that
    the proceedings could properly be regarded  as  having  been   unfairly
    conducted.

6.   Initially  permission  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 23 June 2014
    specifically on the issue of unfairness.

7.   Thus it is that the matter comes before  us  to  determine  the  issues
    raised in the appeal.

8.   The immigration history of the appellant is of  some  significance  for
    the purposes of this present appeal.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 4 August 1997 aged 15 in possession of a false passport.  Thereafter
    he claimed asylum.  On 9 February 1998 he was granted exceptional leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom for four years.

9.   Between 10 March 1998 and 2 August 2002 the appellant was convicted  of
    six offences ranging from robbery, theft, burglary  and  possession  of
    controlled drugs.

10.  On 2 May 2002, having completed four  years'  ELR,  the  appellant  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

11.  On 13 April 2005 at Wood Green Crown Court the appellant was  convicted
    of attempted robbery and on 1 July 2005 he was sentenced to three years
    and eleven months' imprisonment.  Thus he was served with a decision to
    make a deportation order and on 15 November 2006 such an order was made
    against him.  The appellant made an out of  time  appeal  against  that
    deportation and the appeal deemed  to  be  in  time  was  heard  by  an
    Immigration Judge on 19 February 2007.

12.  Eventually the appeal  was  dismissed  and  his  appeal  rights  became
    exhausted on 14 August 2007.  Removal directions were set  but  because
    of the country conditions in Somalia such removal directions  were  not
    implemented.

13.  Between 28 April 2010 and 14 January  2011  the  appellant  accumulated
    six  convictions  ranging  from  fare  evasion,  disorderly  behaviour,
    burglary and theft and possession of controlled drugs.  On 18  February
    2011 he was convicted at Wood Green Crown Court of robbery for which he
    was sentenced to sixteen months' imprisonment.

14.  Following his convictions he was informed on 17 February  2012  of  the
    intention to exclude him from the Convention protection on  Section  72
    grounds. Further representations were made and on  7  November  2013  a
    decision was made to refuse to revoke the deportation order  signed  on
    15 November 2006 and it is that decision which forms the basis  of  the
    appeal before us.

15.  At the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant by Mr Mac, firstly, that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations  under
    the 1951 United Nations Convention relating to the Status of  Refugees.
    The second ground was that the  decision  to  refuse  him  humanitarian
    protection was not in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
    contended that the situation and circumstances in Mogadishu  were  such
    that Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive was to be applied  in
    his case.

16.  In relation to the claim for asylum the Tribunal noted at paragraph  12
    in particular that the respondent had  certified  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter that Section 72 of the 2002 Act  applies  and  that  the
    presumption of Section 72(2) applies to the appellant.  The presumption
    under Section 72(2) is that a person shall be  presumed  to  have  been
    convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious  crime  and  to
    constitute a danger to the community if he is convicted in  the  United
    Kingdom of an offence and sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
    least two years.

17.  In paragraph 14 the Tribunal reached its findings that the  Section  72
    certificate was properly made in relation to the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order on the basis of  the  appellant's  conviction  on  13
    April 2005.  The Tribunal noted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    determination promulgated  on  6  August  2007  had  reached  the  same
    conclusion and there was no basis to conclude otherwise in the material
    as presented before them.

18.  The Tribunal  also  noted  in  paragraph  21  that  the  appellant  was
    excluded from humanitarian protection as set out in paragraph  339C  by
    reasons of paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules.  The Tribunal noted
    the reasons given by the respondent as outlined in the letter of 21 May
    2007.

19.  At paragraph 22 the Tribunal also noted the Reasons for Refusal  Letter
    dated 7 November 2013 and  the  same  conclusions  arrived  at  by  the
    respondent, namely that the appellant was excluded from  the  grant  of
    humanitarian  protection  by  virtue  of  paragraph  339D(i)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

20.  Thus the Tribunal found little merit in the arguments presented  to  it
    by Mr Mac in respect of asylum or humanitarian protection under Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

21.  Part of the first grounds  of  appeal  that  are  presented  before  us
    contends that there was a failure to consider and apply  Article  15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive.  As we indicated to  Miss  Ukachi-Lois,
    who represents the appellant before us, we saw  little  merit  in  that
    matter. The Tribunal was not obliged to consider Article 15(c) as  that
    did not apply to the appellant.  We see  little  merit,  therefore,  in
    that aspect of the appeal.

22.   Ground  2  of  the  appeal  contends  that  Devaseelan   was   applied
    inflexibly, given that the Tribunal seemingly refused  to  depart  from
    the primary findings of fact that had been  made by the Tribunal in the
    decision promulgated on 6 December 2007, namely that the appellant  was
    a majority clan member.

23.  For our part we can find little evidence of such inflexibility  in  the
    approach taken by the First-tier  Tribunal.   At  paragraph  8  it  was
    clearly recognised by the Immigration Judge that the previous  decision
    of 6 August 2007 was not binding upon the Tribunal but it was  properly
    the starting point.   The Tribunal reminded itself that  there  may  be
    relevant facts or evidence that need  to  be  taken  into  account  and
    indicated that it intended to rely upon the  principles  of  Devaseelan
    and that Mr Mac was informed accordingly.

24.  It is the criticism mounted in the grounds of appeal that the  Tribunal
    was inflexible in its willingness to  admit  further  evidence  on  the
    issue of clan membership.

25.  Mr Mac, who is a solicitor and partner in the firm  of  NKM  Solicitors
    and who represented the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal,  has
    made a witness statement dated  9  July  2014.   He  relied  upon  that
    statement before us and indeed chose to give oral  evidence  about  its
    contents.

26.  In that statement he indicates  that  when  he  tried  to  put  forward
    arguments relating to Article 15(c) and Articles 2 and 3 of  the  Human
    Rights, Act particularly by reference to the case  of  AMM  and  Others
    (Somalia) CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC) and AM and AM (Armed conflict:  risk
    categories) Somalia CG [2008]  UKAIT  0091,  the  Tribunal  refused  to
    reconsider the earlier decision, expressing itself as  being  bound  by
    Devaseelan.

27.  We asked Mr Mac what evidence, that was  not  before  the  Tribunal  in
    April 2007 relating to clan membership, was presented for the attention
    of the Tribunal in 2014.  He indicated that nothing  specific  to  clan
    membership was presented other than the general situation  relating  to
    the safety of return to Somalia.

28.  In that connection reliance was  placed  on  the  Home  Office  OGN  of
    Somalia dated September  2013  and  a  joint  report  from  the  Danish
    Immigration Service dated 12 March 2014. Those matters are set  out  at
    pages 99 to 155 of the appellant's bundle of documents.

29.  Clearly, as was recognised in such reports and particularly the OGN  at
    page 109 of the bundle, clan membership was an important factor in  the
    overall assessment of risk to the individual to be made.   That  having
    been said, it is clear to us and  indeed  it  has  not  been  suggested
    otherwise by Miss Ukachi-Lois on behalf of the appellant, that no fresh
    material was presented before the Tribunal in order  to  challenge  the
    original findings that the appellant was a majority  clan  member.   Of
    course the Tribunal was obliged to consider and indeed did consider the
    aspect of Article 3 that was advanced, but that was within the  context
    of the original finding by  the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  was  a
    majority clan member.

30.  In the absence of any fresh material challenging  that  finding  as  to
    clan membership, it is entirely understandable why the  Tribunal  would
    consider itself bound by the earlier decision  on  that  point  by  the
    Tribunal.  For our part we can detect no inflexibility by the  Tribunal
    in its approach to clan membership.   As  the  Tribunal  quite  rightly
    noted, the hearing before the panel  was  not  an  appeal  against  the
    original decision but rather was the opportunity for the  appellant  to
    produce new material in the  expectation  and  hope  that  a  different
    outcome would follow at the current hearing.   On  the  issue  of  clan
    membership, that evidence  simply  was  not  forthcoming  and  we  find
    therefore that the Tribunal was entitled to rely upon the  findings  of
    fact as to clan membership that had already been made.

31.  The grounds contend that Immigration  Judge  Pedro  placed  significant
    reliance on the case of Devaseelan which resulted in the hearing in the
    appellant's  representative  being  repeatedly  stopped   from   making
    submissions  on  the  Refugee  Convention  and  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.   It is  said  that  Immigration  Judge  Pedro
    blocked submissions on the Qualification Directive  and  fresh  country
    guidance on  Somalia  by  repeatedly  stating  that  he  was  bound  by
    Devaseelan and could not and would not hear any  arguments  on  matters
    covered under that determination.

32.  It is said that the  Judge  acted  in  a  highly  inappropriate  manner
    towards Mr Mac by addressing the  submission  made  by  the  Presenting
    Officer who was referring to page 109 of the appellant's bundle on clan
    membership "that was the best submission you  have  made  all  day,  Mr
    Mac."  It was understood by Mr Mac that such a  comment  was  sarcastic
    and inappropriate.  It was also said that the Judge added  "I  mean  no
    disrespect to Mr Mac but you should have made that submission".  Mr Mac
    considered that comment to be offensive and disrespectful  and  repeats
    his concerns in the statement which he prepared.

33.  It seems to us, as we have  already  indicated,  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal, and indeed the submissions which were made by  Mr  Mac  to  the
    Tribunal failed fundamentally to engage with  the  real  issue  in  the
    appeal.  As Miss Ukachi-Lois most fairly conceded,  the  central  issue
    was that of Article 3 of the ECHR.  The  asylum  aspect  fell  away  by
    virtue of the certification that had been applied and for  the  reasons
    we have already indicated, Article 15(c) was not engaged.

34.  It is therefore perhaps understandable that the  Tribunal  was  feeling
    somewhat frustrated that matters which were not central to  the  appeal
    continued to be raised by Mr Mac.  It is clear to us from  reading  the
    determination that  the  reliance  upon  Devaseelan  and  the  previous
    decision was essentially on the basis of clan membership and  no  more.
    If the appellant's representative wished the Tribunal to  fully  engage
    with the current conditions in Somalia as at the time  of  the  appeal,
    then it was necessary to consider such conditions in the light  of  the
    finding that the appellant was a member of the Hawiye clan.   It  seems
    to us that Mr Mac was throughout the hearing  reluctant  to  engage  in
    that process.

35.   We  readily  accept  that  there  may   have   been    a   degree   of
    misunderstanding as between himself and the Tribunal not helped by  the
    skeleton argument that was  submitted  which  focuses  particularly  on
    Section 72  and Article 15(c) than rather perhaps more  centrally  upon
    Article 3.

36.  It is said by Mr Mac in his statement that  the  panel  refused  to  go
    behind the findings of the previous Tribunal in respect of the  Section
    72 certificate.  However, it is not how the matter appears in paragraph
    14 of the determination where clearly the Tribunal recognises that  the
    starting point is in relation to the  Section  72  certificate  is  the
    decision of 6 August 2007 and goes on to say:

         "Notwithstanding this, we have carefully considered the totality of
         the evidence before us in order to determine  whether  or  not  any
         facts have occurred or evidence has  become  available  since  that
         determination which would cause us to reach a different  conclusion
         in relation to the Section 72 certificate now before us  and  which
         would enable us to find that the presumption raised  under  Section
         72(2) of the 2002 Act has been  rebutted."

37.  It is entirely clear to us therefore that the Tribunal was not  fixated
    upon Devaseelan but had  admitted  the  possibility  that  matters  had
    changed.  In the event, as for the reasons set out in paragraph  19  in
    particular, the Tribunal saw no reason to depart  from  that  position.
    We find nothing untoward or incorrect in that approach.

38.   Mr  Mac  in  his  statement,  particularly  in  paragraphs  8  to  18,
    repeatedly refers to his attempt to deal with  Article  15(c)  harm  by
    relying upon AM and Others (Somalia)  CG  and  being  rebuffed  by  the
    Tribunal for his attempts to do  so.   Once  again  we  can  detect  no
    impropriety in the Tribunal for so doing.  At paragraph 22 the Tribunal
    upholds the decision of the respondent that the appellant  is  excluded
    from the grant  of  humanitarian  protection  by  virtue  of  paragraph
    339D(i) of the Immigration Rules.   Once again there was  no  basis  to
    reach a different finding to  that  reached  by  the  Tribunal  in  the
    determination of 6 August 2007.  We can detect no error in approach  in
    that.

39.  The reference made to page 109 of the OGN report  is  some  importance.
    Paragraph 2.1 deals with clan affiliation and protection.   It  may  be
    helpful to summarise in part that which is set out:-


         "Regarding Mogadishu, clan affiliation is still  a  very  important
         issue when it comes to identity as well as protection, according to
         UNHCR.  In some districts of Mogadishu the population is more mixed
         than in other districts, but one  clan  would  be  predominant.   A
         prior clan affiliation will not be a problem. But there  are  cases
         in the circumstances when it matters.  For example, in cases  where
         a girl or woman  is raped by someone  from  another  clan,  if  the
         victim's clan does not obtain  a  satisfactory  solution  from  the
         perpetrator's clan, the victim's clan may resort  to  raping  three
         girls from the perpetrator's clan, according to UNHCR.


         Regarding clan identity and security an  international  agency  (A)
         explained that there are fewer war lords than previously, but  clan
         identity is still very important.  One can put a clan name  of  any
         area in Mogadishu.  In addition there are clans who have their  own
         militia.  However, clan protection is decreasing as the  government
         and Amisom provide increasing security.  On the other  hand,  there
         are minority clans who are more vulnerable than other groups.


         According to the international  agency  (A)  there  is  no  one  in
         Mogadishu who is at risk of attacks or persecution only because  of
         his or her clan affiliation.


         Regarding the  importance  of  clan,  a  diaspora  of  research  in
         Mogadishu stated that clan is no longer as important as it  was  in
         the past.  Protection is not dependent on one's  clan  affiliation.
         Today it is much more important to have connections  i.e.  to  know
         people in power, than to be a member of a  certain  clan.  Clan  is
         more important to the elderly.  It was added that clan is something
         you may talk about at your home  or  when  you  are  together  with
         fellow clan members.  The diaspora of research  in  Mogadishu  also
         stated that  people  might  wish  to  present  themselves  as  more
         cosmopolitan and modern and not necessarily wanting to share points
         of views on clans to westerners."

40.   Thus  the  point  perhaps  which  is  potentially  favourable  to  the
    appellant arises that clan membership is less important  as  a  way  of
    protection but more important is to have connections. It is  of  course
    the case for the appellant as  presented  that  he  had  not  been   to
    Mogadishu for a long term.

41.  Thus rather than seeking to challenge clan membership,  and  indeed  no
    evidence has been  presented on that matter, it would have been helpful
    to Mr Mac had he concentrated more upon  the  connection  issue  rather
    than the clan one.  That is not to say of course  that  he  necessarily
    would have succeeded but it was perhaps in the circumstances one of the
    better points to arise from the background evidence.

42.  We have no comment by the Immigration Judge as to  the  criticism  made
    in respect of such remarks as addressed to  Mr  Mac.   We  can  readily
    understand that the Tribunal may well have been somewhat frustrated  at
    the failure by Mr Mac to address with clarity the precise issues  under
    concern.  Indeed it would seem, according Mr Mac, that it was the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer who actually highlighted the important factor
    in the case for the  appellant  rather  than  Mr  Mac  discovering  it.
    Indeed the "connection" point could fairly be said  to  have  been  the
    best submission that had been made on behalf of the Appellant.

43.  We are not persuaded that the remark of the Judge if made was  intended
    to be sarcastic or inappropriate.  Indeed as the  grounds  make  clear,
    the Judge added the words "I mean no disrespect to you, Mr Mac, but you
    should have made that submission".    It  seems  us  that  that  was  a
    comment properly open to be made  to  the  Judge.  Rather  than  making
    submissions as to Article 15(c) it is clear that Mr Mac should  perhaps
    have more helpfully assisted the Tribunal as to what is highlighted  in
    the case of AMM and Others, namely that whether or  not  the  appellant
    faces a risk under Article 3 depends very much upon  his  circumstances
    and his lack of connection may be said to be an  important  element  in
    that consideration.

44.  We therefore do not detect any lack of objectivity on the part  of  the
    Tribunal, even if what Mr Mac says was spoken was  indeed  spoken.  The
    Tribunal was, as we so find, entitled to focus upon the real  issue  of
    the matter, namely Article 3 of the ECHR.

45.  The grounds also contend a failure to consider Article 8 but we  regard
    that of little merit.  Given the serious nature of the  offending,  the
    length of residence and private life of the  appellant  would  seem  to
    count for little in the overall balancing exercise.  The grounds indeed
    do not condescend upon particulars as to what factor  under  Article  8
    would succeed if it did not succeed under Article 3.

46.  Thus we come to what we consider to be the crux of the  appeal,  namely
    the contention  that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  engage  with  the
    submissions relating to Article 3 ECHR.

47.  Once again we find little merit in such a contention.  The Tribunal  at
    paragraph 25 reminded itself of the country guidance  of  AM  (Somalia)
    and noted  in  paragraph  25  in  particular  that  that  decision  had
    indicated that the armed conflict in Mogadishu did not pose a real risk
    of Article 3 harm in respect of any person in that city,  although  the
    person's particular circumstances must of course  be  considered.   The
    Tribunal went  on  therefore  to  consider  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant and noted the information set out in the reasons for refusal.
     The fact that the appellant was  a  member  of  majority  clan  was  a
    significant feature in that analysis.  Even from the passage of the OGN
    as cited, clan membership provided some degree of protection.

48.  Considering the  head note of AMM, it is clear  that  the  Tribunal  in
    that case found that the armed conflict in Mogadishu  did  not  pose  a
    real risk of Article 3 harm in respect  of  any  person  in  that  city
    regardless of circumstances.  The risk did exist for  those  who  found
    themselves in IDP camps in Mogadishu but a  returnee  from  the  United
    Kingdom who is fit for work or has family connections may  be  able  to
    avoid having to live in such a camp.   A  returnee  may,  nevertheless,
    face  a  real  risk  of  Article  3  harm  by  reason  of  his  or  her
    vulnerability.

49.  In that connection the report of Dr  Sarkar  dated  28  July  2009  was
    taken into consideration by the Tribunal, in paragraphs  16  to  18  in
    particular.  The matter was also revisited specifically in the  context
    of Article 3 in paragraph 26 of the determination.

50.  It is  entirely  clear  from  paragraph  24  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was a member of the Hawiye majority  clan  was  an  important
    factor in the overall approach of the Tribunal.

51.  AMM dealt with the issue of Article 8 so far as Mogadishu is  concerned
    in paragraphs 364 to 367.  It concluded that an Article 3 risk did  not
    exist in the absence of any special factors to the contrary.  The  fact
    that the appellant is a member of the majority clan  and  could  access
    some clan protection is of itself a very relevant feature and  we  have
    no doubt, from reading the determinations a whole, that that  was  very
    much in the mind of the Tribunal in approaching its task.

52.  We can find nothing in the decision of  AMM  which  materially  assists
    the appellant in his case. The  grounds  express  the  contention  that
    membership of the dominant clan  is  not  sufficient  to  show  that  a
    returnee would not be at risk but only connections at the very  highest
    level to powerful actors would be sufficient.  We do  not  detect  that
    statement as having any support in AMM at all.

53.  It is said that there has been no proper assessment of the  appellant's
    personal circumstances relevant to risk but  we  find  that  there  has
    been. Once again the grounds revert  largely  to  a  criticism  of  the
    Tribunal when talking as to indiscriminate  violence  and  humanitarian
    protection which is not entirely relevant.  The appellant was seemingly
    judged fit for work and a member of a majority clan and it seems to  us
    that we can find little in AMM that would assist him to  argue  to  the
    contrary.

54.  Looking at the matter overall, we find  that  the  Tribunal  has  given
    clear consideration to all relevant issues  and  has  made  sustainable
    findings upon them.

55.  In those circumstances we conclude that there was  indeed  no  material
    error in the approach taken by the Tribunal or any lack of fairness  or
    objectivity.

56.  Even were there to be some concern expressed as  to  the  lack  of  any
    specific reference to connections, it is in our decision not a material
    error, particularly in the light of  a  more  recent  country  guidance
    decision which is to be promulgated  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   It  is
    recognised that clan membership in Mogadishu  can  provide  potentially
    social support mechanisms and assistance with access to livelihood.

57.  It is accepted that if the person facing return to  Mogadishu  after  a
    period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the  city
    to assist him and re-establish himself on return, there will need to be
    a  careful  assessment  of  all  the  circumstances.   Family  or  clan
    associations to call upon in Mogadishu; access to financial  resources;
    prospects of securing a livelihood whether that be employment or  self-
    employment, available to  remittances  from  abroad  are  all  relevant
    factors. We find that these factors were  properly  considered  by  the
    Tribunal.

58.  In the circumstances, therefore,  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The original  decision  of  the  Tribunal
    shall stand, namely that the appeal against the  refusal  to  revoke  a
    deportation order is dismissed.



Signed        Date 17 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

