

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/02455/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 October and 03 November 2014            |On 10 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             LAMAR ANTHONY BOWEN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:       In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The background to this appeal is as follows.  By  a  decision  dated  6
    November 2013  Mr Bowen was notified by the Secretary of State that  he
    would be deported from the United Kingdom for the  reasons  given,  the
    precipitating factor being Mr Bowen's conviction of  a  drugs  offence.
    This decision also concluded that deportation would  not  infringe  any
    person's rights under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention.   Mr
    Bowen, who has at all material times been  unrepresented,  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  He made the case that  to  deport
    him would be in contravention of Article 8 of ECHR.   He also  asserted
    that he had lived in the United Kingdom for more than half of his  life
    and had no ties to his country of origin, Jamaica.

 2. In paragraphs [22] to [42]  of  the  FtT's  determination,   the  Judge
    rehearsed certain provisions of primary legislation, namely sections 33
    and 35 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The Judge also referred extensively
    to the Immigration Rules, specifically paragraphs 322(5), 397, 398, 399
    and 399A.  Next, the Judge reproduced in their entirety sections  117A,
    117B and 177C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the
    "2002 Act").  I interpose that these latter provisions constitute a new
    Article 8 ECHR regime, having  been  inserted  by  section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014, which  came  into  operation  on  28  July  2014.
    Further, on the same date, certain provisions of the Immigration  Rules
    were modified and came into operation: see paragraphs A362, 397,  A398,
    398,  399A,  399B,  399C  and  399D.  In  the  determination,  the  FtT
    reproduced the old,  superseded  provisions  of  the  Rules.   At  this
    juncture, it is appropriate to record that the hearing before  the  FtT
    was conducted on 18 August 2014 and the determination  was  promulgated
    on 08 September 2014.

 3. The Judge then made a series of factual findings in paragraph [44],  in
    particular:

        i)    that the Appellant has a long standing relationship with  his
           partner;


       ii)    that his partner is a British citizen who has lived in the UK
           for all of her life;

      iii)    that the Appellant has not had leave  to  be  in  the  United
           Kingdom during the relevant 15 year period; and

       iv)    that there are considerable obstacles to the Appellant's life
           with  his  partner  continuing  in  Jamaica  and  it  would   be
           unreasonable to expect her to go to live there

    Notably, the Judge purported to make all of these  findings  under  the
    former paragraph 399B of the Rules. The Judge elaborated on the  fourth
    of these findings, focusing mainly on certain factors bearing  directly
    on the Appellant's partner.  Having done so, the Judge  concluded  that
    having regard to the third of the  four  aforementioned  findings,  the
    criteria in paragraph 399(b) of the (old)  Rules  were  not  satisfied.
    Once again, in this context, the Judge was referring to the  superseded
    provisions of the Rules.


4.   Next the Judge gave consideration to paragraph 399A of the  Immigration
    Rules.  This was followed by two further specific findings:


        a)    the Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since at latest
           January  2001,   in  other  words  since  the   age   of   nine.
           Accordingly he has lived in the United Kingdom for over half  of
           his life; and


        b)    he has no meaningful ties to Jamaica taking into account  his
           age on entry to the United Kingdom  firstly,  that  he  has  not
           returned there since and that  he was unaware of  any  relations
           who live there.

    This prompted  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  paragraph  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules  was  satisfied.  This  too  was  a  reference  to  a
    superseded provision of the Rules.


 5. The Judge then reasoned that it was unnecessary to proceed to what  was
    described as "stage two".  One of the reasons given for this assessment
    was his finding that the criteria in paragraph 399A(b)  were  satisfied
    (supra).  A further expressed reason was the following:

     "Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014, and, in particular, Part  5(A)
        inserts new Sections 117A-D into the  Nationality  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 2002.  .............. Part 5(A) only applies  where  the
        Tribunal considers  Article  82  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention
        directly are not required to consider Article  8  directly  outside
        the Immigration Rules given the above".


    As a result the Judge declined to give any consideration whatsoever  to
    what maybe described for convenience as the new  statutory  regime.  He
    formulated his decision in these terms:


         "I find that the decision to deport the Appellant to Jamaica is not
         in accordance with paragraph 399A(b) of the Immigration  Rules  and
         not in accordance with the law."

     The FtT allowed the appeal accordingly.

6.   Since the FtT determination the Court of Appeal has considered the  new
    statutory  provisions in the case of YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ  1292.
    Paragraphs [37] - [39] of this decision make clear that  subsequent  to
    the operative date of 28 July 2014 it is  incumbent  upon  a  court  or
    tribunal in appropriate cases to  give  effect  to  the  new  statutory
    regime viz  the combination of the newly created Part 5A  of  the  2002
    Act and the modified provisions of the Immigration Rules.

 7. While the grant of permission to appeal is opaque, it is clear from the
    terms of the application for  permission  that  the  central  complaint
    ventilated about the determination of the FtT is its failure  to  apply
    the new statutory regime.  This, it  is  contended,  is  a  fundamental
    error or law.

 8. At the error of law hearing conducted on 03 November 2014, I  concluded
    that the FtT had erred in law for failing to give effect to the correct
    legal  regime.    This  error  is  elementary  and   of   unmistakeable
    materiality.  Accordingly I ordered that the determination of  the  FtT
    be set aside and I retained the case in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
    purpose of remaking the decision.


The Decision Remade

 9. The reconvened hearing took place on 03 November 2014.  Once again, the
    Appellant was unrepresented.  He accepted the invitation to address the
    Tribunal, in the form of combined evidence and submissions.  He  stated
    that he has been in the United Kingdom since December 2000, when he was
    aged 9 years.   He has, therefore, spent 14 years in the United Kingdom
    and has not returned to Jamaica at any time.  His brother,  mother  and
    father were all born in the United Kingdom. So  was  his  younger  step
    sister.  He asserted that his only cultural tie with Jamaica relates to
    his food preferences.  Following his arrival in the United Kingdom,  he
    was granted leave to enter for a period of 6 months. He  accepted  that
    his presence has been unlawful ever since.

10. The Appellant asserted that he has had  a  female  partner,  a  British
    citizen, for the last four years.   He stated that she  was  unable  to
    attend the Tribunal hearing on account of her university  studies.   He
    was unable to identify the university she is allegedly  attending.   He
    believes that her course began in September 2014 and  further  believes
    that it is a course in health and social care and business  management.
    He stated that although he asked her to write a letter to the  Tribunal
    on his behalf, she had not done so. This was unexplained.   He  claimed
    that they lived together in 2012 for some 5 - 7 months.  There has been
    no cohabitation subsequently, taking into account his effective  period
    of imprisonment of 10 months and his further 6  months  in  immigration
    detention, together with the conditions of his bail  requiring  him  to
    reside at a specified address. His partner has never  been  to  Jamaica
    and, in his words, "her whole home life is here".   He  added  that  it
    would be "a bit  hard"  for  her  to  resettle  in  Jamaica  with  him.
    Finally, he suggested that there would be very significant obstacles in
    his reintegrating in  Jamaica,  highlighting  that  he  would  have  no
    accommodation or financial support there.

11. On behalf of the Respondent, it was  asserted,  without  contradiction,
    that the Appellant's father and younger brother are  the  beneficiaries
    of discretionary leave to  remaining  the  United  Kingdom,  while  his
    mother - whom he has not seen for four years - has no leave to remain.

12. I apply the new provisions of Part 5A of the 2002 Act to this appeal in
    the following way:

    (a)  No issue was raised with regard to section 117B(2) or (3).

    (b)  In accordance with section 117B(4), I attribute little  weight  to
         the Appellant's private life in its entirety.

    (c)  I find that the Appellant does not have the  relationship  claimed
         with the female UK citizen. If this relationship were real, I would
         expect, as a minimum, a  written  statement  or  letter  from  this
         person.  There is none. It is also of particular note that the lady
         did not attend any of the three  Tribunal  hearings  involving  the
         Appellant.   My  reservations  are  fortified  by  the  Appellant's
         vagueness about  her  studies.  I  find  that,  whatever  may  have
         happened in the past, the relationship claimed does not exist.

    (d)  In the alternative, assuming that this is a real relationship,  it
         qualifies for little weight having regard to section 117B(4)(b).

     (e) No issue arises under section 177B(6).

    (f)  By virtue of section 117C(3), the  public  interest  requires  the
         Appellant's deportation  unless  "Exception  1"  or  "Exception  2"
         applies.  Exception 1 does not apply since, per subsection  (4)(a),
         the Appellant has been unlawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
         for most of his life.  Furthermore, having regard to  his  age  and
         maturity, I find, with reference to subsection (4)(c),  that  there
         would not be  "many  significant  obstacles  to  [the  Appellant's]
         integration into the country to which [the Appellant]  is  proposed
         to be deported."  As regards subsection (4)(b),  I  find  that  the
         Appellant is "socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
         Kingdom".

    (g)  As regards "Exception 2", I have found that the Appellant does not
         have "a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying
         partner".  I further find, in any event, that  the  effect  of  his
         deportation on the female person concerned  would  not  be  "unduly
         harsh".  There is  no  evidential  foundation  whatsoever  for  any
         different finding: se especially [10]  above.   Finally,  I  record
         that there is no question of any "genuine and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with a qualifying child".

13. It follows from the above that neither "Exception 1" nor "Exception  2"
    applies.  Accordingly, pursuant to section 117C(3), the public interest
    requires the Appellant's deportation.

Decision

14. Giving effect to the findings and conclusions rehearsed above, I remake
    the  decision  by  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.

15. For the record, at the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I  explained  the
    effect of my decision to the Appellant.   In response to a question,  I
    reiterated the desirability of obtaining legal advice and indicated  to
    him that a limited mechanism for seeking  to  challenge  this  decision
    exists.








                       Signed:
                                 [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:  04 November 2014
