
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02000/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 April 2014                              |On 24 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                           dwayne anthony newland
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Greenland
     Lawyers LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (a  panel  comprising  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Jackson and Mr G H Getlevog) in which they dismissed his appeal against
    the decision of the respondent made on 27  September  2013  to  make  a
    deportation  order  against  him  pursuant  to  Section  5(1)  of   the
    Immigration Act 1971 and Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The appellant's history arrived in the United Kingdom  on  26  December
    2001 with leave to enter which expired on 1 January 2003.  He has  been
    convicted of several offences in  connection  with  the  possession  of
    controlled drugs.  On 15 November 2012 the appellant was  convicted  at
    Wood Green Crown Court of violent disorder and burglary with intent  to
    steal and was sentenced to two years and four months' imprisonment  for
    violent disorder with an  additional  three  months  consecutively  for
    burglary.

 3. The respondent considered that she was required to make  a  deportation
    order against the appellant because as he did not meet the requirements
    of paragraphs 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules in respect of family
    and private life. Although he had a son and had established family life
    in the United Kingdom, the respondent  considered  that  there  was  no
    ongoing genuine or subsisting relationship with  him;  that  the  child
    could continue to be cared for by his mother  in  the  United  Kingdom;
    and, that were any genuine relationship subsisting  between  the  child
    and the appellant or the appellant and  his  former  girlfriend  either
    could be maintained from or within  Jamaica.   She  concluded  that  it
    would not breach the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article 8
    to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.

 4. On the day of the hearing, Mr Balroop who appeared  below  as  he  does
    before me sought an adjournment of the hearing on three grounds:-

     i) that the appellant had recently changed legal  representatives  and
        that the new representatives have not  yet  been  able  to  have  a
        proper legal visit with him and take proper instructions;

     ii) that Counsel had only been instructed the day before;

    iii) that there was a need for the  appellant  to  produce  evidence  in
         response to the  social  services  report  which  was  produced  by
         respondent on the day of the hearing which includes  evidence  from
         the appellant's child's mother.

 5. The panel refused the adjournment on the basis that:-

      i) the appellant had been legally represented for a significant period
         of time, a bundle including witness statements had  been  submitted
         on his behalf (six);

     ii) that the issue raised in the report relied upon by  the  respondent
         was already in issue although not in the same detail; and

    iii) that it was highly unlikely that any evidence from  child's  mother
         would be forthcoming with or without an adjournment.

 6. The panel did however permit a short adjournment until the afternoon to
    allow Counsel to take further instructions. They then heard the  appeal
    and dismissed it. The  Tribunal  noted  [43]  that  the  appellant  had
    confirmed that he was not in a subsisting relationship with either  the
    mother of his son or a former partner. They found  that  the  appellant
    did not have an ongoing genuine or subsisting relationship with his son
    [44], there being no evidence of  the  appellant  seeking  to  maintain
    contact by phone or even birthday cards or Christmas cards, and finding
    the appellant had not had a genuine relationship with his son at  least
    since he had been prison; that the appellant no  longer  has  a  family
    relationship with his mother or siblings; that  the  appellant  had  no
    significant or exceptional private life ties  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    having at best established only a limited private life here [46].

 7. The Tribunal also found, having had regard to the best interests of the
    child [49] in light of the NOMS Report  and  the  information  supplied
    from Hackney Children's Services, to  whom  the  son  and  mother  were
    known, that there is  a  significant  history  of  continuing  domestic
    violence between the appellant and his former partner including threats
    to kill her and her mother, concerns of the effect on the  child,  that
    it would be in the child's best interests not to have any contact  with
    the appellant [51] and that if the  appellant  wished  to  establish  a
    relationship with his son in the future then he could make contact with
    him from Jamaica [51] and that [62]  the  appellant's  deportation  was
    proportionate.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    grounds that the panel's refusal to adjourn the matter  amounted  to  a
    procedural unfairness amounting to an error of law as  the  appeal  had
    proceeded:-

     i) in the absence of proper instructions from the appellant due to the
        late transfer of representation [5];

    ii) that neither the appellant nor his representatives had  any  notice
        of the adverse summary report from Hackney Social Services [6];

   iii) that the representatives had been unable to  obtain,  due  to  time
        constraints, evidence to support the appellant's  claim  of  family
        life.

 9. On 10 March 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted  permission  to
    appeal, also extending the time permitted.  Judge Ford stated:-

       It was arguably unfair to refuse the appellant an adjournment  given
       the grounds state that  neither  the  NOMS  Report  nor  the  social
       services report was available to the appellant or his representative
       before the hearing the appellant did not  have  the  opportunity  to
       call evidence to address the concerns of the appellant expressed  at
       paragraph 35 (SH (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 1284).

10. The respondent has since the grant of permission  produced  a  detailed
    reply pursuant to Rule 24.

11. Mr Balroop relied on the grounds of appeal submitting that  whilst  the
    issue of domestic violence had been raised in the  NOMS  Report,  there
    was a qualitative difference between that very short reference and  the
    detailed,  extensive  report  produced  on  the  day  of  the  hearing.
    Further, that report had  been  produced  contrary  to  directions  and
    contains a number of factual errors in particular the  allegation  that
    the appellant had been back to Jamaica and has a child there which  was
    not substantiated.

12. Mr Melvin relied on his Rule 24 statement, submitting that there was no
    merit in the submission that the panel should have adjourned the matter
    to permit rebuttal evidence in respect of the information from  Hackney
    Social Services.  He submitted that even with that the outcome in  this
    appeal was inevitable and on that basis any error was  not  capable  of
    affecting the outcome.  He submitted that the appellant had been put on
    notice of the domestic violence issue and had  failed  to  provide  any
    proper explanation for changing representatives.

13. There is little  merit  in  the  submission  that  the  Tribunal  acted
    unfairly in failing to adjourn the matter owing to the late instruction
    of Counsel and late change in representatives.  No  proper  explanation
    has been provided as to why this was necessary; no  evidence  has  been
    adduced of  any  complaints  made  by  the  appellant  or  his  current
    representatives to the previous representatives; nor are their  claimed
    failings particularised.

14. There was in this case no full  NOMS  Report  merely  a  summary  which
    appears in the respondent's  bundle  ("RB")  at  Appendix  G.   In  the
    summary at Section 2 - Offending Related Information - Risk of  Serious
    Harm it is stated that an OASys assessment  has  been  completed  on  7
    March 2013 but this has not been produced.  Section 2b provides:

    2B.  Risk of Serious Harm Level:    Medium  -  to  children  and  known
                                   adult
             Low - to public and staff

         Summarise the risk factors - who is at risk, of what, and when?

         -    History of  domestic  incidents  with  ex-partner  -  risk  of
             violence/threats to ex and  future  partners.   Also  risk  of
             children being caught up in this.

         -    Risk of burglary/theft.

         -    Previous assessment indicates some gang issues as he  reported
             not being able to report to probation  in  Highgate  for  this
             reason.

15. The respondent's bundle was served on the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  24
    October 2013.  There is no indication that it was  not  served  on  the
    appellant's then representatives.

16. Directions for the hearing which took place on  21  January  2014  were
    issued to all parties on  9  October  2013.   These  provide  that  all
    documents are to be filed no later than ten days before the hearing and
    the parties' attention is  drawn  to  Rule  21(b)  of  the  Immigration
    Appeals (Procedure Rules) 2005 which provides:-

    The Tribunal  must  not,  in  particular,  adjourn  a  hearing  on  the
    application of a party in order to allow the party more time to produce
    evidence, unless satisfied that -

      a) the evidence relates to a matter in dispute of the appeal;

      b) that it would be unjust to determine the appeal without  permitting
         the party a further opportunity to produce the evidence; and

      c) where the party has  failed  to  comply  with  directions  for  the
         production  of  the  evidence,  he  has  provided  a   satisfactory
         explanation for that failure.

17. Rule 51 of the same rules provides as follows:-

    51. (4)  Where the Tribunal has given directions  setting  time  limits
           for the filing and serving  of  recent  evidence,  it  must  not
           consider any written evidence which is not filed and  served  in
           accordance with those directions unless satisfied that there are
           good reasons to do so.

18. Despite the express provisions of this Rule, there is no indication  in
    their determination that the Tribunal gave  any  consideration  to  the
    duty imposed by it.  Instead, they simply accepted the document adduced
    by the respondent on the day of the hearing which had not  been  served
    on the appellant.    Further,  rather  than  offer  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to adduce evidence in rebuttal, the Tribunal  proceeded  on
    the basis that it would not be available.

19. While the issue of domestic violence and the concern that the child may
    be caught up in this are raised in the NOMS Report, what is said in the
    CCD family separation reference adduced on the day of the hearing  goes
    into  significantly   greater   detail   and   is   substantially   and
    qualitatively different.  It refers amongst other things  to  referrals
    to social services; to the child's mother obtaining restraining orders;
    to arrests for  ABH,  threats  to  kill  and  an  allegation  that  the
    appellant had  sought  to  persuade  the  child's  mother  to  have  an
    abortion.  Mention is also made that no further action had  been  taken
    as the father had left the country at some point in 2009 and  that  the
    appellant has a further child in Jamaica.  Much of this information  is
    potentially significant.

20. In MM (unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC),a decision of the
    President of the Upper Tribunal, the Honourable  Mr  Justice  McCloskey
    and Upper Tribunal Judge Southern , noted:

         The matrix of this appeal, rehearsed above, prompts  reflection  on
         the content and reach of one of the cornerstones of the common law,
         namely the right of every litigant to a fair hearing. The right  in
         play  is  properly  described  as  fundamental,   irreducible   and
         inalienable.

21. Having considered the relevant case law they distilled  the  principles
    derived[15]:
:-
        1) The defect, or impropriety, must be procedural in nature.  Cases
           of this kind are not concerned with the merits of  the  decision
           under review or appeal.   Rather, the superior  court's  enquiry
           focuses on the  process,  or  procedure,  whereby  the  impugned
           decision was reached.
        2) It is doctrinally incorrect to adopt the two  stage  process  of
           asking  whether  there  was   a   procedural   irregularity   or
           impropriety giving rise to unfairness and, if so,  whether  this
           had any material bearing on the outcome. These are, rather,  two
           elements  of  a  single  question,  namely  whether  there   was
           procedural unfairness.
        3)  Thus,  if  the  reviewing  or  appellate  Court  identifies   a
           procedural irregularity or impropriety which, in its view,  made
           no difference to the outcome, the appropriate conclusion is that
           there was no unfairness to the party concerned.
        4) The reviewing or appellate  Court  should  exercise  caution  in
           concluding that the outcome would have  been  the  same  if  the
           diagnosed  procedural  irregularity  or  impropriety   had   not
           occurred.

22. While acknowledging that there may be cases in which, in the  field  of
    judicial review, cases where denying  the  subject  of  a  decision  an
    adequate opportunity to put his case is not in  all  the  circumstances
    unfair[17], the remedy there being discretionary, that  is  not  so  in
    hearings of this type,  stating: [18]



    ...  an appeal on a point of law from  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal, to be contrasted  with  an  application
    for judicial review  based  on  alleged  procedural  unfairness.   Such
    appeals are governed  by  section  11  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007, which provides in subsection (1):

         "For the purposes of subsection (2), the reference to  a  right  of
         appeal is to a right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  any  point
         of law arising from a decision  made  by  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
         other than an excluded decision."


    We are satisfied that  the  fourth  of  the  principles  formulated  by
    Bingham LJ (supra) applies fully to appeals of this genre, for two main
    reasons.  The first is that where either party to an appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal is denied a fair hearing, this constitutes an error
    of law.  The second is that in determining appeals,  this  Tribunal  is
    not concerned with the merits of the decision of  the  lower  Tribunal.
    Rather, its function is to decide whether, within the  compass  of  the
    grant of permission to appeal, the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal
    is vitiated by a material error of law.  This analysis is reinforced by
    section 12 of the 2007 Act.  This provides, inter alia, that where  the
    Upper Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal "involved the making of an error on a point of law" and orders
    that the decision be set aside, it may re-make  the  decision.   If  it
    decides to do so, it will, in effect, conduct an appeal on the  merits,
    either applying the correct legal principles in  play  to  findings  of
    fact preserved from the First-tier Tribunal determination or, in  cases
    where those findings have given rise to  the  relevant  error  of  law,
    evaluating all the evidence, forming its own views and making  its  own
    findings  and  conclusions.   The  timing  of  this   exercise,   where
    performed, is telling: it is separated from the error of  law  hearing,
    whether it is conducted immediately thereafter or,  where  unavoidable,
    at a later date. It is a re-making exercise.,

23. In this case, given the serious and detailed nature of the  allegations
    put forward in the material presented to the appellant only on the  day
    of the hearing, an adjournment for a  matter  of  hours  to  allow  for
    instructions to be taken was wholly inadequate in terms  of  permitting
    him an opportunity  to  obtain  evidence  in  rebuttal,  and  thus  the
    question "Did the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involve  the
    making of an error of law" must be answered in the affirmative.

24. Further, given that the evidence set out in the document served on  the
    date underpins to a substantial extent  the  panel's  finding  that  it
    would not be in the appellant's child's best interest for him to remain
    in the United Kingdom, it cannot be said that  this  document  and  the
    information in it did not form a  central  plank  of  the  respondent's
    case.  The appellant was ambushed by the respondent and the  First-tier
    Tribunal  acquiesced  in  this.   They  thus  permitted  a   procedural
    unfairness  to  proceed.   Accordingly,  I  am   satisfied   that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
    error of law with the result that the appellant did not receive a  fair
    hearing.

25. Following MM at [26], I consider that given the nature  of  the  error,
    the matter should be remitted to the First-tier for it to make a  fresh
    determination on all issues in order that  the  appellant  has  a  fair
    hearing.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I remit the matter to a differently constituted First-tier  Tribunal
       for the appeal to be heard afresh. None of the findings of fact made
       by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  its  earlier  determination   are
       preserved.

Signed                                  Date:  22 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


