
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02096/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 August 2014                             |On 2 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                     MJY

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel instructed by Crown & Mehria
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Kenya,  born  on  19  March  1991.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 November 2007 to  join  his  father
    and family.  In due course he received indefinite leave to remain on 23
    November 2009.

2.   He was convicted on 26 February  2013  of  inflicting  grievous  bodily
    harm.   On  22  March  2013  he  was  sentenced   to   twelve   months'
    imprisonment.

3.   The respondent, by a decision of 3 October 2013 invoked the  provisions
    of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007,  namely  to  bring  into
    effect the deportation of the appellant.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle and Mr Getlevog (Non  Legal
    Member) on 29 January 2014.

5.   The appeal was dismissed.

6.   Grounds of appeal were submitted to the effect that  the  Tribunal  had
    not fully considered the extent of the dependency upon the appellant of
    his family had been somewhat dismissive of the effect that his  removal
    would have upon them.  Permission to appeal was granted on that basis.

7.   The matter  came  before  me  on  17  April  2014.   Having  heard  the
    submissions of both parties on that occasion I  was  concerned  whether
    the  appropriate  test  can  be  applied  to  the  factual  matrix,  in
    particular whether the test of removal  being  unduly  harsh  had  been
    applied to the family members as well as to  the  appellant.   Although
    the Tribunal seemed to have highlighted much of the evidence which  the
    appellant sough to rely upon, it seemed that there were areas  of  that
    evidence which were not fully engaged in the application of  the  test.
    I was also concerned as to whether full consideration had been given to
    the effect of returning the appellant to Kenya.

8.   In relation to those matters therefore I determined that  the  decision
    should be set aside for those matters to be considered.

9.   Thus the matter came before me for a re-hearing on 12 August 2014.

10.  Most helpfully at the hearing it was agreed  that  there  had  been  no
    challenge to the credibility of  any  of  the  witnesses  or  of  their
    statements which had been submitted  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    There had been no challenge to what the appellant had to say as to  his
    situation and circumstances.  The family  situation  and  circumstances
    had been clearly set out in the many witness statements which had  been
    prepared and the medical reports which had been  submitted.   In  those
    circumstances Mr Eaton, who represents the appellant, was of  the  view
    that it was unnecessary to call further oral evidence and that  it  was
    entirely proper to rely upon the evidence that had been presented.   Mr
    Richards, who represents the respondent,  agreed  with  that  approach.
    Thus it was that the re-hearing proceeded on the basis  of  submissions
    made and evidence previously presented.

11.  I have regard in particular to the large  bundle  which  was  presented
    before the First-tier Tribunal which sets out many  of  the  statements
    from witnesses that attested  to  the  appellant's  character  and  the
    family life.

12.  So far as the offence itself was  concerned  it  was  one  of  violence
    committed whilst the appellant was drunk.   It  was  the  only  offence
    which he had committed and it was submitted that  he  was  unlikely  to
    commit any further offences.  My attention was drawn to  the  probation
    officer's report at A31 and  32  of  the  bundle  which  spoke  of  the
    appellant's response to custody and thereafter.  It speaks of the steps
    taken by the appellant to address his behaviour, particularly attending
    the stepping stones programme which focused  on  drug  misuse  and  the
    consequences of same.  It spoke of the appellant's positive attitude as
    a volunteer at the prison and his hard  work  as  part  of  a  team  in
    prison.  It spoke of the fact that custody was very difficult for  him,
    how upset he was that he was separated from  his  family,  particularly
    given their physical and emotional needs of him.

13.  Perhaps what lies at the  heart  of  this  appeal  is  in  reality  the
    complex needs of the appellant's family.  My attention was drawn to the
    medical evidence relating particularly to the appellant's  father.   He
    is assessed as requiring need at the highest level.   He  has  physical
    difficulties in walking and mobility such that in fact he attended  the
    hearing in a wheelchair.

14.  In particular he needs constant care and support, particularly  getting
    in and out of bed,  managing  his  toilet  needs,  washing  and  drying
    himself, using a bath or shower, dressing and undressing, going up  and
    downstairs or moving about.  He requires attention not only during  the
    day but also at night, particularly in relation to his toileting needs.
     It is perhaps unnecessary to set out in great detail the  difficulties
    faced by the appellant's father.  The appellant himself sets  that  out
    in a detailed statement of 20 January 2014.

15.  His  father  has  a  number  of  illnesses  including  diabetes,  heart
    failure, angina, kidney problems, prostrate  problems,  depression  and
    gout.  He has had a coronary artery bypass.  He is on  anti-coagulation
    therapy, with a high risk of stroke and further complications.  He  has
    to take some 23 medicines a day.

16.  The appellant speaks in paragraph 21 of his  statement  of  his  unique
    relationship with his  father  which  is  over  and  above  the  normal
    relationship that a child has with a parent.  His  father  relies  upon
    him to help him lead a normal life as possible treating him not only as
    a son but as a best friend.  They spend a lot of time together and when
    time permits the appellant takes his father out for walks  or  to  have
    other activities.

17.  The added complication in this family context is that his  mother  also
    is unwell.  She has had a number of illnesses.  She  has  required  eye
    surgery and suffers severe visual impairment and  restricted  mobility.
    She suffers from Zollinger disease and has other difficulties with  her
    health.  She too requires some  physical  and  particularly  moral  and
    emotional support to cope not only with her  condition  but  also  with
    that of her husband.  She is not capable of physically lifting him  and
    therefore requires other assistance.

18.  Neither parents drive and therefore are dependent  upon  somebody  else
    to take them to hospital appointments, to go shopping and generally  to
    move them around.

19.  In addition the appellant has his sister who is  attending  university.
    She too has suffered heart surgery and finds it difficult physically to
    do much around the house.  She too is often depressed at the  situation
    of the family and again emotionally vulnerable, depending very  heavily
    upon  the  appellant  for  her  emotional  support.   She   has   every
    possibility of doing  well  in  her  studies.   She  attends  the  same
    university as the appellant and they commuted together  three  to  four
    days a week.

20.  Although the  family  receive  financial  assistance  from  the  state,
    particularly the father who receives disability living allowance,  that
    is not sufficient to meet all the needs of the family and so  they  are
    dependent to some extent upon the modest earnings which  the  appellant
    manages to make in addition to his studying.

21.  As was submitted there  is  a  complicated  interconnection  of  family
    support as required, the lynchpin being that of the appellant.  Despite
    his youth and his responsibilities in study he  has  committed  himself
    fully to supporting his family and without him that family would be  in
    a bad state.  It was not simply the physicality of the support but also
    of the emotional inter-dependence that each family member had with  the
    others.

22.  It was not suggested that the family could  relocate  to  be  with  the
    appellant in Kenya.  The father was in any event a British citizen  and
    that status as well as the indefinite leave to remain  status  afforded
    to the other members of the family was something to  be  recognised  in
    the proportionality exercise.

23.  My attention was drawn to the decision of Kugathas and  I  was  invited
    to find that on a proper  construction  of  the  family  chemistry  and
    grouping that there was a great deal of emotional dependency  upon  the
    appellant in particular.  Such was an important basis, particularly for
    those prone to depression.

24.  As to  the  appellant's  return  to  Kenya  that  of  course  would  be
    difficult for him, he having no relatives  there  to  support  him  and
    having little connection with the  country  since  he  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was not argued however by  Mr  Eaton  that  such  a
    return would  be  unduly  harsh  in  all  the  circumstances  that  the
    appellant was a relatively young man  with  education  and  ability  to
    work.  It would however devastate his family to remove  from  them  the
    main support and help that they have.  His sister has  in  fact  passed
    her degree but is hopeful of undertaking a postgraduate  degree.   Thus
    her need of the  care  and  support  of  her  brother,  the  appellant,
    continues.

25.  The period during which the appellant was  in  custody  which  was  for
    some six months was a particularly difficult time for the family.  They
    relied upon the services of a friend to drive them around.  That friend
    himself is not in good health and it was only a temporary  arrangement.
    There are family members that are  in  the  United  Kingdom,  they  are
    essentially cousins with their  own  family  responsibilities.   It  is
    submitted that even some modest help from them which is all they  could
    offer, if at all, would not cater for the complex medical needs of  the
    family, in particular the need for somebody to be at home most  of  the
    time in order to  assist  the  father  with  his  care  needs.   It  is
    unlikely, given the complexity of his needs that they would  be  served
    by a third party or outside  agency  even  if  that  support  could  be
    avoided.  Given the difficult financial position  of  the  family,  any
    additional expenses on taxis and so forth was a serious  consideration.



26.  My attention was drawn to the various witnesses that had spoken  as  to
    the matter including statements from the appellant's father, mother and
    sister and medical statements concerning the health of all three.

27.   Mr  Richards,  in  his  submission,  invited  my  attention   to   the
    Immigration Act 2014, in particular to  paragraph  117C  thereof.   The
    appellant did not fall  within  any  of  the  two  exceptions  in  that
    Section.  I was invited to  find  that  the  situation  was  relatively
    straightforward, namely that the Act clearly indicated that it  was  in
    the public interest that there by deportation and that that  should  be
    the decision made in this case.  I was asked to find that the appellant
    did not come within any of the exceptions to deportation and  that  the
    public interest was clearly expressed in the Act, namely that he should
    be deported and his appeal dismissed.  I was invited to do so.

28.  It is to be recognised that the legislation has changed both as to  the
    Rules and Act of Parliament but I am obliged to take these matters into
    account.  So far as the change  of  Rules  is  concerned,  I  note  the
    amendment to Rule 398 provides:-


         "The public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
         other factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances  over
         and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

29.  I note also the  amendment  to  paragraph  399A.   It  substitutes  the
    requirements as follows:-

         "(a) the person has to be lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of
             his life;


         (b)  is socially and culturally integrated into the UK; and


         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."


30.  I bear in mind also Section 117C of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  which
    impose additional considerations in cases involving  foreign  criminals
    in the context of Article 8.  It is to be noted  that  exception  1  in
    that section generally speaking reflects that which is now set  out  in
    Rule 399A.

31.  There are no transitional provisions and therefore my findings of  fact
    and findings of law are to be considered within the context of the  new
    legislation and requirements.

32.  That the appellant is in general terms a commendable young man  who  is
    concerned not only to progress his study but is also committed  to  the
    welfare of his family is not in doubt.

33.  It is said that he  would  not  pose  any  threat  to  society  by  re-
    offending but rather that he  has  much  to  give  to  society  in  his
    acceptance of responsibility as a citizen would also not seem to be  in
    any doubt.  I take into account the glowing references that  are  given
    in the statements about him  and  I  take  into  account  the  positive
    factors that can be spoken about him.  Those  however  do  not  replace
    what is enshrined in statute, namely that the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest.   The  more  serious  the  offence
    committed the greater the public interest in deportation.

34.  Section 117C(3) provides that:

         "(3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  exception
             (1) or exception (2) applies.


         (4)  Exception (1) applies where -


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated into  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported."

35.  It is not suggested to me during the course  of  the  submissions  that
    the appellant meets that exception.

36.  He arrived in the United Kingdom when he was 16 years of age.   He  has
    been in the United Kingdom for some seven  years  and  thereafter.   It
    will be said therefore that he has been resident in the United  Kingdom
    for most of his life.  Clearly it is  entirely  arguable  that  he  has
    socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.  He had not
    sought to argue that there would be very significant obstacles  to  his
    integration  into  Kenya  although  there  would  be  clearly   initial
    difficulties in his so doing.   Although  the  documentation  that  was
    originally presented  seeks  to  show  a  country  that  is  dangerous,
    particularly to the stranger or to the person that  is  not  culturally
    integrated into the community, that aspect of the matter is not pursued
    before me.  He clearly has the  intelligence,  skills  and  ability  to
    integrate himself into Kenyan society,  being  mindful  clearly  as  to
    where he should reside in Kenya for that purpose.

37.  Prior to the coming into effect of the 2014  Act  there  were  numerous
    decisions as to the proper interpretation at  paragraph  398,  399  and
    399A.  Also, as consideration of Article 8  should  the  appellant  not
    meet the requirements as therein set out.

38.  In general terms therefore were the appellant not to  meet  the  strict
    requirements of the Rules it would generally  only  be  in  exceptional
    circumstances Article 8 would be held to apply.  There would need to be
    compelling  circumstances  outside  of  the  Rules  which  would   make
    deportation unduly harsh in all the circumstances.

39.  Looking at the circumstances of this  case  I  have  no  hesitation  in
    considering that the  complex  physical  and  emotional  needs  of  the
    appellant's family and their inter-dependence upon him  to  be  such  a
    compelling circumstance.  I disagree with the findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that there would be other support available to the family
    from other family members.  Those members are not close family  members
    and  although  there  is  some  connection  with  them  and  with   the
    appellant's core  family  in  terms  of  communication  and  occasional
    meetings, they are all people having their own family  responsibilities
    and I accept entirely from the generality of the evidence as  presented
    that they would not be in a position  to  provide  the  nature  of  the
    support that is required.  The  assistance  of  a  friend  to  help  in
    emergencies is not quite the same as the requirement to provide what is
    in effect full-time care, particularly to the father.  It may of course
    be that the statutory bodies have an obligation to  provide  carers  to
    help out the family but it is unlikely they would be  able  to  provide
    the quality of  care  and  consistency  of  care  that  is  at  present
    provided, particularly by the appellant.  Funding such care is  also  a
    further issue.

40.  It is to be recognised  that  so  far  as  the  appellant's  sister  is
    concerned she has currently a  dependency  upon  him,  particularly  in
    emotional  terms.   He  and  she  share  responsibility  towards  their
    parents, he also needs the support of  the  appellant  for  her  needs.
    Long-term such needs are likely to age with growing maturity  and  with
    responsibilities but I focus at present  upon  what  is  the  situation
    rather than what could  be  the  situation.   Equally  the  appellant's
    mother  has  a  closer  than  normal  bond  with  him  because  of  her
    difficulties.

41.  I bear in mind the case of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  I  have
    no doubt that there is a degree  of  emotional  dependency  within  the
    family unit as a whole and  one  upon  the  other  such  as  to  firmly
    establish family at present.

42.  It was clear from the Probation Officer's letter that  separation  from
    his family caused the appellant great distress in that he was not  able
    to be as helpful to his family or  supportive  of  their  needs  as  he
    wished to be.  It is clear also that the appellant's removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would in the circumstances cause great difficulty to the
    family and much emotional distress to its members.  It is to  be  noted
    that  the  father  in  particular  suffers  from  depression  and   the
    appellant's mother also has episodes of  emotional  turbulence.   These
    matters are very relevant to the issue of dependency within the  aspect
    envisaged in the case of Kugathas.

43.  I have no doubt therefore that  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    family are such that their needs would not be met or  nearly  met  were
    the appellant to be removed.   As  I  have  indicated  I  do  consider,
    contrary to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, that  that  factor
    is a compelling one when set within the overall context of this case.

44.  Were the law to be as it was therefore I would have had  no  hesitation
    in concluding that that was such a compelling circumstance as to render
    removal disproportionate.  Clearly the more  serious  the  offence  the
    greater the public interest in that proportionality exercise.

45.  The issue for me, however, is whether or not the coming into  force  of
    the new legislation renders of no effect the compelling circumstance in
    my consideration of Article 8 within the ambit of Section 117C.

46.  Mr Richards is adamant that if the exceptions are not met that  is  the
    end of the matter so far as Article 8 is concerned  and  that  whatever
    may  be  other  considerations  they  do  not  serve  to   defeat   the
    deportation.  Mr Eaton however invites me to find  that  the  2014  Act
    merely gives statutory recognition to the Rules as existed and does not
    substantively change the approach to be taken to Article  8.   He  thus
    invites me to allow the appeal were I minded  to  find  compelling  and
    compassionate circumstances.

47.  The 2014 Act sets out at 117B the public interest  considerations  that
    are applicable to all cases that are considered under Article 8.

48.  I take those  into  account.   In  this  case  it  is  clear  that  the
    appellant and indeed his family are  lawfully  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom having indefinite leave to remain.  There is no suggestion that
    the appellant is any financial burden upon the  establishment.   Indeed
    it may be argued that his dedication towards his family both  in  terms
    of a financial contribution to the household income and to the  looking
    after of his father and mother are such that relieves the state of what
    otherwise might be an expensive financial burden.

49.  In terms of the Rules themselves it would seem that  the  appellant  is
    somewhat falling within 398(b) or (c) in which case it would only be in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation would
    be outweighed by other factors.  Paragraph 399 and 399A do  not  apply.
    Given the structure of the code  and  the  amount  of  public  interest
    enshrined therein it is difficult, without  more,  to  understand  what
    additional requirements are sought to be imposed by the 2014 Act.

50.  It is to be noted that part 5A is said only to apply when the  Tribunal
    considers Article 8(2) of the ECHR directly.  It is not entirely  clear
    what is meant by that statement.

51.  I have regard in any event to the Act as required to  do  so  and  note
    particularly Section  117A(2).   In  considering  the  public  interest
    question, the court or Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

    (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section 117B, and


    (b)  in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  the
         considerations listed in Section 117C.

52.  Paragraph 117A(3) provides:

         "In Section (2), 'the public interest question' means the  question
         of whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for
         private and family life is justified under Article (2)."

53.  As I have indicated I have had regard to Sections  117B  and  117C.   I
    note particularly in Section 117C(iii) that if the appellant  does  not
    fall within either  of  the  exceptions  in  that  Section  the  public
    interest requires is removal.  The  wording  of  that  particular  sub-
    Section  sits  uncomfortably  as  I  so  determine  with  the   overall
    responsibility of the Tribunal as set out in 117A(ii).  Thus the  focus
    of attention would seem to be "the public interest question".  Although
    I recognise that it would be relatively  rare  for  considerations  not
    contemplated within 117B and 117C to  found  the  basis  to  uphold  an
    Article 8 decision, it does seem to me that the circumstances  of  this
    particular case are so exceptional such a consideration should  prevail
    in this particular case.

54.  It is in the interest of three members of the  appellant's  family  and
    their needs should be considered in the wider context, irrespective  of
    the needs of the appellant.

55.  In all the circumstances therefore the appellant's  appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    shall be re-made  such  that  the  appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of
    deportation is allowed and that in respect of Article 8  ECHR  is  also
    allowed.







Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

