
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02217/2013
                                                               DA/02218/2013
                                                               DA/02219/2013
                                                               DA/02220/2013
                                                               DA/02221/2013
                                                               DA/02222/2013
                                                               DA/02223/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2015                            |On 6 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     SKG
                                     TT
                                     RK
                                     LSK
                                     SSK
                                     ESK
                                     JSK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a re-making of the appellants' appeals against  deportation  on
    Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

 2. The re-making is limited to the error of law found by me in my decision
    promulgated on 14 August 2014. That decision is appended and  sets  out
    the background to this matter.

 3. In short, the appellants are citizens of Eritrea. They are all related,
    the first and  second  appellants  being  the  parents  of  five  minor
    children, the remaining appellants.

 4. The parents of the family maintain that  they  left  Eritrea  illegally
    and, as a result of  that  illegal  exit,  will  face  mistreatment  on
    return. That issue is the only one remaining at large after my error of
    law decision which decided in their favour that the First-tier Tribunal
     had not dealt adequately with that matter.

 5. The limited point before me was to make a finding on  whether  the  two
    main appellants left Eritrea illegally. It was common ground before  me
    that this finding would be determinative of the appellants  making  out
    their protection claim given the real risk of  serious  harm  from  the
    Eritrean authorities to  those  who  return  having  left  the  country
    illegally.

 6. I was most grateful to Mr  Howard  and  Mr  Mills  for  their  skeleton
    arguments on this matter and their customary thorough  preparation  and
    focussed submissions.

 7. The first and second appellants have always maintained that  they  left
    Eritrea illegally. They have been consistent on this matter  throughout
    their asylum claims  and  remain  so  before  me.  I  must  weigh  that
    consistency on this point against the evidence as a  whole  and  taking
    into account the guidance from case law that was before me.

 8. Of some relevance, is that the adult appellants claimed asylum  in  the
    UK on 28 July 2005. They clearly left Eritrea prior to that date. In an
    earlier appeal hearing before Judge Blandy their evidence  recorded  at
    paragraph 3.2 was that they left Eritrea for Sudan in early June 2004.

 9. It remains the case that the  two  adult  appellants  have  been  found
    unreliable as regards other aspects of their claims for protection.  It
    was not accepted that they had been mistreated  prior  to  leaving  the
    country, that they had made a genuine  conversion  to  the  Pentecostal
    faith, that their children  would  face  harsh  working  conditions  on
    return or that the female children faced a real risk of FGM.

10. Nevertheless, the adult appellants argue that their consistency on this
    point combined with the country evidence on the tight  restrictions  on
    lawful exit from Eritrea are sufficient factors to show  to  the  lower
    standard that they could only but have left illegally.

11. Certainly, the current country guidance  case  on  Eritrea  shows  that
    legal exit from Eritrea is very restricted. The head note of  the  case
    of MO (illegal exit-risk on return) Eritrea  [2011]  UKUT  00190  (IAC)
    states:

        "(i)      The figures relating to UK entry  clearance  applications
             since 2006 - particularly since September 2008 -  show  a  very
             significant change from those considered by the Tribunal in  MA
             (Draft evaders-illegal departures-risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT
             00059 and are among a number of indications that it has  become
             more  difficult  for  Eritreans  to  obtain  lawful  exit  from
             Eritrea.


        (ii) The Eritrean authorities continue to envisage lawful  exit  as
             being possible for those who are above national service age  or
             children of 7 or younger.  Otherwise,  however,  the  potential
             categories of lawful exit are limited  to  two  narrowly  drawn
             medical categories and those  who  are  either  highly  trusted
             government officials or their families or who  are  members  of
             ministerial staff  recommended  by  the  department  to  attend
             studies abroad.


        (iii)     The general position concerning illegal exit  remains  as
             expressed in MA, namely that illegal exit by  a  person  of  or
             approaching draft age and not medically unfit cannot be assumed
             if they had been found wholly incredible. However,  if  such  a
             person  is  found  to   have   left   Eritrea   on   or   after
             August/September 2008, it may be, that inferences can be  drawn
             from their health history or level of education or their skills
             profile as to whether legal exit on their  part  was  feasible,
             provided that such inferences can be drawn in the light of  the
             adverse credibility findings.


        (iv) The general position adopted  in  MA,  that  a  person  of  or
             approaching draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and still not  above
             the upper age limits for military service, being under  54  for
             men and under 47 for women)  and not  medically  unfit  who  is
             accepted as having left Eritrea illegally is reasonably  likely
             to  be  regarded  with  serious   hostility   on   return,   is
             reconfirmed, subject to limited exceptions in  respect  of  (1)
             persons whom the regime's  military  and  political  leadership
             perceives as having given  them  valuable  service  (either  in
             Eritrea or abroad); (2) persons who are trusted family  members
             of, or are  themselves  part  of,   the  regime's  military  or
             political leadership. A further possible exception, requiring a
             more case-specific analysis, is (3) persons (and their children
             born afterwards) who fled (what later became the territory  of)
             Eritrea during the war of independence.


          v) Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum  seekers
             as such are not  generally  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
             serious harm on return, on present evidence  the great majority
             of such persons are likely  to  be  perceived  as  having  left
             illegally and this fact, save for very limited exceptions, will
             mean that on return they face a real  risk  of  persecution  or
             serious harm."

21. It should be noted immediately  that  MO  distinguishes  the  level  of
    difficulty in leaving Eritrea from September 2006 onwards,  finding  it
    to be more restrictive after that time than the earlier time  at  which
    these adult appellants must have left Eritrea.

22. The case of MA (Draft evaders - illegal departures - risk)  Eritrea  CG
    [2007] UKAIT, referred to at (i) of MO, states in the head note:
        "1.  A person who is reasonably likely to have left Eritrea
             illegally will in general be at real risk on return if he or
             she is of draft age, even if the evidence shows that he or she
             has completed Active National Service, (consisting of 6 months
             in a training centre and 12 months military service). By
             leaving illegally while still subject to National Service,
             (which liability in general continues until the person ceases
             to be of draft age), that person is reasonably likely to be
             regarded by the authorities of Eritrea as a deserter and
             subjected to punishment which is persecutory and amounts to
             serious harm and ill-treatment.
        2.   Illegal exit continues to be a key factor in assessing risk on
             return. A person who fails to show that he or she left Eritrea
             illegally will not in general be at real risk, even if of draft
             age and whether or not the authorities are aware that he or she
             has unsuccessfully claimed asylum in the United Kingdom."

23. In GM (Eritrea) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCH  Civ  833,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered  how  the  country  evidence  and  ratio  of  MA  should  be
    approached when assessing illegal exit where  there  is  little  or  no
    reliable evidence other than the country evidence as to illegal exit.

24. The Court of Appeal in GM (Eritrea) does not set down that the  country
    evidence on illegal exit should lead a  Tribunal  to  conclude  to  the
    lower  standard  that  illegal  exit  must  have  occurred.  The  Court
    concludes that it may remain difficult for an appellant to show illegal
    exit if the remainder of their claim is not credible and/or there is no
    reliable evidence as to how they exited. None of the appellants in that
    case was found to have exited illegally even where  one  of  them,  MY,
    appeared to be clearly outwith the categories of persons who could have
    left legally as set out in MA.

25. So, against that case law guidance, I must weight  the  fact  that  the
    adult appellants before me are consistent as to  having  left  Eritrea.
    The country guidance indicates that it was difficult to leave  lawfully
    even in 2004 or 2005 but not as difficult as it was from September 2006
    onwards. Against  that  the  appellants  are  not,  generally,  at  all
    credible as witnesses.

26. In addition, there is the issue of the first appellant being  found  by
    Judge Blandy to have completed his military service; see  6.2  of  that
    determination.

27. There  is  the  further  evidence,  noted  at  [33]  and  [34]  of  the
    respondent's reasons letter dated 14 October 2013, the first  appellant
    also had evidence of a war injury in 1999 and had  associated  symptoms
    and conditions.  The categories of those who might  obtain  legal  exit
    even after September 2006, according to the third paragraph of the head
    note of MA, included those who were medically unfit.

28. My conclusion is that the evidence before me indicates that  the  adult
    appellants here have not shown even to the  lower  standard  that  they
    left Eritrea illegally, notwithstanding  the  county  evidence  on  the
    difficulty of illegal exit and their consistent evidence on this point.
    Their general lack of credibility, their having left prior to September
    2006 and the first appellant  having  completed  military  service  and
    there being evidence of medical unfitness are sufficient  to  undermine
    their claim as to illegal exit.

29. Where that is so, they have not shown on any basis that they  or  their
    children are in need of international protection. They  have  not  made
    out their asylum and Article 3 ECHR claims.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the appellants'  asylum  and
    Article 3 ECHR claims discloses an error on  a  point  of  law  to  the
    extent set out above and is set aside accordingly to be re-made.

17. The appeals against deportation are refused.


Signed:  [pic]         Date: 5 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Anonymity

I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellants as a result of the content of the  protection  claim
and in the best interests of the minor appellants.


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02217/2013
                                                               DA/02218/2013
                                                               DA/02219/2013
                                                               DA/02220/2013
                                                               DA/02221/2013
                                                               DA/02222/2013
                                                               DA/02223/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 July 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     SKG
                                     TT
                                     RK
                                     LSK
                                     SSK
                                     ESK
                                     JSK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal against a decision promulgated on 17  April  2014  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes and Dr J O de Barros which refused the
    appeals  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  brought  against  the
    respondent's automatic deportation orders dated 25 October 2013.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Eritrea. They are all related, the first
    and second appellants being the parents of  five  minor  children,  the
    remaining appellants.

Background

 3. The background to this matter is that the first two appellants claim to
    have arrived in the UK illegally on 28 July 2005. They claimed  asylum.
    The claim was refused on 9 September 2005. The appeal  against  refusal
    was dismissed in a decision of Immigration Judge Blandy promulgated  on
    14 November 2005. Appeal rights became exhausted on 8 December 2005.

 4. On 18 September 2007 the first appellant was convicted of possessing  a
    false identity document and on 25 February 2008  was  sentenced  to  12
    months' imprisonment.

 5. On 9 May 2008 the respondent served notices of a decision to deport  to
    the first four appellants. The appeal against deportation was dismissed
    in a decision of Immigration Judge Osborne and Mr J H Eames promulgated
    on 2 October 2008. Deportation orders were  issued  against  the  first
    four appellants on 24 December 2008 and served on 29 December 2008.

 6. Various further representations to the respondent followed  leading  to
    correspondence over a number of years between the  appellants  and  the
    respondent, those matters continuing  until  21  March  2013  when  the
    respondent made a decision refusing to revoke the  deportation  orders.
    Appeal proceedings started but on 7 October 2013 the respondent revoked
    the deportation orders made against the first four appellants.

 7. The respondent then made automatic deportation orders  against  all  of
    the appellants on 25 October 2013, having explained in   letters  dated
    14 October 2013 why, in her view, the family had not  shown  that  they
    had protection or Article 8 claims of any merit.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. Before the First-tier Tribunal  there was agreement that the appellants
    could only  succeed  in  their  appeal  against  deportation  unless  a
    protection or Article 8 claim was made out.

 9. At [21] the  First-tier  Tribunal  adopted  the  findings  of  the  two
    previous appeal determinations that no protection claim had  been  made
    out in so far  as  those  findings  were  on  similar  facts  to  those
    currently being put forward.

10. At [22] to [27] the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  conversion  of
    the family to Pentecostal Christianity, a new head of  claim,  was  not
    genuine.

11. At [28] to [32] the First-tier Tribunal  found that  there  was  not  a
    real risk of the minor female appellants undergoing FGM  on  return  to
    Eritrea. This was also a claim that had not been made previously.

12. The First-tier Tribunal concluded at [33] that no protection claims had
    been made out.

13. At [34] to [45], the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  evidence  did
    not show that the deportation decisions breached Article 8 of the ECHR.



The Grounds of Appeal

14. There were five main grounds of  appeal  which  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

          i. The panel did  not  make  a  finding  on  whether  the  second
             appellant  and  the  children   were   genuine   converts   to
             Pentecostal Christianity

         ii. The best interests of the children were incorrectly assessed

        iii. The assessment of the risk of female  genital  mutilation  for
             the female children was in error

         iv. The panel was incorrect in finding the  private  life  of  the
             family not "particularly strong"

          v. The risk on return for those who exit  Eritrea  illegally  was
             not addressed

Error of Law

15. I did not find any merit in the first four grounds.

16. The First-tier Tribunal set out from [22] to [27] its reasons as to why
     it concluded that the claimed conversion to  Pentecostal  Christianity
    was not genuine.  The panel was clearly entitled  to  place  weight  at
    [23] on the timing of the conversion. The positive views of members  of
    the church attended by the family were taken into account in  terms  at
    [24]. The appellant's responses in interview  to  questions  about  his
    religion were considered at [25] to [26]. The finding at [25] and  [26]
    that adverse  weight  could  be  placed  on  the  appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge, in particular his inability to name the five  gifts  of  the
    Holy Spirit in  an  interview  conducted  4  years  after  his  claimed
    conversion was correct on the basis of the evidence that was before the
    First-tier Tribunal. The new material put before me on the question  of
    the five gifts of the Holy Spirit cannot show an error of  law  in  the
    reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal.

17. The First-tier Tribunal  stated in terms at [27] that it did not accept
    that  either  the  appellant  or  his  wife  had  undergone  a  genuine
    conversion. In that light of that  sustainable  finding,   it  did  not
    appear to me that the  panel  could  be  said  to  have  erred  in  not
    addressing directly whether the minor children had undergone a  genuine
    conversion. If the conversion of the parents is not genuine and they do
    not face a risk on return  as  they  will  not  wish  to  practice  the
    Pentecostal faith, nothing in the evidence indicated that the  children
    had any independent views on these matters such  that  they  might  act
    differently on return.

18. The First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  its  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the children. The First-tier Tribunal  cannot be  said  to
    have failed to weigh the children's best interests  a  primary  factor,
    setting out the correct approach at [13] and stating in terms  at  [41]
    that the position of the children was the strongest part of the Article
    8 claim and at [44] that the best interests were weighed as  a  primary
    factor. At [35] it considered the evidence of the children's length  of
    residence and education in the UK and accepted at [42]  and  [43]  that
    return to  Eritrea  would  interfere  with  the  children's  lives  and
    education and that the standard of services available in Eritrea  would
    be lower than that in the UK. It was not obliged  to  find  that  these
    matters, even where one child had been in the  UK  for  over  7  years,
    showed the decision to deport the children with  their  parents  was  a
    disproportionate breach of their private lives.

19. The grounds refer to the country evidence on child labor in Eritrea but
    there was nothing to indicate that these children would  be  forced  to
    work when both of their parents are able to do so and nothing suggested
    that the oldest child still in Eritrea  was  subject  to  significantly
    poor working conditions, if working at all. The panel correctly pointed
    out at [35] that that much of the children's residence had been  during
    the years when they remained closely involved in the family rather than
    forming independent social lives. The family speaking Tigrynyan and the
    oldest child of the family is  still  being  in  Eritrea  were  further
    factors which allowed the panel to conclude that return of the children
    to Eritrea with the parents was not disproportionate.

20. The panel's consideration of the risk of FGM to the female children  is
    at [28] to [32] and the reasoning there is entirely sound and  in  line
    with the country evidence on the improved situation  regarding  FGM  in
    Eritrea. No error arises there.

21. As above, at the heart of this Article 8 claim was the situation of the
    children and the oldest  child  in  particular.  Where  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision on the situation of the children was not in  error,
    as discussed above, and the panel took into account the material  facts
    concerning the parents' private lives no error arises in its assessment
    of the family's private life.

22. I did find that the final ground of  appeal  had  merit,  however.  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not consider whether the appellant and his wife
    exited Eritrea illegally.  The  respondent's  refusal  letter  at  [33]
    maintains that previous determinations found that  there  had  been  no
    illegal exit. Neither the determination of Judge Blandy promulgated  on
    14 November 2005 nor the determination of Immigration Judge Osborne and
    Mr J H Eames promulgated on 2 October  2008  address  the  question  of
    illegal exit in terms, however.

23. The current country guidance case of MO (illegal exit-risk  on  return)
    Eritrea [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC) indicates that an individual would face
    serious mistreatment on the  basis  of  imputed  political  opinion  on
    return as someone of draft age who  had  left  Eritrea  illegally.  The
    fourth paragraph of the head note to MO states:

      "(iv)  The general position  adopted  in  MA,  that  a  person  of  or
      approaching draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and  still  not  above  the
      upper age limits for military service, being  under  54  for  men  and
      under 47 for women) and not medically unfit who is accepted as  having
      left Eritrea illegally  is  reasonably  likely  to  be  regarded  with
      serious hostility on return, is reconfirmed ... ".

24. The fifth paragraph of the head note of MO  states,  referring  to  the
    country guidance case of MA (Draft evaders - illegal departures - risk)
    Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT:

      "(v) Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum seekers as
      such are not generally at real risk of persecution or serious harm  on
      return, on present evidence the great majority  of  such  persons  are
      likely to be perceived as having left illegally and  this  fact,  save
      the very limited exceptions, will mean that on return they face a real
      risk of persecution or serious harm."

25. I concluded that this was a material matter on which  no  decision  had
    been made by the First-tier Tribunal and that an error of law therefore
    arose. To this extent I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in order for it to be re-made.



Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the appellants'  asylum  and
    Article 3 ECHR claims discloses an error on  a  point  of  law  to  the
    extent set out above and is set aside accordingly to be re-made.

27. A further hearing will take place on Thursday 23 October 2014.

28. The parties are directed to file with the Tribunal and  serve  on  each
    other no later than 16 October 2014 a skeleton argument on the question
    of whether the evidence already provided shows that the  appellant  and
    his wife exited Eritrea illegally and the correct approach  in  law  to
    that evidence following the country guidance cases on illegal exit from
    Eritrea.


Signed:  [pic]         Date: 12 August 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Anonymity

I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellants as a result of the content of the  protection  claim
and in the best interests of the minor appellants.
