
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02364/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th June 2014                             |On 25th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR Gregory Dwayne Whilby
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr I Lourdes, Counsel, instructed by Edward
Marshall solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 4th September 1978.

2.   On 27th January 2002 he arrived in the United  Kingdom  and  was  given
    six months' leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor.   On  4th  July  2002  an
    application was submitted on his behalf for indefinite leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of a person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.  That application was refused because by
    then the appellant was over 18 years of  age.   An  appeal  was  lodged
    against that refusal but later withdrawn on 15th December 2004.

3.   On 2nd November 2004 the claimant applied for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a spouse of a British citizen.  That was  refused  on
    25th February  2005.   Subsequent  appeals  were  lodged  against  that
    decision with appeal rights being exhausted on 19th May 2006.

4.   Thereafter three further applications were made for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present and settled all of
    which were rejected.  On 27th February 2007, however, the claimant  was
    granted three years' discretionary leave outside the Immigration  Rules
    valid until 29th September 2011.  A further three years'  discretionary
    leave was granted until 12th December 2014.

5.   On 23rd May 2013 at the Harrow Crown Court the Claimant  was  convicted
    of possession  with  intent  to  supply  a  controlled  drug.   He  was
    sentenced to 51 weeks imprisonment.

6.   In the light of that conviction  he  was  served  with  notice  of  his
    liability to deportation on  31st  July  2013.   He  responded  raising
    Article 8 of the ECHR, contending that a decision to  deport  him  from
    the United Kingdom would be in breach of his human rights.

7.   On 13th November 2013 the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    set out detailed reasons why it had been decided to  proceed  with  his
    deportation.  His immigration history was set out,  together  with  the
    sentencing remarks of the Judge.  It was made abundantly clear in those
    remarks and set out in italics within  the  written  reasons  that  the
    Judge did not make a deportation order at the time of  sentence  so  as
    not to tie the hands of the authorities.

8.   It was made entirely clear in the reasons that it was  considered  that
    the claimant's deportation was conducive to the public good because, in
    the view of the Secretary of State, the offending  had  caused  serious
    harm.  It was said that the claimant  was  a  persistent  offender  who
    showed a particular disregard for the law of the United Kingdom  having
    amassed three convictions in his  background.   Paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules was cited and in particular 398(c) that:

         "The deportation of a person from the United Kingdom  is  conducive
         to the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,
         their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a  persistent
         offender who shows a particular disregard for the law."


    It was considered that that particular Section applied in the  case  of
    the appellant.

10.  Thereafter followed the notice of decision to make a deportation  order
    of the same date namely 13th November 2013.  It is  this decision which
    gives rise to the appeal.

11.  What was set out in that decision was as follows:-

         "The Secretary of State has considered the  court's  recommendation
         and has concluded that deportation would  be  appropriate  in  your
         case.  Having determined that you are liable to deportation  action
         by virtue  of  Section  3(6)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  the
         Secretary of State has decided to make such an  order  against  you
         under Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971."

12.  The appellant  appealed against that  decision.  The  matter  was  next
    considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig on what  seems  to  have
    been a prehearing review as scheduled.

13.  The Judge noted that no recommendation for deportation  had  been  made
    and hence the reliance upon Section 3(6) of the  Immigration  Act  1971
    would seem to be misplaced and indeed inaccurate.

14.  On 20th March 2014 he issued a notice pursuant to  Rule  15(3)  of  the
    Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  being  an
    indication that he intended to deal with the appeal without a  hearing.
    He said that representations were to be received  by  the  Tribunal  no
    later than 28th March 2014.

15.  In the event of no representations being made the Judge determined  the
    matter on the papers of 3rd April 2014.

16.  He found that the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    therefore that the appeal was allowed on a limited basis.

17.  The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  sought  to  appeal
    against that decision on the basis that no trace of the notice had been
    received and  therefore   the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  had  the
    opportunity to deal with the matter.

18.  Permission to appeal was granted, however, on the  basis  that  it  was
    questionable why the Judge proceeded to determine  the  appeal  on  the
    papers and in any event there seemed to be a lack of  reasoning  as  to
    why the decision was found not to be in accordance with the law.

19.  Mr Wilding represents the Secretary of  State.   He  accepts  that  the
    decision was made under the incorrect sub- Section of the Act.

20.  He invites my attention to Section 3(5) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    which provides that a person who is not a British citizen is liable  to
    deportation of the United Kingdom if the Secretary of State  deems  his
    deportation to be conducive to the public good.

21.  He submits that  it  was  abundantly  clear  from  the  reasons,  which
    accompanied the decision, that that was the thrust of the reasoning  by
    the Secretary of State.  It was a mistake in all the circumstances  for
    the decision to have failed to refer to  the  appropriate   sub-Section
    but it was clear from reading the reasons what was truly intended.

22.  He submits, however, that notwithstanding the  error  the  decision  is
    and remains a valid and lawful decision because of Section 86(4) of the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   That  provides  as
    follows:-

         "For the purposes of subsection (3) a decision that a person should
         be removed from the United Kingdom under a provision shall  not  be
         regarded as unlawful  if  it  could  have  been  lawfully  made  by
         reference to removal under another provision."

23.  Section 86(3) provides:

         "The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks that:


         (a)  a decision against which the appeal is brought or  is  treated
             as being brought was not in accordance with the law (including
             immigration rules), or


         (b)  a discretion exercised in making a decision against which  the
             appeal is brought or is treated as being brought  should  have
             been exercised differently."

24.  Thus he submits that providing the decision could  have  been  made  by
    virtue of Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act , the fact  that  it  was
    misstated  as  3(6)  although  unfortunate  and  inaccurate  does   not
    invalidate the decision itself.

25.  He reinforces the argument by reference to  the  case  of  VM  (Chicago
    Convention s 86(4)) Iran [2010] UKUT 303 (IAC).   The headnote reads:

         "Removal stated in a  reasons  for  refusal  letter  as  under  the
         provisions of the Chicago Convention  but  which  would  be  lawful
         under paras 8-10 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act cannot  be  regarded
         as unlawful by reference either to that Convention or the  relevant
         IDIs, because of the mandatory provisions of s.86(4)  of  the  2002
         Act."

26.  The argument advanced was that a removal for the stated reason  of  the
    Chicago Convention was unlawful.  It was held the direction for removal
    could have been made in the same terms under the 1971 Act.   The  court
    concluded that the Immigration Judge in that case erred in law  failing
    to deal with Section 86(4).

27.   Mr Lourdes, who represents the claimant, invited me to find  that  the
    decision of Judge Pullig was entirely correct.  The decision  had  been
    made on the wrong basis and it was entirely proper  for  the  Judge  to
    expect the decision to be remade in its correct form.

28.  It seems to me that were the decision to stand in its own  right,  then
    that would be an argument with merit, but in the light of Section 86(4)
    it is clear that the Judge should also have looked at the  reasons  for
    that decision having been made.  It would have been apparent that there
    was another obvious ground for removal that could  have  been  applied.
    The Judge gives no reason at all why he finds that the decision is  not
    in accordance with the law other than that the Sentencing Judge did not
    make the recommendation.  A complaint was also made that the quality of
    the papers as presented in the appeal were such  that  the  Judge  felt
    driven to reject them.

29.  I find , contrary to the findings of the First-tier Immigration  Judge,
    that Section 86(4) should operate in this case to render  the  decision
    not unlawful as an alternative basis was apparent  on  the  papers.   I
    find that in failing to take that matter into  account  the  Judge  has
    fallen into a material error of law. I therefore set aside the decision
    of Judge Pullig.  That in effect leaves the appeal  to  be  listed  and
    heard before the First-tier Tribunal.   Having  considered  the  Senior
    President's practice direction and having noted the number of potential
    witnesses, I consider that the proper forum for the rehearing  ins  the
    First tier Tribunal.

30.  Mr Wilding indicated and I requested that  he  would  ensure  that  the
    decision notice although  valid  would  be  corrected  to  reflect  the
    correct Section and the sub-Section of the  1971  Act.   That  did  not
    prevent the progress of the appeal.

31.  Mr Lourdes indicated that he was to some extent taken by surprise  with
    the alternative ground.  I can find little  reason  for  his  doing  so
    given the detailed way in which the matter is dealt with in the reasons
    for decision.  There were many people attending the hearing  before  me
    and I anticipate that there will be a significant number  of  witnesses
    to give evidence for on behalf of the appellant.

32.  No doubt the First-tier Tribunal may consider  that  prehearing  review
    might be sensible in order to determine the number of witnesses at  the
    time to be allocated.  That is a matter however for the  administration
    of the First-tier Tribunal and not for me.

33.  While subject to  the  proper  amendment  of  the  decision  I  see  no
    impediment why the claimant's appeal should not be properly  considered
    in the usual course of events.  Although he is on bail, it is a  matter
    which I deem to be in the interests of justice to be determined without
    undue delay, so that he and his family should know the position  as  to
    his future and status in the  United  Kingdom.   Although  it  was  not
    possible for various administrative reasons to obtain a date  following
    the hearing it was my hope that the matter can be expedited as  far  as
    is possible in the scenario of listing.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
