
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02542/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th July 2016                    |On 28th September 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     af
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Naik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, appeals  with  permission  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel, who, in a  determination
    promulgated on 2nd October 2014 dismissed his appeal.  On 4th  December
    2013 the Respondent had  made  a  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant.
    Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Goldstein  on  10th  February
    2015.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269 as amended)) I make an anonymity order.   Unless  the
    Upper  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   For
    the avoidance of doubt, this order applies to the Appellant and to  the
    Respondent.  A failure to comply with the order may lead to contempt of
    court proceedings.

 3. Following permission being granted by the Upper  Tribunal,  the  appeal
    came before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error on a point of  law.
    I had the opportunity of hearing submissions from the  parties  at  the
    hearing and after discussion, it was conceded by Mr Bates on behalf  of
    the Respondent that the decision did indeed involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and therefore I gave short reasons as to why I agreed that
    was the case and had why the decision should be set aside.

 4. I therefore now set out my reasons for reaching that decision which are
    summarised below.

 5. The background to the proceedings are set out in the decision letter of
    4th  December  2013  and  summarised  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraphs [12] to [21].  The Appellant entered the UK on 9th  December
    1998 with leave to enter for six months as a  visitor  and  applied  in
    1999 for leave to remain as a student.  This was later followed  by  an
    application made on the basis of his marriage to a British citizen.  It
    is plain from reading the First-tier Tribunal's determination  that  it
    was accepted at that hearing by the Respondent that whilst  a  decision
    had been made in 2005, it was not disposed of until 2010 and  that  the
    Appellant was not granted  leave  as  the  Respondent  was  considering
    deportation action against him as a result of his criminal offending.

 6. As the First-tier Tribunal panel observed at [13] the appeal  that  was
    before them was the third occasion  that  the  Appellant  had  appealed
    against deportation proceedings.  The  first  decision  to  deport  the
    Appellant was taken in 2005 but was not resolved  until  2010  after  a
    decision of the Court of  Appeal  remitted  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for a rehearing.  The second decision was taken  in  2011  and
    the appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds.  The  present  proceedings
    were as a result of a further conviction which  led  to  the  Appellant
    receiving a sentence of 43 months' imprisonment  on  12th  March  2012.
    The Appellant had acquired convictions  for  seventeen  offences  going
    back to June 2000 and they were summarised by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel at paragraphs [16]-[19].

 7. The basis of the appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  on  two
    distinct grounds, namely Article 3 and Article 8.  In  respect  of  the
    application on Article 3 grounds, it  was  common  ground  between  the
    parties that the panel's starting point of  their  assessment  was  the
    previous determination from 2011  whereby  the  Appellant's  Article  3
    claim was dismissed but his Article 8 claim  was  allowed.   The  panel
    summarised the evidence of the earlier Tribunal at paragraphs [23]-[31]
    of the determination and for the purposes of this decision  it  is  not
    necessary to set out or refer to those findings in detail.

 8.  In summary, the Tribunal in 2011 had accepted the Appellant's evidence
    as credible concerning his account of  having  given  evidence  against
    another individual which had led to him being the  subject  of  serious
    attacks and the subject of  threats  to  himself  and  members  of  his
    family.

 9. The risks from the individual concerned, were set out by the First-tier
    Tribunal at [25] and the panel referred to the oral evidence in support
    at  paragraphs  [26]  to  [35]  of  the  determination  and  also   the
    documentary evidence including evidence emanating from  the  police  at
    [31].

10. Thus the panel had before  them  evidence  of  past  serious  harm  and
    threats made to the Appellant in the UK and also  in  light  of  events
    relating to the return of the Appellant to Jamaica.

11. The panel also had further evidence relating to the  risk  of  harm  in
    Jamaica from this individual  including  a  letter  from  the  Jamaican
    Police  Force  and  also  expert  evidence  from  a   country   expert.
    Notwithstanding that, the panel considered that the Appellant would not
    be at risk  on  return  from  this  named  individual  or  any  of  his
    associates.

12. It was common ground that at the time of the hearing before  the  panel
    that the individual concerned had been deported to Jamaica and this was
    an important change when considering  the  issue  of  risk  on  return.
    According to the grounds settled by Counsel, the information as to this
    man's deportation had not been notified  to  the  Appellant  until  the
    morning of the hearing.  At the  time  of  the  hearing  in  2011  this
    individual was in custody and the Appellant was not at risk of  removal
    due to the success of  his  Article  8  claim.   Thus  the  panel  were
    required to consider the past evidence of accepted serious harm in  the
    light of the new evidence and importantly that the individual  who  was
    the focus of concern was now in Jamaica and the risk  of  harm  arising
    from that.

13.  In my judgment, the panel's findings on this issue which are  set  out
    at paragraphs  [33]-[46]  failed  to  assess  the  risk  on  return  in
    accordance with the  evidence.   It  was  incumbent  on  the  panel  to
    consider the individual concerned and his propensity to inflict  future
    harm when set against  the  accepted  factual  background.   There  was
    substantial evidence before the panel as to  the  past  harm  and  this
    individual's propensity.  Whilst the panel did  consider  the  evidence
    concerning the lack of threats made by this individual, in my  judgment
    that was in a  different  context  to  the  one  that  would  face  the
    Appellant on return to Jamaica where the individual concerned would  be
    present.  The findings also failed to take into  account  that  he  had
    been in prison for four of the five years which undermine that part  of
    their findings.

14. Furthermore, as Mr Bates accepts, there was no assessment  made  as  to
    risk to the Appellant in Jamaica itself by reference to the past events
    nor was  there  any  consideration  of  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
    protection or  whether  the  Appellant  could  internally  relocate  to
    another area in Jamaica.  There was  also  no  reference  made  to  the
    country guidance case of AB (Protection -  criminal  gangs  -  internal
    relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 00018.

15. When considering the issue of risk on return in the particular  context
    relating to this Appellant, it was necessary to consider the  objective
    evidence relating to whether the authorities were  able  to  provide  a
    level of protection to those who fear retribution or whether  he  would
    be admitted to a witness protection programme.  Those issues arise from
    the country guidance case but there was no  assessment  made  of  those
    issues.

16. The panel also had evidence from the police in Jamaica.   However,  for
    the reasons set out at paragraphs [44] and  [46],  the  panel  did  not
    place any weight on that evidence.  In my judgment the  panel  did  not
    assess the evidence in the light of the earlier findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal whereby R had been a  credible  witness.   Nor  had  they
    considered the police evidence in the context of the  chronology.   The
    written evidence confirmed that the individual concerned  had  returned
    to Jamaica and that this was well before his return had  been  accepted
    by the  Respondent.   Furthermore,  the  panel  failed  to  assess  the
    evidence in the light of  the  country  guidance  case  and  the  later
    evidence  of  the  expert.   As  Mr  Bates  conceded   there   was   no
    consideration of the issue of sufficiency of protection or whether  the
    Appellant could relocate (if he was at risk in his own  area  from  the
    individual concerned).

17. I have therefore reached the conclusion that the decision does  involve
    the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law  for  those  reasons  and
    therefore the decision should be set aside.

18. As to the re-making of the decision,  both  advocates  before  me  have
    submitted that in view of the error of  law  identified,  it  would  be
    necessary for further evidence to be  provided  by  the  parties  which
    would also include updating oral evidence.  It was therefore  submitted
    by both advocates that in those circumstances that a  remittal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal was the correct course to adopt.  As to the Article
    8 claim, both advocates were of the view that due  to  the  passage  of
    time since the hearing in 2014, that new evidence concerning Article  8
    would also be necessary.

19. Ms Naik also made reference to two particular issues which  would  need
    to be resolved.  Firstly, in relation to his  criminal  conviction  and
    the plea tendered which she submitted had not been  recorded  correctly
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  Secondly, she submitted that  there  would
    be further matters relating to the disclosure of information  from  the
    Respondent which would require consideration.  In view of  the  latter,
    it would be necessary for a case management hearing  to  be  undertaken
    before the hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

20. Consequently, I therefore agree with the advocates as  to  the  correct
    course to adopt in relation to this appeal namely that having found  an
    error of law and having set aside the decision, that  it  is  one  that
    should properly be re-made by way  of  a  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is  remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed  [pic]
                                Date: 27/9/2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



