

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/02296/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Promulgated on               |
|3 October 2014                                |19 November 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      AM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Grubb, instructed by Hoole & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Britton and MJ Griffiths JP  DL  sitting
    as a panel, made following a hearing on 7 March 2014,  and  promulgated
    on 21 March 2014, in which they allowed the appellant's appeal  against
    deportation on the basis that he established that  he  fell  within  an
    exception to the automatic deportation provisions set out at s.32(5) of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.   The  basis  of  the  decision  is  that  the
    appellant is essential to the care of the British children that he  has
    fathered with a British partner.

 2. The grounds of appeal assert  that  in  reaching  that  conclusion  the
    tribunal has failed to take into account the Immigration Rules and  the
    requirement  for  exceptional  circumstances  to  be  identified.   The
    grounds also take issue with the  conclusion  on  the  basis  that  the
    evidence before the tribunal did not sustain the conclusion because  it
    was stale.   The  grounds  refer  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant
    originating in 2012 i.e.  some two years prior to the hearing.

 3. The difficulty with the grounds is that, first of  all,  they  fail  to
    recognise that the relevant test was that set out  in  The  Immigration
    Rules Statement of Changes in HC 395. HC395  as  amended,  at  398B  as
    opposed to 398A. It is 398A which requires  exceptional  circumstances,
    and that rule applies following a period of imprisonment of  more  than
    four years.  This was a case where the appellant had been convicted and
    sentenced to a lesser term of imprisonment, so that the  appellant  was
    within 398B; the circumstances then fall to be assessed in the  context
    of 399A and 399D.  The tribunal were required, and did make findings in
    respect of available  care  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  British
    children, and their finding, that  there  was  a  lack  of  alternative
    available  care,  resulted   in   a   positive   outcome.    In   those
    circumstances, there is no requirement for "exceptional  circumstances"
    to be identified beyond those matters set out at para 399A,  and  these
    grounds are simply wrong in asserting that there is  an  error  in  the
    decision making framework.

 4. The remainder of the  grounds at para 4  amount  to  a  dispute  as  to
    facts; the assertion that there was no evidence later than 2012  before
    the First-tier Tribunal so as  to  be  able  to  properly  sustain  the
    findings made in respect of 399A is simply not born out when we  looked
    at the evidence before the tribunal.  In the appellant's  bundle  there
    was evidence from the children's school, as well as from  the  family's
    medical practitioner, and from probation. It all speaks to the  benefit
    that the appellant's presence in the United  Kingdom  provides  to  the
    children, and it is evidence of specific improvement in their  position
    since his relatively recent release from custody, i.e.  it  covers  the
    up to date position.

 5. The grounds which at 5 through to 12 refer to errors in  an  article  8
    balancing exercise.  Whilst the tribunal has set out the  matters  that
    had persuaded them that the best interests of the children require  the
    appellant's continued presence in the United Kingdom, and set out their
    reasons for  concluding  that  in  any  event  the  circumstances  were
    exceptional  so that an article 8 consideration would have brought  the
    balance down in his favour.  In light of the clear findings under  399A
    the point is however otiose and incapable of founding an error of  law.



 6. Mr Richards submitted before us that the panel had failed to appreciate
    that the appellant's deportation is conducive, in terms of  the  public
    interest with regard to s.32(4) of the 2007 Act.  In  that  regard,  we
    note the tribunal's considerations at para 36, 38 and 40, in which they
    plainly set out both the seriousness of the  appellant's  offending  in
    the context  of  his  last  conviction,  as  well  as  his  history  of
    offending, and we find it is plain that they  balance  the  significant
    weight they attached to the public interest with the  position  of  the
    children.  In doing so, the panel recognised that  the  respondent  had
    accepted that the British children could not be reasonably required  to
    leave the Untied Kingdom.  Under paragraph 40, the  tribunal  conclude,
    taking into the account of all the evidence, that the way the appellant
    looks after  the  children  and  the  genuine  remorse  he  has  shown,
    outweighs the public interest in his deportation.

 7. We conclude by saying that the tribunal plainly found the case to be an
    exceptional one.  The conclusion is sustainable on the evidence and  so
    not perverse.  We conclude that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    reveals no material error of law requiring it to be set aside, so  that
    the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  deportation
    stands.











                                         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 11 November 2014
