

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02169/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14th August 2014                           |On 15th Aug 2014             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                KARAMO BOJANG
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: In person.
For the Respondent: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer and Mr B
        D  Yates  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  'the  Panel')  who  in  a
        determination  promulgated  on  25   March   2014   dismissed   the
        Appellant's appeal against the order for his deportation  from  the
        United Kingdom.


     2. The Appellant was convicted  on  27  February  2013  following  his
        arrest at the Channel Tunnel in Folkestone for attempting to  leave
        the United Kingdom  on  a  false  document.  He  was  charged  with
        possession and control of an identity document,  with  intent,  and
        theft and was sentenced to 14 months  imprisonment.   On  19  April
        2013 the deportation order was made against him. On 29 May 2013 his
        previous representatives sent a letter  stating  he  could  not  be
        returned to Gambia as he is a gay man. The Appellant had previously
        signed a form under the  Facilitated  Return  Scheme  in  which  he
        stated that there was no reason why he should not be  deported  and
        that he wished to leave the United Kingdom  as  soon  as  possible.
        Following his representatives letter he withdrew that  request  and
        stated he now wished to claim asylum. He was  interviewed  and  his
        claim refused on 17 October 2013.


     3.  The  Appellant  opposes  the  deportation  order   claiming   that
        exceptions provided by UK Borders Act applied to him,  namely  that
        he was entitled to be recognised as a  refugee  and  for  leave  to
        remain under Articles 3 and 8 of ECHR.


     4. The Panel assessed the evidence which they had been  provided  with
        and set out their findings from paragraph 23 of the  determination.
        They correctly identify the relevant question as being whether  the
        appellant has established to the lower standard that he is  gay  in
        relation to which there was a subsidiary  question  of  whether  he
        will be at risk on return to Gambia if he is gay [23].


     5. The Panel did not find that the Appellant had established  that  he
        is a gay man. They note in paragraph 24 that such a claim  was  not
        made until very late in the proceedings, in  May  2013,  after  the
        deportation order had been signed. The fact  he  has  two  previous
        female partners with whom he has fathered children  was  noted  and
        that, although he claimed in his oral evidence to be divorced  from
        his wife, this was not supported by any other  evidence.  The  fact
        the  Appellant  had  signed  the  Facilitated  Return  Scheme  form
        claiming there was no reason he could not return and did not  raise
        any issue of risk as a result of sexual identity at  that  time  is
        also noted in that paragraph.


     6. The Panel find the Appellant to lack credibility. They  state  they
        were not impressed by his evidence and did not  find  credible  the
        claim to be in relation carrying out a double life,  being  married
        and having a gay relationship, which they specifically found was  a
        claim raised at a late stage to seek to create an asylum and  human
        rights claim.


     7. The finding the Appellant lacks credibility is important for it was
        found that the claim he is divorced from his wife and that he had a
        gay relationship with an individual named Michael was not supported
        by any evidence other than the Appellants own claims.   As  he  was
        found not credible the little weight the  Panel  attached  to  that
        evidence was a matter for them and does not disclose arguable legal
        error.


     8. The Appellant stated during the course of the  hearing  before  the
        Upper Tribunal that he has now contacted Michael.  He accepts there
        was no evidence from this source before the Panel. It appears  that
        on 14th March 2014 his  representatives  wrote  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal seeking an adjournment for a number  of  reasons,  one  of
        which was to obtain additional evidence, but this was  refused  for
        reasons that do not disclose any procedural irregularity sufficient
        to amount to an error of law. The application to adjourn to  obtain
        further evidence was not renewed at the hearing. If material is now
        available that does not prove arguable legal error based  upon  the
        information the Panel were asked to consider, but may  support  the
        Appellant making a fresh claim so such material can  be  considered
        by the Secretary of State.


     9. The Appellant also accepted that he failed to provide any  evidence
        to the Panel to support his claim that as a gay man he will  be  at
        risk if returned to Gambia. In relation to Gambia,  in  R  (on  the
        application of Darboe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
        [2010] EWHC 880 (Admin) the Respondent had included Gambia  in  the
        list of designated "safe" states under s 94(4) of the 2002 Act.  Mr
        Justice Beatson in reviewing the decision to designate Gambia as  a
        "safe" state, said that the evidence submitted, indicated that  the
        situation in  Gambia  was  troubling  and  needed  to  be  reviewed
        regularly. That evidence, however, indicated that  there  had  been
        improvements in Gambia since the coup in 2006 and was not  such  as
        to put the designation into question. Accordingly, the  application
        in relation to the safe state issue had to be dismissed  (paras  16
        and 44).


    10. No legal error material to the  finding  the  Appellant  failed  to
        substantiate his claim to be a gay man has been established.   This
        is not a finding based upon sexual conduct but an assessment of the
        evidence in the round, of  which  previous  relationships  are  one
        element.


    11. In relation to the Article 8 element, it is accepted that the Panel
        erred in failing to consider this  ground  of  appeal  at  all.  In
        discussing with the Appellant the nature of the Article 8 rights he
        seeks to rely upon it transpired that these are limited to the fact
        he has a cousin in the United Kingdom and that he has been in  this
        country for thirteen years and so has established a  private  life.
        The Appellant confirmed he has a brother in Gambia  and  that,  bar
        his  claim  relating  to  risk  arising  from  his  alleged  sexual
        identity, there was no reason why he could not return  to  live  in
        Gambia. The fact the Appellant may have been in the United  Kingdom
        for thirteen years does not mean he is able to  succeed  for  under
        Paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules the minimum period is 20
        years within the United Kingdom unless an individual has lost  ties
        with his home state, which is not the  case  in  this  appeal.  The
        Appellant was not able to succeed under the Immigration  Rules  and
        has not established unjustifiably harsh consequences as a result of
        a refusal of his Article 8 appeal sufficient to warrant  Article  8
        being considered outside the Rules.  Therefore, although the  Panel
        failed to deal with this element, such error is not material as the
        decision under challenge is to their decision to dismiss the appeal
        which is the correct decision  in  relation  to  the  human  rights
        element of the claim too.


    12. Having considered the submissions made, the available evidence, and
        the sustainable adverse credibility finding, I find  the  Appellant
        has not satisfied this tribunal that there is  any  arguable  legal
        error material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  proved,  and
        accordingly the determination must stand.


Decision

    13. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14th August 2014












