
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02434/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 10 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    TUMM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Simmonds of Duncan Lewis & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision to allow the appellant's appeal under  Art  8,
    for convenience I will refer to the parties as they appeared before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on 13 October 1990.
     The appellant came to the United Kingdom in December 2001 when he  was
    11 years of age.  His mother had previously come to the UK in 2000.  He
    has remained in the UK since his arrival and  completed  his  secondary
    education here.  At the date  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant was 23 years of age.

 4. Following his arrival in the UK, the appellant's mother  unsuccessfully
    applied for further leave to remain as a student and  also  on  medical
    grounds with the appellant as her  dependant.   Following  that,  on  6
    January 2006  the  appellant's  mother  applied  for  asylum  with  the
    appellant as her dependant.  That application was refused  on  7  March
    2006 and her subsequent appeal was dismissed followed by a  refusal  to
    grant her permission to appeal on 30 January 2009.

 5. On 3 July 2007, the appellant was convicted at the Cardiff Crown  Court
    for the offence of robbery and on 3 August  2007  was  sentenced  to  a
    detention and training order (DTO) of eighteen months.   The  Secretary
    of State sought to deport the appellant but his appeal was allowed on 4
    January 2008.

 6. On 15 February 2010, the appellant was again convicted at  the  Cardiff
    Crown Court on this occasion of four  offences  of  supplying  class  A
    controlled drugs.  On 21 April 2010, he was  sentenced  to  36  months'
    detention in a young  offenders'  institution  on  each  count  to  run
    concurrently.

 7. On 5 July  2011,  the  appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation.  The appellant raised asylum issues claiming  to
    be dependent upon his mother's asylum claim.

 8. On 18 November 2013, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    asylum claim and for humanitarian protection  certifying  those  claims
    under s.72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the
    "NIA Act 2002") and para 339D of the Immigration Rules   (Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 as  amended).   The  Secretary  of
    State also concluded that the appellant could  not  succeed  under  the
    applicable Immigration Rules for deportation cases, namely  paras  398,
    399 and 399A.  The Secretary  of  State  concluded  that,  despite  the
    appellant's lengthy residence in the  UK,  his  deportation  would  not
    breach Art 8.

The Appeal

 9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 25 March  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  N  J
    Osborne and Ms V S Street JP) allowed the appellant's appeal under  Art
    8 of the ECHR. The claim succeeded essentially  on  the  basis  of  the
    impact the appellant's deportation would have on the relationship  with
    his girlfriend "SH".

10. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier
    Tribunal on 24 June 2014 but on 1 August 2014 the Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ
    Kebede) granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

12. Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State,  relied  upon  the
    grounds of appeal.  Those grounds are somewhat diffuse.  They challenge
    the First-tier  Tribunal's  favourable  finding  that  the  appellant's
    deportation had not been shown to be proportionate.   In  essence  they
    argue that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons  why
    the impact upon the appellant and his relationship with his  girlfriend
    (SH) if he were deported amounted to "exceptional circumstances"  under
    para 398 of the Rules so as to outweigh the public interest.   Further,
    it is said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate
    consideration  to  the  public  interest  given  the  severity  of  the
    appellant's offending.  The First-tier Tribunal did not properly  carry
    out the proportionality assessment and identify why there  would  be  a
    "unjustifiably harsh" consequences if the appellant were deported.

13. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards refined the Secretary  of  State's
    position.  First, he pointed out that it had been accepted  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the appellant could not succeed under para 399
    or para 399A of the Rules.  Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal had  then
    recognised that it was necessary to establish whether  there  were  any
    "exceptional circumstances" to outweigh the public interest.   However,
    despite setting out and dealing with the relevant criteria under Maslov
    v Austria [2009] INLR 47, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to identify  any  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  its
    determination.  As a consequence, the First-tier  Tribunal  had  fallen
    short of what was required of it given that the appellant  was  relying
    upon "exceptional circumstances".  That was a material error of law.

14. Mr Simmonds, who represented the appellant, submitted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had correctly directed itself at para  35  in  accordance
    with the Court of Appeal's decision in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 acknowledging that there must be "very compelling reasons"  to
    outweigh the public interest.  Secondly, Mr Simmonds submitted that the
    "exceptional  circumstances"  test  was  that   contemplated   by   the
    Strasbourg jurisprudence which the First-tier Tribunal had  applied  at
    para 52 on the basis of the  Maslov  criteria.   Thirdly,  Mr  Simmonds
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had fully taken into account the
    public interest, for example at para 50 it had noted the importance  of
    the expression of society's revulsion at  particularly  serious  crimes
    and  deterring  foreign  criminals  from  committing  future  offences.
    Fourthly, Mr  Simmonds  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    considered in great detail the appellant's circumstances including that
    he had come to the UK when he was 11; he had been here for twelve years
    which was more than half his life; he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship since December 2011 with  his  girlfriend  and  that  they
    intended  to  marry.   There  was  also  positive  evidence  about  the
    appellant's voluntary work.  Mr Simmonds submitted that taken together,
    the First-tier Tribunal had  considered  these  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances" to outweigh the public interest.

Discussion

15. The First-tier Tribunal heard the appellant's appeal on 14 March  2014.
    The appeal was, therefore, governed by the Immigration Rules  in  force
    prior to 28 July 2014.  Further, Part 5A of the NIA Act  2002  did  not
    apply as that also did not come into effect until 28 July 2014.

16. The relevant Immigration Rule is para 398 which, at that time, provided
    as follows:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the UK's obligation under Art 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and
         ...

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than four years but at least twelve months; ...

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors".

17. It was accepted before the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant could
    not succeed under either para 399 or para 399A.   The  basis  for  that
    concession is not recorded in the First-tier Tribunal's  determination.
    Paragraph 399(a) deals with the situation where the  individual  has  a
    child in the UK.  That is not the case for this  appellant.   Paragraph
    399(b) deals with the situation where the individual has a "genuine and
    subsisting relationship with a partner" who is a British  citizen.   It
    applies where the individual has  been  in  the  UK  with  valid  leave
    continuously for at least fifteen  years  and  there  are  "insuperable
    obstacles" to family life with the partner continuing outside  the  UK.
    Even if the basis of the concession  is  not  recorded,  the  appellant
    obviously could not satisfy the "fifteen years" residency  in  the  UK.
    He had only been resident for twelve years.

18. Likewise, para 399A (the 'private life'  provision)  applies  where  an
    individual has lived in the UK for twenty continuous years or is  under
    25 years of age and  has  spent  at  least  half  of  his  life  living
    continuously in the UK and has "no ties (including social, cultural  or
    family)" with his  own  country.   Clearly,  the  appellant  could  not
    satisfy the "twenty years" continuous residence.  Further, although  he
    was aged under 25, he had not spent at least half his  life  living  in
    the UK (discounting any periods of imprisonment).  Though it  is  again
    not recorded in the determination, that may well have  been  the  basis
    for the concession that he could not meet the requirements of para 399A
    because, given the judge's finding that he  had  been  in  the  UK  for
    twelve years, had not returned to Zimbabwe since 2001 and had no family
    living there, it would seem that he had "no ties" left with Zimbabwe in
    the sense that would allow him to reintegrate having left twelve  years
    ago as an 11 year old child.

19. Leaving those matters aside, where a person relies upon Art 8 to resist
    deportation, the Immigration Rules provide a "complete  code"  (see  MF
    (Nigeria)).  The assessment of  whether  the  individual's  deportation
    breaches Art 8  is  subsumed  within  the  "exceptional  circumstances"
    assessment under para 398.  The public interest  is  reflected  in  the
    well recognised  three  facets  of  -  the  risk  of  reoffending,  the
    expression of society's revulsion at the commission  of  serious  crime
    and  the  general  deterrent  effect  upon  other   foreign   nationals
    committing serious offences (see OH (Serbia) v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    694).  The public interest reflected in both the Secretary  of  State's
    policy set out in the Immigration Rules and also by Parliament  in  the
    automatic deportation provisions in the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  (which
    apply to foreign offenders who have been sentenced to twelve months  or
    more imprisonment) a "very strong claim indeed" is required to outweigh
    the public interest (see, e.g. SS (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    550).  The assessment must be made through the "lens" of the Rules (see
    SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636).   In  order  to  establish  a
    breach  of  Art  8,  an   individual   must   show   "very   compelling
    circumstances" in order to succeed (see MF  (Nigeria)  at  [43]).   The
    balancing  exercise,  however,  involves   the   application   of   the
    "proportionality test" required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence (see MF
    (Nigeria) at [44]).

20. I now turn to consider  Mr  Richards'  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.

21. First, it  is  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  itself
    correctly as to the approach to Art  8.   First,  the  panel  correctly
    applied the well-known five stage test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at para
    38 of the determination.

22. Secondly, in considering  proportionality  under  Art  8.2,  the  panel
    adopted  the  two-stage  approach  of  first  considering  whether  the
    appellant could succeed under the Immigration Rules (namely  paras  399
    or 399A)  and  then,  secondly  whether  there  were  any  "exceptional
    circumstances" to outweigh the public interest (see Singh and Khalid  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74).

23. Thirdly, the panel correctly identified, having set  out  the  relevant
    paragraphs in MF (Nigeria) that  the  public  interest  could  only  be
    outweighed by "very compelling reasons".

24.  Fourthly,  in  assessing  proportionality  it  is   clear   beyond   a
    peradventure that the panel had well in  mind  the  importance  of  the
    public interest.  At para 49, the panel set out in full the  head  note
    from Masih ([2012] UKUT 46 (IAC)) reminding itself  that  there  was  a
    "strong public interest  in  removing  foreign  citizens  convicted  of
    serious offences" and the need  to  take  into  account  not  only  the
    importance of preventing further offences, but of expressing  society's
    condemnation of serious criminal activity and deterring  other  foreign
    criminals from  committing  offences.   At  para  50  the  panel  again
    reminded itself of the "important feature" of the public interest where
    a foreign citizen has committed "serious crimes".

25. Fifthly, the panel considered  in  detail  the  appellant's  individual
    circumstances and the evidence that had been given including  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant and his  partner.   The  panel  accepted  the
    evidence of both witnesses.  The panel dealt with the evidence at paras
    39 - 46 as follows:

         "39. We find that the Respondent's decision to deport the Appellant
             amounts to an interference with  any  private  life  that  the
             Appellant has established in the UK.  As he has lived  in  the
             UK since the age of 11 years, and as he has friends within the
             Cardiff community and as he has  an  established  relationship
             with [SH]  whom  we  heard  in  evidence,  we  find  that  the
             Appellant has an established private life in the UK.

         40.  It is  no  part  of  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  has  an
             established family life with his natural  family  in  the  UK.
             His mother and aunt attended the  hearing  but  did  not  give
             evidence.  We find that the Appellant is  aged  23  years  and
             that he is living independently from his mother who also lives
             in Cardiff and is part of the Appellant's private life.

         41.  Having heard the Appellant give evidence we found him to be an
             impressive witness.  He gave evidence in what we  find  was  a
             naturally relatively quiet voice.  He  listened  carefully  to
             each  question  put  to  him  and   answered   each   question
             respectfully in an understated but earnest manner.  At no time
             did he attempt to deny or minimise any aspect of his  previous
             criminal offending.  Although he stated that he had 'fallen in
             with the wrong crowd' and associated with the  wrong  sort  of
             people, he did not blame those  influences  for  his  criminal
             offending for which he accepted responsibility.  We find  that
             throughout  his  evidence  the  Appellant   adopted   a   most
             straightforward  manner.    His   evidence   was   free   from
             exaggeration and we assess him as an honest witness.  We  find
             that the Appellant has  not  committed  any  criminal  offence
             since before his 19th birthday.  We further find that there is
             no evidence of the Appellant's behaving inappropriately in any
             way since that time.  The Appellant told us  that  immediately
             upon release from custody he was fortunate enough to meet [SH]
             who is culturally from a Pakistani family and who  also  lives
             in Cardiff.  The Appellant stated that they  have  been  in  a
             committed relationship since they met  on  23  December  2011.
             They intend to marry.  However, the Appellant appreciates that
             [SH's] parents would prefer her to  marry  a  young  boy  from
             within the Pakistani community.  He has accepted that and  has
             also accepted that if he is to marry [SH] that he will have to
             wait until she has completed her degree and  studied  for  the
             bar.  Her parents have expressed a wish that the  relationship
             between the Appellant and [SH] does not adversely  affect  her
             studies.  The Appellant upon this issue gave  mature  evidence
             in stating that he accepts  their  position  and  that  he  is
             prepared to wait for [SH] to complete her education.

         42.  We have read the correspondence from the Prince's Trust  Cymru
             and we have also  read  the  references  from  [AH]  and  [TA]
             (already mentioned above).  Those documents amount to positive
             evidence in favour of the Appellant.  The Appellant undertakes
             activities with and for the Prince's Trust and is committed to
             working with young people with a similar history to his own so
             that he can show them how  people  can  change  if  they  take
             responsibility for  their  own  actions.   We  find  that  the
             Appellant undertakes valuable work for the community  in  this
             respect.

         43.  We then heard evidence from [SH]  herself.   She  is  aged  18
             years and is  studying  for  her  A  level  examinations  this
             summer.  She has been provisionally accepted to study  law  at
             Reading University and at the University of South Wales.   She
             wishes to study for a law degree and she intends to  become  a
             barrister.  We also note that  she  is  a  volunteer  for  the
             Alzheimer's Society and that she is also prepared to carry out
             unpaid work for the benefit of  those  who  suffer  from  that
             unfortunate condition.  [SH]  was  indeed  a  most  impressive
             witness.  Despite her young age we find that she gave evidence
             calmly, carefully, and in a most thoughtful and mature manner.
              She answered fully every question that was put to her and she
             did her best to assist the decision making process.   We  have
             no hesitation at all in finding that she is an entirely honest
             witness.  She has a close relationship with her parents  which
             she does not wish to jeopardise.  However, unmistakeably,  she
             is committed  to  the  relationship  that  she  has  with  the
             Appellant.  She confirmed that they met on  23  December  2011
             and that they have been in a  close  relationship  since  that
             day.  She does not wish to  offend  her  parents  and  she  is
             prepared to continue her relationship with  the  Appellant  in
             the hope that eventually her parents will accept the fact that
             she wishes to marry the Appellant.  She is prepared  to  delay
             that wedding/marriage until she has completed her  studies  in
             order not to upset or offend her parents.

         44.  We find that the Appellant and [SH] have been in  a  committed
             relationship since 23 December 2011 which is now more than two
             years.  We find that they intend to marry and  that  they  are
             planning their future with considerable maturity.

         45.  [SH] told us that the Appellant told her  about  his  criminal
             history from their very first date.  She is particularly close
             with her mother and has told her mother everything  about  the
             Appellant.  [SH] has done  this  in  the  knowledge  that  her
             mother will speak with her father.  Although [SH] has a  close
             relationship with her father the fact of the  matter  is  that
             she speaks to her mother constantly in a freer  way  than  she
             would speak with her father.  She explained  to  us  that  the
             Appellant has met both her parents and that her parents  liked
             the Appellant despite the cultural difference.

         46.  Having considered all the evidence from the Appellant and [SH]
             we find that the Appellant's private life is established  such
             that it fulfils Article 8(1) of the ECHR".

26. Then, having reminded itself of the public interest  reflected  in  the
    appellant's  offending,  at  para  50  the  Tribunal  noted  that   the
    appellant's earlier deportation appeal had  been  successful  and  said
    this:

         "We find that the 2008 deportation proceedings did not dissuade the
         Appellant from committing further criminal offences.   However,  we
         also acknowledge that the Appellant was then  considerably  younger
         and less mature than he is today".

27. At para 52, the panel applied the criteria set out  in  the  Strasbourg
    decision in Maslov as follows:

         "52. .... In a case such as the Appellant's  appeal,  the  relevant
             criteria to be considered (following para 71 of  the  decision
             in Maslov) are:

             (i)  The nature and seriousness of the  offence  committed  by
             the applicant

                  As  we  have  stated  above,  we  consider  the   offences
                  committed by the Appellant to  be  serious  offences.   We
                  take due note of the sentencing  remarks  of  the  learned
                  sentencing judge.  We note  that  the  Appellant  did  not
                  commit the drugs offences to  obtain  heroin  himself  but
                  because he was being used by people who had some  form  of
                  hold over him.  We find that he  no  longer  moves  within
                  those circles.   We  find  that  to  a  large  extent  the
                  Appellant has seen the error of  his  previous  ways.   We
                  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the   Appellant's
                  girlfriend [SH] is and has been a most positive  influence
                  in his life.  It is likely that she will continue to be  a
                  positive influence for his distinct benefit.

             (ii) The length of the Appellant's stay in  the  country  from
                  which he is to be expelled

                  The Appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  9
                  December 2011.  He was then aged 11 years.

             (iii)    The time elapsed since the offence was committed  and
                  the applicant's conduct during that period

                  As we have already stated above, we have  been  told  that
                  the Appellant's offences were committed in  2009  when  he
                  was still aged 18 years.  He  has  committed  no  offences
                  since that time.  Additionally, we have been  told  of  no
                  bad or inappropriate behaviour committed by the  Appellant
                  since that time.

                  We have, however, read correspondence  from  the  Prince's
                  Trust Cymru which indicates that the Appellant is a  great
                  team leader and sets a good example amongst his peers;  he
                  is also very open-minded and has inspired others to become
                  more like this and to think about and  learn  about  other
                  cultures.  The Prince's  Trust  have  discussed  with  the
                  Appellant his past and his future.  He  is  very  keen  to
                  move forward and  to  help  others  with  their  problems,
                  specifically around tackling poverty.  He has reflected on
                  his past behaviours and understands what he did wrong.  Jo
                  Micklewright,  Senior  Outreach  and  Development   Worker
                  believes the Appellant is not a threat to society and will
                  not repeat his previous behaviour in the future.   Due  to
                  his positive approach to his role the Appellant  has  been
                  referred to The Enterprise Programme in which it is  hoped
                  he will be engaged  in  the  future.   This  programme  is
                  designed to help unemployed young people start  their  own
                  business through the provisions of  start-up  funding  and
                  mentoring.

             (iv) The solidity of social, cultural and family ties with the
                  host country and with the country of destination

                  The Appellant's father who lived in Zimbabwe was killed in
                  2005.  The Appellant now has no links with any  family  in
                  Zimbabwe.  The Appellant's mother and aunt live in the UK.
                   They have made their home in this country and  they  wish
                  to remain in this country.  The Appellant too has made his
                  home in this country and  has  not  returned  to  Zimbabwe
                  since he arrived in the UK in 2001.

                  The Appellant is in a  committed  relationship  with  [SH]
                  whom he intends to marry when she completes  her  studies.
                  The Appellant wishes to make something of himself  in  the
                  UK and wishes to help others in  the  community  initially
                  through the Prince's Trust".

28. At para 53, the panel noted the appellant's  "genuine  remorse"  and  a
    number of positive features relevant to its decision:

         "53. We find that the  Appellant  has  shown  genuine  remorse  and
             insight into his  previous  offending.   He  realises  why  he
             committed those offences and he blames no one but himself.  He
             realises that it is important to take responsibility for one's
             own actions and he is committed to do that in the future.   We
             find that prison has had a positive effect upon the Appellant.
              We also find that the Appellant has matured as an  individual
             and as a member of society since he  committed  his  offences.
             We further find that his girlfriend [SH]  and  indirectly  her
             family are a positive influence upon the Appellant".

29. At paras 54 and 55 the Tribunal reached its ultimate finding  that  the
    public interest was outweighed by the appellant's circumstances:

         "54. We find that all these factors and all those matters to  which
             we have referred above we now carefully and delicately balance
             in   the    assessment    of    proportionality.     Assessing
             proportionality in an appeal such as this is  an  exercise  in
             taking   all   relevant   matters   into   consideration   and
             appropriately balancing them.  It is a most  delicate  matter.
             Although we find most definitely that society is  entitled  to
             express  its  revulsion  against  the   Appellant's   criminal
             offending, we also find that there is much to be  put  in  the
             balance in his favour.

         55.  For these and for all the other reasons we have set out above,
             we consider that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  deport  the
             Appellant is in all the circumstances not proportionate  in  a
             democratic society to the legitimate aim to be  achieved.   We
             have formed the view that  despite  the  Appellant's  criminal
             offending,  all  those  factors  set  out  above,  make   this
             particular case one of those cases where the  public  interest
             in deporting the Appellant is outweighed  by  the  established
             private and family life that exists".

30. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that this experienced  tribunal
    reached its decision other than on the basis that it  considered  there
    were "very compelling reasons" to outweigh the  public  interest.   The
    Tribunal clearly acknowledged the importance of the public interest and
    referred to it a number of times, including when stating  its  ultimate
    decision at paras 54-55.  It was undoubtedly aware of  the  seriousness
    of the appellant's offending.  In my judgment, the panel identified the
    factors that outweighed the public interest, especially at paras 52 and
    53.  I accept Mr Simmonds' submission that the  panel  expressed  those
    reasons as including the fact that the appellant was 11 when he came to
    the UK; that he had been here for twelve years and so for  around  half
    his life; the strength and  sincerity  of  his  relationship  with  his
    partner since December 2011, and the fact that he had no links with any
    family in Zimbabwe.  His mother and aunt lived in the UK and his father
    had been killed in 2005.  In my judgment, the Tribunal's reasoning  was
    adequate in the sense that it gave  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the
    basis for its conclusion that the public interest was outweighed by the
    appellant's circumstances.

31. I did not understand Mr Richards to challenge the decision on the basis
    that the finding was irrational.  However, I see no  sound  basis  upon
    which the decision can be challenged on the  ground  of  irrationality.
    The Tribunal  itself  recognised  that  its  decision  was  "delicately
    balance[d]".  By that, as I understand it,  the  Tribunal  acknowledged
    that the appellant had narrowly persuaded it that the balance should be
    struck in his favour.  Having given full weight to the "strong"  public
    interest but having regard  to  all  the  circumstances  including  the
    appellant's positive approach to his future behaviour, I am  unable  to
    conclude that this was a decision which a reasonable Tribunal could not
    reach.  As Carnwath LJ (as he then was) pointed out in Mukarkar v  SSHD
    [2006]EWCA Civ 1045 at [40]:

         "The mere fact that one tribunal  has  reached  what  may  seem  an
         unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does  not
         mean that it has made an error of law..."

32. It may not necessarily be the conclusion  which  every  Tribunal  would
    reach.  That, however, does not establish irrationality, in  the  sense
    that no reasonable Tribunal could reach this finding.

33. For all these reasons, I reject the Secretary  of  State's  submissions
    that the First-tier Tribunal was not entitled in law to  conclude  that
    the appellant's deportation would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

34. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law.  Its decision stands.

35. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



Signed   Date

A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

