
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02181/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates' Court        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 May 2014                                |On 30 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Fred Efosa

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation, appeared in person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born 12  November  1991,  has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Holt and Ms S Hewitt  JP  (the  panel)  who  for  reasons  given  in  a
    determination dated 26 January 2014  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
    decision to make a deportation order dated 11 October 2013.

 2. The Secretary of State had deemed the respondent's  deportation  to  be
    conducive to the public good based on her policy.  This  was  in  terms
    that criminal behaviour which results in a custodial sentence of twelve
    months or more, or a total aggregate sentence of twelve months or  more
    over a period of five years was serious enough to initiate  deportation
    action.  The  convictions  which  the  Secretary  of  State  considered
    resulted  in  the  respondent  being  liable  to  deportation  were   a
    conviction at Preston Crown Court on 15 March 2013  for  one  count  of
    robbery  for  which  the  respondent  was  sentenced  to  nine  months'
    imprisonment, five counts of  theft  leading  to  a  sentence  of  four
    months' imprisonment concurrent for each count making a total  of  nine
    months' imprisonment.  Furthermore on 2 September 2013  the  respondent
    was sentenced to three months' imprisonment at Liverpool  and  Knowsley
    Magistrates' Court for having been convicted of handling stolen goods.

 3. The panel heard evidence from the  respondent  who,  as  was  the  case
    before us, was unrepresented.  It concluded  that  the  presumption  in
    favour  of  deportation  was  triggered  by  paragraph  398(c)  of  the
    Immigration Rules although it did not consider that that a letter  from
    Lancashire Social Services referring to  a  police  record  of  fifteen
    incidents of domestic abuse between July 2009 and 2012 to  be  evidence
    of further criminal activity by the respondent in addition to the above
    convictions. The panel concluded that the respondent  satisfied  399(a)
    and 399(b) of the Rules in relation to his partner Y G  and  their  two
    children J and P.  The panel also found that the respondent  had  spent
    more than half his life living continuously in the United  Kingdom  and
    as he was under 25 paragraph 399A applied and so allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State's challenge is on these bases:

      a) The panel failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  disregarding  the
         Social Services  report  regarding  the  relationship  between  the
         respondent and his partner in 2012.  It  had  erred  materially  by
         failing to take into  consideration  that  report.   There  was  no
         evidence the respondent had any contact at all with his children or
         had made any effort through  any  legal  channels  to  obtain  such
         access.  He had provided no evidence that he was in a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with the mother of his children and had not
         lived in the United Kingdom with valid  leave  for  fifteen  years.
         Thus the findings under paragraph 399(a) were flawed;

      b) The panel had failed to give any or adequate reasons for  accepting
         at face value the respondent's evidence that he had arrived in  the
         United Kingdom around 2003 and thus its  conclusions  under  399(b)
         were  flawed.   The  panel's  acceptance  of  evidence   from   the
         respondent was perverse;

      c) The panel had  failed  to  conduct  a  rounded  assessment  of  the
         possibility of the respondent reintegrating in Nigeria;

      d) The panel had failed to give adequate consideration to the risk  of
         the respondent reoffending.

 5. In a letter dated 4 May 2014 the First Law Partnership  explained  that
    they had been instructed by the respondent and sought an adjournment in
    order for them to obtain the sentencing remarks, OASys Report, the file
    of papers from the respondent's previous solicitors or any  presentence
    reports that were in existence.  They explained that they  were  acting
    pro bono and argued that if the hearing before us on  22  May  were  to
    proceed  it  was  likely  that  we  would  find  the  respondent  again
    unrepresented and unprepared for a complex  hearing  without  essential
    papers.

 6. The respondent explained he was unrepresented because of lack of funds.
      We  did  not  consider  an  adjournment  justified.   The  First  Law
    Partnership had indicated that they were instructed on a pro bono basis
    and there was no satisfactory explanation why they had not attended  in
    the light of their  evident  willingness  to  undertake  representation
    without a fee.  Subject to argument, if we were persuaded to set  aside
    the decision, it would be  on  the  basis  that  the  matter  would  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for starting  afresh.   Accordingly
    we considered in the interests of justice that we should proceed.

 7. The respondent explained that his partner Y G telephoned him every day.
     He gave us the dates of birth of the three children with whom he had a
    relationship.  Y G had also provided a new reference about him.

 8. In his submissions, Mr Mills argued that in addition to the grounds  of
    application, the panel had erred in its assessment of the  letter  from
    Lancashire County Council Children's Social Care Team in  finding  that
    the relationships were extant.  Without giving adequate reasons for not
    taking that letter into proper account, the panel had been perverse  in
    deciding to accept the oral testimony of the  appellant.   The  further
    failure by the panel related to  a  failure  to  address  the  question
    whether there was any other family member who was able to care for  the
    child in the United Kingdom.

 9. As to paragraph 399(b) it was not just the absence of reasons regarding
    the length of time the respondent had been in the  United  Kingdom  but
    there also was the legitimacy of its finding that there was  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship.

10. As to the respondent's private life addressed under paragraph 399A,  Mr
    Mills argued there was an absence of adequate reasons why the panel had
    reached its conclusion as to the length of time the respondent had been
    to the United Kingdom. He also  submitted  that  the  panel  had  given
    inadequate reasons for its conclusions regarding  the  absence  of  any
    ties in Nigeria.

11. We gave our decision at the hearing that the panel had  erred  in  law.
    We set aside its decision and decided to remit the case to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh with none of the findings of  fact  by
    the panel being preserved.  As the respondent is detained we direct  an
    expedited hearing.  However, we did also explain to him the opportunity
    he had to make an application for bail.

12. The relevant provisions of the Rules are paragraph 363, 397,  398,  399
    and 399A with reference to 399B.  For our purposes it is sufficient  to
    set out 398 to 399A as follows:

          "398.   Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12  months;
                  or

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of
                  State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
                  a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                  the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
             if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                           to leave the UK; and

                      (b)  there is no other family member who is  able  to
                           care for the child in the UK; or

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
                  settled in the UK, or in the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
                  humanitarian protection, and

                  (i)  the person has lived  in  the  UK  with  valid  leave
                      continuously for at least the  15  years  immediately
                      preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration   decision
                      (discounting any period of imprisonment); and

                  (ii) there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
                      with that partner continuing outside the UK.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

             (a)  the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                  20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
                  decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he
                  has no ties (including social, cultural  or  family)  with
                  the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
                  leave the UK; or

             (b)  the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least
                  half of his life living continuously in the UK immediately
                  preceding   the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no
                  ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
                  country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
                  the UK."

13. As we have observed  above,  the  panel  concluded  at  [20]  that  the
    presumption in favour of deportation was triggered by paragraph 398(c).
     At [29] it noted that the appellant did not accept that the respondent
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with any of his  children.
    There are three children altogether: J and P whose mother is YG  and  a
    third child, L, from a different mother.  J was born on  23  June  2008
    and P on 13 January 2010.  The determination is silent as to  the  date
    of birth of L.  The respondent explained that she had been born 19  May
    2008.  As to this child the panel observed at [31] that there was scant
    evidence the respondent had ever had much contact with  this  child  or
    that he intended to  pursue  a  relationship  and  explained  that  the
    respondent's status  as  biological  father  did  not  influence  their
    decisions.

14. In reaching its conclusions on the relationship between the  respondent
    and J and P, the panel did so  based  on  the  oral  testimony  of  the
    respondent, an unsigned statement of YG,  a  signed  statement  by  the
    respondent, birth certificates and the  above  letter  from  Lancashire
    County Council.

15. Although the birth certificates did not  show  the  respondent  as  the
    father, the panel noted that both J and P had been given  his  surname.
    They also had regard to YG's  witness  statement.   The  absence  of  a
    signature did not appear  to  trouble  the  panel  on  the  basis  that
    solicitors had seen fit to submit it to  the  Home  Office.   This  was
    evidence that YG had given the information contained in that  statement
    to the solicitors there being no suggestion of dishonesty.   The  panel
    observed that having regard to  the  respondent's  very  poor  literacy
    skills, he would not be capable  of  creating  this  document  himself.
    Accordingly the panel gave weight to that statement and were  satisfied
    with the respondent's testimony that he had the intention to seek legal
    advice and assistance  in  getting  contact  with  his  children.   His
    attempts to do so had been thwarted and the process had been brought to
    an end when he had been  caught  handling  stolen  goods  and  sent  to
    prison.  The statement from YG explained how she had met the respondent
    and how they had moved into their own flat in 2008.  She refers to  the
    respondent's affection for his children and  his  patience  with  them.
    She refers in very positive terms to the respondent's role as a  father
    and that they were "good together" and that they loved each other.

16. The letter from Lancashire County Council is  dated  22  October  2013.
    The following points are made:

      i) YG and the children had not seen  the  respondent  since  they  had
         moved in approximately October 2012.

     ii) YG and the respondent are not in a relationship and the  respondent
         has no involvement with the upbringing of J and P.

    iii) The  respondent's  details  were  not  fully  known  to  Lancashire
         Children's Social  Care.   He  had  informed  Blackpool  Children's
         Social Care that he had come to England when he was 10 years of age
         with an unknown female.

     iv) Between  July  2009  and  2012  the  police  had  recorded  fifteen
         incidents of domestic abuse between YG and the respondent  many  of
         which were witnessed by the children.  There was reference  to  the
         children having  witnessed  severe  domestic  abuse  and  that  the
         incidents were characterised by drugs and  alcohol  consumption  by
         the respondent.

      v) An s.47 enquiry was initiated and  YG  agreed  to  sign  a  written
         agreement stating the children would  not  have  contact  with  the
         respondent until a further risk assessment of him was completed.

     vi) At a review child protection conference in July 2012 it  was  noted
         that Blackpool Children's Social Care could not recommend a plan of
         protection which could safely allow  the  respondent  to  have  any
         unsupervised contact with the children.

             "Freddie was unable to identify anyone suitable  to  supervise
             the contact and YG expressed her wishes that Freddie would  no
             longer have any contact with the children."

    vii)  At  a  review  held  in  January  2013  YG  had  made  significant
         improvements to prioritising the  needs  for  her  children.   They
         remained on a plan of  emotional  harm  as  the  children's  father
         remained an unassessed risk and had made  contact  with  them  over
         Christmas 2012 by letter.

   viii) At a review held in June 2013 YG had been to court with the support
         of  Women's  Aid  to  get  a  non-molestation  order  against   the
         respondent.  She had been very cautious about whom  she  had  given
         her new address to so as to minimise the  risk  of  the  respondent
         locating her.

     ix) Since finding out the respondent was in prison YG had been back  to
         her solicitor to try to obtain a restraining order to  prevent  him
         being in contact.

17. The panel accepted the respondent's  evidence  that  he  had  not  been
    served with a non-molestation order.  This undermined the Secretary  of
    State's reliance on the letter  from  Lancashire  Social  Services  and
    added, in their view, credence to the respondent's assertion that  when
    he had bumped into YG on the street  she  was  friendly  and  exchanged
    information with him.  She had been receiving money  from  him  as  and
    when he was able to send her modest sums.  The panel was concerned that
    the letter from Lancashire Social Services used  loose,  imprecise  and
    unhelpful language which they contrasted with the respondent's detailed
    oral evidence.  They found his description of his relationship with  YG
    and the children credible which they contrasted  with  the  significant
    concerns over the reliability of the Lancashire Social Services  letter
    and they lacked confidence regarding the overall  judgments  about  the
    respondent and his relationship with YG and the children.

18. The panel were clearly impressed by  the  respondent  but  we  are  not
    persuaded that they have  given  adequate  or  sufficient  reasons  for
    disregarding the letter from Lancashire County Council which refers  to
    specific incidents of a serious  kind.   To  suggest  that  letter  was
    unreliable implies that the author Jacqui Cummings  had  misrepresented
    the position.  The serious concerns expressed in  the  letter  required
    something more than the simple oral testimony of the respondent by  way
    of rebuttal.  The panel did not ask themselves the question why YG  had
    not attended the hearing and furthermore there was no  evidence  before
    them how her statement had come into being other than that it had  been
    provided by the solicitors.  We are persuaded that the Tribunal reached
    conclusions on the evidence as to the relationships in play  that  were
    not rationally sustainable.  Even if we could be  persuaded  otherwise,
    the panel  erred  in  failing  to  answer  the  question  at  paragraph
    399(a)(ii)(b).  It is unarguable on the evidence before the panel  that
    there was another family member who was able to care for the children.

19. The panel's reasoning in respect of its finding that  paragraph  399(b)
    had been made out is equivocally expressed at [38] of the determination
    but more positively at [51].  This is undermined by the conclusions  we
    have reached as to the sustainability of  the  findings  regarding  the
    relationship between the respondent and YG.   Furthermore,  it  appears
    that the panel failed to turn its mind to the second limb of  the  rule
    and consider whether the respondent had lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with valid leave continuously for at least  fifteen  years  immediately
    preceding the date of immigration decision discounting any  periods  of
    imprisonment.  Disregarding the concerns which we come  to  below  over
    the findings by the panel on the length of time the respondent had been
    in the United Kingdom, no panel could have  rationally  concluded  that
    the respondent had been here continuously  with  any  valid  leave  let
    alone for the fifteen years required by this provision.

20. The panel also concluded that paragraph 399A had been made out.  It has
    to be said this is not subject to direct challenge in  the  grounds  of
    application, yet having  regard  to  the  questions  raised  about  the
    adequacy and rationality of the reasons given for the  panel's  finding
    as to the length of time the respondent has been in the United  Kingdom
    and the absence of any ties in Nigeria, we consider it is an aspect  we
    must address.

21. There appears to be no dispute that the respondent is  aged  under  25.
    The immigration decision is dated 11 October 2013.  For the  respondent
    to succeed based on the earlier of the two dates of birth (5 May 1991),
    he would need to have been here for at least twelve years and  to  have
    arrived before December 2001.  Those inconsistencies are noted at  [11]
    of the determination and it is not at all clear from the  determination
    how that was resolved before the panel concluded by implication at [45]
    that the respondent was only 10 years of age at the time he came to the
    UK.  In the light of a challenge to this by the Secretary of  State  in
    the refusal letter, it was incumbent upon  the  respondent  to  produce
    some evidence of his earlier years.  Bearing in mind the respondent  is
    recorded to have  made  friends  during  those  early  years  including
    someone he lived with as a best friend, the panel erred in  not  asking
    itself why there was no corroborative evidence forthcoming rather  than
    just simply resolving this by reference to him having lived "under  the
    radar" and hence having no official documentation.

22. Even if the panel were correct that the respondent had spent  half  his
    life  living  in  the  United  Kingdom,  discounting  the  periods   of
    imprisonment, it was not rationally open to them to  conclude  at  [40]
    that having been orphaned, the  respondent  as  a  consequence  had  no
    social, family or cultural ties in Nigeria as a  result,  applying  the
    principles in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  60
    (IAC).

23. Accordingly we are satisfied that the panel failed to give adequate and
    rational reasons for its positive conclusions under 399A.

24. In summary  therefore  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    infected by error of law.  We set that aside and remit the case to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for the appeal to be heard  afresh.   None  of  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal is preserved.




Signed
                                                      Date 27 June 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



