

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
DA/02442/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 January 2014                             |On 9 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           JEFFERSON CARLOS CASTRO
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr S Harding, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal  by  the  respondent,  Jefferson
    Castro, under the EEA regulations  and on human rights grounds  against
    the decision made on 5 November 2013 to  remove him to Italy  following
    his conviction and imprisonment  for  an  offence  of  making/supplying
    articles for use in fraud. In this decision I will refer to the parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Castro as the appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of both Brazil and Italy  born  on  5  April
    1983. The background to  this  appeal  can  briefly  be  summarised  as
    follows. The appellant lived in Brazil with his family until he was  14
    when he went to live with his uncle. When he was 16 he met his wife and
    they moved in together and a son was born on 2 July 2000. In  2006  his
    family (himself, his wife, son and  mother)  travelled  to  Italy.  His
    mother is Italian  by  birth,  hence  the  appellant's  entitlement  to
    Italian nationality. He started to work in Italy and duly  obtained  an
    Italian  passport.  He  then  moved  to  Spain  and  had  jobs  in  the
    construction industry. His wife became pregnant but because there  were
    complications, she needed 24 hour care. It was decided  that  his  wife
    and son would return to Brazil where her  mother  could  care  for  and
    support her whereas the appellant came to the UK because  the  work  he
    had in Spain had came to an end.

 3. In October 2008 his daughter was born and a month later  the  appellant
    travelled to Brazil returning to the UK in December 2008. He  was  able
    to work and save money to bring his family over and they joined him  in
    December 2009. In  January  2010  his  wife  fell  pregnant  again.  An
    application was made for residence permits under  the  EEA  regulations
    and they were granted 5 year permits in October 2010. Subsequently, the
    appellant lost his job and because of the financial pressures on him he
    became involved in the criminal activities which were to  lead  to  his
    conviction.

 4. On  28  March  2011  he  was  arrested  with  others  involved  in  the
    manufacture and supply  of  false  documents  including  passports  and
    identity cards. In August 2011 he was convicted at Harrow  Crown  Court
    of making/supplying articles for use in fraud and on 16 September  2011
    he received a sentence of 5 years 4  months.  The  seriousness  of  the
    offence is apparent not only from the length of the sentence  but  also
    from the judge's sentencing remarks which included the following:

             "Getting involved in the commercial production on a significant
             scale of false  identity  documents  is  very  serious.  It  is
             serious  because  it  leads  to  a  widespread  abuse  of   the
             immigration and employment laws,  and  upsets  the  balance  of
             society it is a serious crime. In the case of all of  you,  you
             knew exactly what you were doing. In the case of all of you, it
             was motivated by the prospects of, in my judgement, high  level
             commercial gain. It was, I think it's  been  described  by  the
             prosecution as a medium sized, significant  operation.  But  it
             was very significant, and it was fairly sophisticated. You were
             using equipment especially produced for the  purpose,  and  you
             had set up a head quarters  for  your  operation.  There  isn't
             evidence that  there  was  anybody  in  this  country  who  was
             masterminding the operation for you..... In my judgement, it is
             not a decision that I, the judge, makes, but I want to  put  it
             on record that if there is an ability to deport you, you should
             be, because your presence is not conducive to the  public  good
             in this country, quite the  contrary,  because  what  you  have
             done, as I said, which undermines society in  the  way  I  have
             described."

 5. At the hearing of the appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  the
    First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence from the appellant, his son and
    his  wife.  It  found  that  all  the  witnesses   gave   evidence   in
    straightforward and helpful manner and  the  panel  had  no  reason  to
    believe they had not been told the truth [56]. The appellant had been a
    man of good character who had worked in Brazil, Italy and Spain  before
    coming to the UK in 2008 where he had  worked  until  "the  unfortunate
    commission of his offence." They accepted that financial  pressure  had
    built up and that the appellant  had  decided  to  take  "the  criminal
    route, hence finding himself where he does" [57].

 6. The panel referred to the OASYs assessment dated 27 November 2013 which
    recorded that  the  appellant  accepted  full  responsibility  for  the
    commission of his offence and that it was his  first  offence.  He  had
    been employed full time whilst in custody and in particular had  worked
    for DHL at HMP The Verne for about 6 months and received  an  excellent
    work report. The probability of the appellant re-offending was regarded
    as low and it was  recorded  that  he  was  motivated  to  address  his
    offending and had the capacity to change  and  reduce  it.  There  were
    numerous good case notes entries on the C-NOMIS system.

 7. The Tribunal also referred to  a  letter  from  the  National  Offender
    Management Service  at  the  London  Probation  Trust  written  by  the
    appellant's  probation  officer   who   had   reduced   his   reporting
    requirements and felt that the risk of re-offending was low and that he
    could safely be managed in the community. On visits to the family  home
    the probation officer commented that the children  were  well  behaved,
    polite and clearly happy to have their father home. The family lived in
    a three bedroom flat which was well maintained with no obvious signs of
    wealth to suggest that the appellant may be living a  lavish  lifestyle
    following the offence.

 8. The panel commented and found, in confirmation of  the  fact  that  the
    custodial sentence  had  afforded  the  appellant  the  opportunity  to
    reflect and understand that should he commit offences he  risked  going
    back to prison, that he had wasted no time in obtaining employment  and
    was not afraid of hard work as he not only worked during  the  day  but
    had also taken  on  evening  and  weekend  work  to  help  improve  his
    finances. So far as the appellant's thinking and behaviour at the  time
    of the offence, he had clearly involved himself with a group of  people
    that believed that committing offences of fraud was justified  but  the
    probation officer said that in her assessment the appellant's  term  in
    custody was a very harsh lesson for  him  and  she  believed  that  his
    thinking had changed considerably. He now believed that the only way to
    live was by legitimate means. It was her assessment that the  appellant
    had made positive strides to reintegrate into society.

 9. The panel summarised its findings in [65] as follows:

             "Whilst in no way minimising the appellant's  offence,  against
             the background of all the evidence, we find that the  appellant
             does not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
             threat to the public to justify his  deportation.  He  utilised
             his time in prison in a positive manner, before which  time  he
             was a man of good character.  The  report  from  the  probation
             officer is to the effect that the  appellant  is  making  every
             effort and appears to be succeeding in leading his life in  the
             exemplary manner he has done, before his unfortunate  error  of
             judgement."

10. The panel went  on  to  consider  article  8  and  found  that  in  the
    appellant's circumstances removal  would  be  disproportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim pursued.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

11. Permission to appeal was sought and in the application  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal it was argued that the Tribunal had  failed  to  consider
    the EEA regulations fully, that deportation was justified under grounds
    of public policy or public security and  that  the  Tribunal  had  also
    failed to make any findings on why  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    lowest threshold. It was further argued that the finding  that  he  did
    not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  was
    flawed in that all relevant matters had not  been  taken  into  account
    and, in particular, the seriousness of the offence and the comments  of
    the sentencing judge. It was further argued that the  appellant  denied
    using aliases which suggested he was not fully rehabilitated or  taking
    full responsibility for his actions, that the Tribunal  had  failed  to
    consider the appellant's rehabilitation prospects in  Brazil  or  Italy
    and that he had clearly  not  integrated  into  the  UK  way  of  life,
    otherwise he would know that his conduct was unacceptable.

12. Permission was refused on the basis that the application amounted to no
    more than a disagreement with findings which were properly open to  the
    panel having assessed and compared all the  evidence.  The  application
    for permission to appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and in these
    grounds it was  argued  that  the  essential  contention  made  by  the
    respondent in her explanatory letter was that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden in establishing that he was entitled to permanent
    residence and there was no clear finding on this important issue. There
    was also a challenge to the finding that the appellant  had  worked  in
    the UK prior to his  imprisonment  and  that  it  was  not  clear  what
    evidence had been assessed in coming to this conclusion. The article  8
    assessment was challenged on the basis that there had not been a proper
    consideration of the seriousness of the offence.

13. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:

              "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  has  failed  to
              make  a  finding  on  whether  the  appellant  had  permanent
              residence and if so on what basis  and  thus  has  failed  to
              identify the level of protection afforded to the appellant in
              determining  his  appeal  against  deportation   as   an   EU
              national."


14. At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds repeating  the
    argument that no finding had been made on the level of  protection  the
    appellant fell under. He further submitted that  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's employment was unclear  and  insufficient  to  justify  the
    Tribunal's findings. The evidence had been set out  but  when  analysed
    there was very little of  substance  available  to  the  Tribunal.  The
    appellant had committed a very serious offence and been sentenced to  a
    period of 5 years 4 months imprisonment. The public interest  arguments
    had not been properly assessed but minimised by the Tribunal using such
    phrases as "an unfortunate error  of  judgement  [65]."  This  did  not
    indicate that the necessary balancing of the  competing  interests  had
    been properly taken into account.

15. Mr Harding submitted that the basis of the grant of the permission  was
    ill founded. It had never been a part of the appellant's case  that  he
    had enhanced protection under either reg 21(3) or (4). The Tribunal had
    made a clear finding of fact [65] that the appellant did not  represent
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat. This was a decision
    properly open to the Tribunal on the evidence and in the light of  that
    finding the Tribunal had not erred in law by allowing the appeal. In so
    far as it was open to the respondent to  rely  on  the  other  grounds,
    these amounted to a disagreement with findings  properly  open  to  the
    Tribunal. It had made it clear that it was not minimising the  offence,
    the facts of which were clear from the OASYs report which had concluded
    that the risks of re-offending were low. That view was supported by the
    assessment of the appellant's probation officer.

Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law

16. The issue for me at this stage of the hearing is whether the First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law such that its decision should be set  aside.  The
    ground for granting permission by the Upper Tribunal relates solely  to
    the issue of the failure of the First-tier Tribunal to make  a  finding
    on whether the appellant had permanent residence and so to identify the
    level of protection afforded  to  him  against  deportation  as  an  EU
    national. It is not in  dispute  that  a  decision  to  remove  an  EEA
    national must be made on the grounds of public policy, public  security
    or public health but if the decision is taken  in  respect  of  someone
    with a permanent right of residence, it can only be on serious  grounds
    of public policy or public health whereas a decision may not  be  taken
    except on imperative grounds of public security in respect  of  an  EEA
    national who has resided in the UK for a continuous period of at  least
    10 years prior to the relevant decision.

17. In the present appeal the appellant has not sought to argue that he  is
    entitled to enhanced protection. There is nothing in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to indicate that any such argument was made and
    indeed at [4] the Tribunal noted that the respondent had  not  accepted
    that the appellant had acquired permanent residence under reg 15. There
    is also nothing to indicate that the appellant made any such submission
    at the hearing and Mr Harding who represented him before the First-tier
    Tribunal confirmed this was the case.

18. I am therefore not satisfied that the Tribunal erred  in  law  in  this
    respect. There is no basis for believing that the Tribunal proceeded on
    any  misunderstanding  of  the  level  of  protection  sought  by   the
    appellant. It had to consider whether he should be removed on the basis
    of the grounds of public policy or public security  and  to  take  into
    account the factors set out in reg 21(5) and (6). These  provide  inter
    alia that the decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
    conduct of the person concerned which must represent a genuine, present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interest of society and that matters isolated from the  particulars  of
    the case which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do  not
    justify the decision.

19. It is clear from the Tribunal's decision that it carefully recorded and
    assessed the evidence. It was entitled to find that the appellant,  his
    wife and  son  had  given  evidence  which  was  straight  forward  and
    truthful. Standing by themselves the use of  the  phrases  "unfortunate
    error of judgement" and "unfortunate commission of the  offence"  might
    indicate that the panel had not  appreciated  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence but they must be read in the context of the decision as a whole
    and are off-set by the references  to  the  length  of  the  period  of
    imprisonment and to the fact that the appellant had  been  involved  in
    serious criminal offending.

20. So far as the other grounds are concerned, leaving  aside  whether  the
    respondent is entitled to pursue them in the light of the terms of  the
    grant, I am not satisfied that they disclose any error of law. There is
    no reason to believe that the Tribunal did not take the seriousness  of
    the offences into account. When reaching its decision the Tribunal  was
    entitled to take account  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  accepted
    responsibility and  regretted  his  actions  and  to  this  extent  was
    attempting to reintegrate into society. There was little,  if  anything
    in the evidence to support an argument that  he  would  have  a  better
    prospect of integrating or rehabilitating himself in Italy  or  Brazil.
    So far as the issue of whether the appellant had been working prior  to
    his imprisonment that was an issue of fact where the Tribunal reached a
    decision properly open to it.

21. There is no substance in the grounds seeking to challenge the article 8
    assessment which in the circumstance of this  appeal  adds  little,  if
    anything, to the decision under the EEA regulations which in any  event
    substantially incorporate all that is required in respect of the  right
    to respect for private and family life: it is provided by reg  21(5)(a)
    that the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality and
    all the factors normally relevant to an assessment  of  proportionality
    are set out in reg 21(6).

22. There  is  no  doubt  that  this  was  a  very  serious  offence  where
    deportation would be the likely outcome  if  the  matter  was  assessed
    under the immigration rules but so far as EEA nationals  are  concerned
    the issue of deportation must be assessed under the separate  appellate
    regime of the EEA regulations. This Tribunal has done and has reached a
    decision properly open to it.

Decision

23. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and accordingly its decision
    stands.





Signed                                  Date 20 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


