
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02005/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 August 2016                          |On 15 August 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    M C E
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms K McCarthy of Counsel, instructed by Wilsons
solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal under Articles 3 and 8  ECHR  against
   the respondent's decision on 2 September 2013 to make a deportation order
   against him.  The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of
   the Congo (DRC), born in April 1984 and now 32 years old.

Background

2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom when he was  9  years  old:   he
   was granted exceptional leave to  remain  in  line  with  his  father  in
   November 1998 and indefinite leave to remain on 12  May  2003.   However,
   because of a criminal offence committed  in  2003,  he  was  not  granted
   British citizen status in 2004 in line with his other family members.

3. The respondent has made three  deportation  orders  in  respect  of  this
   appellant.  The first, in August 2006, he appealed successfully  and  his
   appeal was allowed on 28 February 2007.  The  second  deportation  order,
   made on 16 July 2010 was successfully appealed in 2011.

4. The appellant offended again, and on 11 January 2012,  he  was  convicted
   of robbery and sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.  That is  the  index
   offence for the present deportation order, made on 2 September 2013.  The
   appellant has continued to commit offences while these  proceedings  have
   been ongoing.

First-tier Tribunal decision

5. The First-tier Tribunal considered the applicant's history carefully  and
   dismissed the appeal, which was brought under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.  The
   First-tier Tribunal had found the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his
   family members to be lacking in credibility.

6. In relation to Article 3 ECHR, the Tribunal found that the appellant  had
   failed to discharge the burden of proof upon him  that  he  would  suffer
   cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment on return to DRC, and
   in particular, that the high standard  for  Article  3  was  not  met  in
   relation to his contention that he would be detained and  ill-treated  by
   the Congolese authorities  by  reason  of  his  offences  in  the  United
   Kingdom.

7. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, the decision was made on the  basis  of  a
   relationship between  the  appellant  and  his  former  partner,  and  in
   particular, the close relationship he stated that he had  developed  with
   her child.  The Tribunal took account of the length of time the appellant
   had spent in the United Kingdom, and his evidence as to private life, but
   concluded that the Article 8 evidence was not strong enough  to  outweigh
   the pressing nature of  the  public  interest  in  his  deportation.  The
   appellant no longer relies on the relationship with his  former  partner.
   He has a new partner but the relationship is recent and he does not  rely
   on that relationship either.

8. The appellant's mother and father are British  citizens  originally  from
   the DRC.  He has 5 living siblings from the same  parents,  and  a  step-
   brother, all British citizens.  The appellant's eldest full brother lives
   in France, and would now be about 35.  In the United Kingdom,  he  has  a
   brother aged 26, a sister aged 25, a sister aged about 21 and  a  brother
   aged  16.   His  youngest  brother  and  sister  are  British-born.   The
   appellant's father had two more children with another woman, a boy and  a
   girl.  The appellant's step-brother lives in Norwich with his partner and
   three children.  The appellant's step-sister, unfortunately,  became  ill
   and died on her journey to the United Kingdom.

Permission to appeal

9. When granting permission, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pirotta  considered
   that there was no arguable material error of law in relation to the First-
   tier Tribunal's credibility finding,  its  findings  of  fact,  or  under
   Article 8 ECHR.

10. Permission to appeal was granted in relation to Article  3  ECHR  alone,
   with reference to the First-tier Tribunal's failure to apply the guidance
   given by Mr Justice Phillips in P (DRC), R  (On  the  Application  of)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 3879  (Admin)  and
   to explain adequately why it preferred the  respondent's  Country  Policy
   Bulletin CPB1/14  to  that  decision.   That  element  of  the  grant  of
   permission has been overtaken by the Upper Tribunal's country guidance in
   BM and others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal)  (CG)  [2015]  UKUT
   293 (IAC).

11. On 24 November 2014, the Upper Tribunal  (Mr  Justice  McCloskey,  UTIAC
   President, and Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson) found a  material  error  of
   law in relation to Article 3 ECHR only and retained  the  appeal  in  the
   Upper Tribunal for remaking.  The appeal was one of  a  group  identified
   for possible  country  guidance  in  what  became  BM  and  Others.   The
   appellant's case did not proceed as part of the BM  and  others  guidance
   and is therefore a follower case in which the country guidance  falls  to
   be applied, unless a good reason is shown to depart from it.

12. On 17 September 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan  gave  directions  for
   hearing.  He recorded that Ms McCarthy for the appellant  identified  the
   issues as:

         "(a) The risk of destitution violating the  appellant's  Article  3
             rights.
           (b)    Article 8 based on his relationship and length of time  in
             the United Kingdom.
           (c)    It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant's  conviction  was
             approached in line with current country guidance."

13. The appellant stated that he intended to call himself, his partner,  and
   his mother, and his brothers and sisters (or some of them).

14. Directions were given on that  basis,  with  witness  statements  to  be
   served within 28 days  and  to  stand  as  evidence  in  chief,  and  all
   witnesses  to  attend  and  be  cross-examined  unless  the  Home  Office
   Presenting Officer otherwise  notified  the  appellant's  representative.
   Bundles of documents were to be filed and served at the  same  time,  and
   skeleton arguments 7 days before the hearing.

15.  The  respondent  broadly  complied  with  her  obligations  under   the
   directions.

16. The appellant's representatives  breached  the  directions.   A  37-page
   skeleton  argument  was  served  on  the  morning  of  the  hearing;  the
   appellant's sister did not attend for cross-examination; and none of  the
   documentary timelines were respected.

17. The skeleton argument set out the appellant's arguments  on  destitution
   at pages 21-24, with regard to the expert evidence of Dr Kodi.

18. In addition, and without notice to the respondent (save that  the  issue
   was addressed in late-served expert evidence),  the  appellant  seeks  to
   reopen the country guidance on the basis of evidence from Dr Kodi,  whose
   opinion is that there is a real risk of persecution or serious  harm  for
   those convicted abroad, on return to Kinshasa airport.

19. The appellant also set out his Article 8  arguments.   I  remind  myself
   that permission to appeal was not granted on Article 8 and that the Upper
   Tribunal did not find a material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal
   decision on Article 8, but in the light of the decision of Upper Tribunal
   Judge Jordan I have permitted Article 8 to be argued  and  received  oral
   and written evidence thereon.

20. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

Evidence

21. The appellant, his mother and his youngest brother, now  16  years  old,
   gave evidence at the hearing before me,  as  did  his  step-brother,  who
   lives in Norwich and has a partner and children there. A sister  provided
   an unsigned witness statement but did not attend to be cross-examined.

22. The appellant's father was in court, which surprised both the  appellant
   and his representatives.  The hearing lasted all day and there would have
   been time for a brief statement to be prepared and  the  father  to  give
   evidence, but Counsel told me that  he  had  refused  to  give  evidence,
   stating that he had come only to give his son moral support.

23. The appellant and respondent  both  provided  bundles  of  documents  to
   assist the Upper Tribunal.  In reaching my conclusion on this  appeal,  I
   have had regard to all the materials in both bundles, and  the  oral  and
   written evidence and submissions, whether or not expressly  mentioned  in
   this decision.

Appellant's evidence

24. The appellant adopted his witness  statement  which  he  signed  at  the
   hearing.  In that statement, he wished to explain his  offending  history
   and the reasons behind it.  He stated that he had been stabbed, age 7  in
   DRC, by people looking for his father who was by that time in the  United
   Kingdom.  He had been badly injured and was lucky to survive.  He  feared
   return to the DRC because of his experiences there.

Life in the DRC

25. The appellant was born in  Kinshasa,  and  had  an  atypical  first  and
   middle for a Congolese man, as his paternal grandfather  was  from  Mali.
   His family name is Congolese.

26. The appellant's  father  had  shops  in  Kinshasa  and  the  family  was
   relatively prosperous,  though  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
   father was always difficult.  Things in Kinshasa changed suddenly:  there
   was rioting and looting and he was not allowed to go outside  the  house.
   The appellant felt scared; food was scarce.

27. One day, his father and two of his brothers just vanished.   His  mother
   told him they had left because his father was no longer safe.  Those left
   behind were the appellant, his  step-brother  and  step-sister,  and  his
   mother.  Some time later, armed men came to the house,  looking  for  his
   father.  They pushed his mother over, and in order to frighten  her  into
   telling where his father was, they  threatened  to  kill  the  appellant.
   They had a knife and he was stabbed.  His  lung  was  punctured  but  the
   knife missed his heart.

28. The appellant was in hospital for  some  time.   In  the  meantime,  his
   mother also fled from the DRC.  The appellant  lived  with  his  maternal
   grandparents for a time.  He stayed home: he missed  school.   His  step-
   brother and step-sister stayed somewhere else.  After a while, a stranger
   came to pick up the appellant and bring him to  where  his  half-siblings
   were living.  They started to travel but during  the  journey  they  were
   split up again.

29. Finally, after staying with a woman for  a  few  months,  another  woman
   came and brought the appellant to his  mother,  who  was  in  the  United
   Kingdom. His father and his two  brothers  were  here  also.   His  step-
   brother arrived later:  his  step-sister  became  ill  and  died  on  the
   journey. The family does not know where she is buried.

30. The appellant has a lot of bad  memories  from  the  time  when  he  was
   separated from his mother, a period of about 2 years, before arriving  in
   the United Kingdom. The adults who looked after him treated him badly; he
   was made to work hard, if he wanted to eat; he often did not have  enough
   to eat.  Sometimes he had to eat  from  the  bin.   He  felt  scared  and
   powerless, and that adults could do what they wanted.  He saw  a  lot  of
   dead bodies, including babies and burned corpses.  He  feels  he  had  no
   childhood before the age of 9, while still in the DRC.

Schooling and early years in United Kingdom

31. When he arrived in the United Kingdom, the appellant  had  no  trust  in
   adults. He found it hard to eat in front of people, for example,  to  eat
   his school dinners in the school dinner hall.    However,  he  felt  safe
   with his parents.  They did not talk about the past; he thought they were
   trying to forget it.  Both of them were easily  angered  and  his  father
   punished the appellant harshly and often.  The appellant felt  that  both
   of them, in particular his father,  were  angry  with  him,  but  now  he
   realises they were deeply traumatised by their own experiences.

32. The appellant went to school.  He found the system confusing. He had  no
   knowledge of English at first, and when he did learn it,  spoke  with  an
   accent.  He was wearing second-hand clothes donated by the  church  which
   his parents attended, because they had no money.   He  had  been  out  of
   school for at least  2  years  before  coming:  he  had  no  mathematical
   knowledge, and did not know his date of birth or the months of the  year.
   Other children laughed at his accent and called him stupid.

33. The appellant adapted badly to school.  He  got  into  fights;  he  felt
   bullied and ridiculed by other children.   His  bad  behaviour  made  his
   father angry with him  and  on  one  occasion,  his  father  slapped  the
   appellant in front of a head teacher and the  appellant  was  taken  away
   from his parents for about 6 weeks.  He was frightened by that;  when  he
   returned home, he never told any outsiders  about  the  beatings  he  was
   still receiving in case he was taken from home again.

34. His father beat and humiliated the  appellant  often  in  front  of  his
   brothers and sisters.  His father ruled the house and his mother  had  no
   influence.  On one occasion the appellant stole beers from a party at the
   family home and his father found him on the road, stripped him naked, and
   beat the appellant with a hose pipe,  including  on  his  genitals.   The
   appellant was bruised all over his body.

35. While at secondary school, the appellant was assessed as having  special
   needs and given extra classes.  He found it very difficult to learn,  and
   felt left out. He was angry, got into fights, and was briefly taken  into
   care again during this period after teachers saw bruising  on  his  body.
   He cried for his mother and was allowed to return home.

36. The appellant states that he  got,  and  still  gets,  nightmares  about
   soldiers and that if he heard other Congolese children speaking  Lingala,
   it would trigger flashbacks of the stabbing incident in Kinshasa.  He did
   not feel safe for a long time: he thought what had happened to him in the
   DRC would happen again.

37. Eventually, in 1996 when he was 12,  the  appellant  brought  a  bicycle
   chain and an army-style knife in to school and was excluded.  He was sent
   to a special school because he  was  considered  to  have  emotional  and
   behavioural difficulties.  That was a successful placement: the appellant
   did quite well, and left with 8 GCSEs.  The school was very supportive.

38. On one occasion that school tried to include the appellant on  a  school
   trip to Spain, but he could not go because he lacked a travel document or
   passport.  His parents had a pending asylum application at this time  and
   were more relaxed.  The appellant thinks that the  school's  intervention
   may have helped the family get exceptional leave to remain in 2003.   His
   Congolese travel document arrived later but was sent to the  Home  Office
   when his parents, brothers and sisters applied for British citizen status
   in 2004 and he has not seen it since then.

39. The appellant's difficulties with his father continued and he  got  into
   bad company.  He smoked cannabis for the first time when he was 12 or  13
   years old.  It helped him calm down and sleep at  nights,  and  became  a
   regular routine.  The nightmares were easier.  He began stealing  as  the
   money from his paper round was not enough to  pay  for  the  cannabis  he
   used.  He also ran errands for older children, collecting money for  them
   and getting paid in cannabis.  On two occasions, the appellant was caught
   shoplifting.  His father beat him severely but he was inured to  that  by
   now: it just made him angry.

40. The appellant finished at  his  special  school  and  went  to  college.
   Without the additional support,  he  felt  lost.   Social  services  lost
   interest in the appellant and he dropped out of college age 16 or 17  (so
   in 2000 or 2001).  He got work in a  furniture  store  and  kept  out  of
   trouble for a while. Working was good for him: he was using less cannabis
   and not hanging about on the streets.

Adult life and criminality

41. In August 2003, the appellant was convicted and  fined  for  threatening
   and insulting  words  and  behaviour.   His  account,  supported  by  his
   brother's evidence, is that he was with his brother in the brother's  car
   and they were stopped by  the  police,  who  punched  the  appellant  and
   dragged him out of the car.  He was shocked  and  lost  his  temper.   He
   admits shouting  and  swearing.   The  appellant  was  arrested  for  his
   behaviour but feels that it was a case of mistaken identity and unfair.

42. In September 2004, the  respondent  refused  to  grant  British  citizen
   status to the appellant but did not return his Congolese  passport.   His
   job had come to an end because the furniture  company  had  closed.   The
   appellant could neither get work nor study, because he lacked an identity
   document. He felt alienated and as though he was in  the  United  Kingdom
   illegally, but he still had indefinite leave to remain, which  has  never
   been withdrawn.

43. The appellant got deeper into drugs.  He was bored and  wanted  to  stay
   away from the family home and his father.  He could not get benefits, and
   he  hung  around  with  drug  dealers.   Finally,  he  got  an   informal
   apprenticeship at a garage, through a friend of his father's, but he  was
   not learning or getting paid.  He claims to have  been  unaware  that  he
   could seek legal advice.  He was smoking crack cocaine and stealing  from
   his mother's purse and from the family home.  His parents  asked  him  to
   leave the house.  Now he was homeless, living on the streets and  in  his
   car.  He was depressed, and using crack cocaine heavily.

44. In 2005, the appellant committed a robbery.  He had taken crack  cocaine
   from a dealer 'on trust', but then could not pay.  He was scared and high
   on the drug.  He borrowed a car from a friend,  knowing  he  was  driving
   uninsured.  He was very scared, but trying to calm down,  using  alcohol.
   The appellant stated that he went to a corner shop  and  took  a  can  of
   lager to the till, although he had no money to pay for it. Then he  tried
   to grab the till, which had money in it.   A  child  behind  the  counter
   began hitting the appellant with a stick.  The till came apart, the money
   fell out, and the appellant stole what he could pick  up  and  ran.   The
   police chased and arrested him.  The appellant was sentence to  3  years'
   imprisonment. He was partly relieved to be away from drugs in prison.  He
   worked hard on drug programs and on his relationship with his mother.

45. At the end of his sentence in 2007, the appellant was 23 years  old.  He
   was detained under immigration powers and a deportation order  was  made.
   The  appellant  successfully  appealed  against  deportation:  the  judge
   considered that he had made efforts  to  rehabilitate  himself  and  that
   there was no serious risk that he would  reoffend.   He  was  advised  to
   apply for a passport from the DRC Embassy.  He did so  and  was  given  a
   passport.    The family then applied to have the  appellant's  indefinite
   leave to remain endorsed on his DRC passport but that  application,  made
   in summer 2007, resulted in the respondent having, and holding on to  his
   passport.  He has not received it back.   He had  no  right  to  work  or
   claim benefits, or get access to housing.  His mother wrote to  the  Home
   Office on the appellant's behalf on a  number  of  occasions  to  try  to
   resolve the issue.

46.  The appellant still owed money to his dealers.   They  gave  him  crack
   cocaine and he returned to using it. The appellant agreed to work off his
   debts, selling drugs for the dealers, but he sold to an undercover police
   officer.  It is his case that he has not used drugs since 2008.

47. In April 2008, the appellant was convicted of possession with intent  to
   supply class A drugs and sentenced to 2�  years  imprisonment.  While  in
   jail, he learned that working out helped  him  deal  with  his  emotional
   issues.  He did more courses, and studied. He was released on licence  in
   September 2009.

48. The appellant met a girl  and  began  going  out  with  her  (his  first
   partner).  For a time, he was given jobseekers' allowance but  the  first
   job that they  offered  was  not  available  to  him  because  he  lacked
   documentation.  The jobseekers' allowance was withdrawn.

49. The appellant learned to  drive.   He  started  to  help  his  recently-
   separated sister with transporting her children to school and so on.  His
   probation officer was supportive.  His mother wrote  again  to  the  Home
   Office about his indefinite leave to remain.

50.  The  respondent  started  deportation   proceedings.    The   appellant
   appealed: Immigration Advisory  Service  represented  him.   Between  the
   first and the second appeal  hearing,  the  appellant  was  charged  with
   battery of his first partner, but she withdrew the charges and was  fined
   for wasting police time. The appellant's appeal succeeded on the basis of
   his family life and his efforts to rehabilitate himself.

51. In the Home Office bundle, a copy of  his  indefinite  leave  to  remain
   letter was disclosed and,  along  with  his  full  driving  licence,  the
   appellant was now better placed to look for work.   He  still  could  not
   access state benefits.

52. In 2011, after his appeal was allowed, the appellant began  drinking  to
   excess.  His relationship with his first partner broke  down.   He  began
   another relationship with a woman (his second partner) who was  a  single
   mother: he became really close to her daughter.

53. In November 2011, the appellant committed  a  robbery,  and  in  January
   2012, he was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.  He had  been  working
   the night shift at Sainsbury's in St Albans, near  his  second  partner's
   home.  She was not working but was  attending  college.   They  moved  in
   together and he was able to  help  financially.   Over  time,  he  became
   convinced that his second partner was more interested  in  the  financial
   contribution the appellant made than in the appellant himself.

54. Around this time, the appellant was also convicted of fraud in  relation
   to the hire of a car at Stansted Airport.  The details used to obtain the
   car were fraudulent.  The appellant maintains that he was unaware of  the
   fraud.  He was fined and sentenced to unpaid community work.

55. His relationship with his second partner was not going well.  They  were
   arguing a lot about money.  In December 2012, the appellant was convicted
   of assaulting his second partner, during an argument about a mobile phone
   she had insisted he buy for her.  He was annoyed: she did  not  need  the
   newest phone and there was nothing wrong with her old  one.   He  grabbed
   the phone, with the intention of  taking  it  back  and  terminating  the
   contract.  There was an altercation and the appellant  was  arrested  for
   common assault.  His employer agreed to hold his job open for  2  months.
   The appellant pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 7 weeks' imprisonment.

56. When he came out, he  was  subject  to  a  restraining  order  which  he
   breached, after his second partner visited him at his registered  address
   (his mother's home) and asked him to come back.  Once  they  were  living
   together, his second partner often threatened to report  the  appellant's
   presence to the police as it was a breach of the restraining order.  On a
   number occasions she actually called the  police  and  made  accusations,
   often throwing the appellant out in the middle of  the  night.   Warrants
   were issued for the appellant's arrest, then  his  second  partner  would
   withdraw the accusations.  He was working, giving her all his money,  but
   she was not contributing financially.

57. On one occasion, his second partner did not withdraw her accusation  and
   the appellant was arrested and punished  for  breaching  his  restraining
   order.  He received a community penalty.  He  went  back  to  his  second
   partner, despite the restraining order.

58. On another occasion, the appellant borrowed his second partner's car  to
   get to his job and was arrested for driving without insurance and using a
   car which did not belong to him.  He was sentenced to 8 weeks  for  those
   offences.  He lost his Sainsbury's job this time.  The  respondent  began
   deportation procedures again.  The appellant was detained at the  end  of
   his sentence under the respondent's immigration powers.

59. In August 2013, the appellant was bailed and went back to live with  his
   mother.  He got a local job and  tried  to  stay  away  from  his  second
   partner.  The relationship was effectively over but both of them asserted
   at the hearing in March 2014 that it was genuine and subsisting.  In  the
   weeks before the hearing, the appellant felt  under  constant  threat  of
   exposure from his second partner for this untruth.  At the  hearing,  his
   second partner told the appellant she did not want to be with him; he was
   happy with that.  She gave evidence but it was half-hearted and the judge
   did not believe it.

60. The appellant then met his third partner.  He tried to keep  in  contact
   with his second partner because he remained fond of her daughter.

61. In April 2014, the appellant's  appeal  against  the  third  deportation
   order failed.  He was still spending time with his  second  partner,  who
   was unaware of his new relationship with his third partner.   His  second
   partner found text messages and pictures on  the  appellant's  phone  and
   went crazy.  The appellant left, and blocked the second partner's  number
   on his phone.  However, over the next few days the second partner pursued
   him at his mother's and sister's house and eventually called the  police,
   saying that the appellant had assaulted her.  She still wanted him  back.



62. The case went to the  magistrates'  court.   They  believed  his  second
   partner, taking account of her oral evidence and his previous  conviction
   for assaulting her.   The  appellant  was  convicted  and  got  'a  short
   sentence'.  He was detained on release under the respondent's immigration
   powers and remains so detained.

Present circumstances

63. The appellant states that he takes full responsibility for his  previous
   actions, and that he is not a career criminal or a  violent  person.   He
   has had a difficult life and all his problems were caused either by other
   people or by his lack of documentation.  His  driving  offences  occurred
   when he was trying to get to work.  He had tried really hard not to  fall
   back into bad company or criminal ways. The appellant  stated  that  that
   his desperate situation led him to do 'desperate stupid things' but  that
   he could 'make an effort to do things right'.

Return to the Democratic Republic of the Congo

64. The appellant's evidence was that  he  could  no  longer  'really  speak
   Lingala or French': after their arrival in the United Kingdom, the family
   spoke all three languages for a time but that some of his  siblings  were
   born in the United Kingdom and as they got older,  the  family  moved  to
   speaking only in English.  He observed that  in  his  second  deportation
   appeal in 2011, the judge had accepted that he no longer spoke French  or
   Lingala.

65. The appellant stated that his  parents  were  frightened  to  return  to
   Kinshasa because of what happened there.  It 'messed up' his  father  and
   his mother.  They just wanted to forget all about it.

66. The appellant had very bad memories of the DRC.   He was  frightened  to
   return, partly because of what happened, and partly because  of  what  he
   had pieced together from the little his  parents  said.   He  thought  if
   returned to the DRC that he would be killed.  He  did  not  know  how  he
   could survive there.

67. His parents' asylum claim was never properly considered by a  judge  and
   the appellant does not know what was his father's political profile.   He
   does not know whether the authorities will consider that as his  father's
   son he has been involved in some kind of  anti-Government  activities  in
   the United Kingdom.

68. If deported, he would be living on the streets.   He  would  stand  out,
   and that would put him at risk.  He would be seen as rich and would be an
   obvious target for violence and crime. His family might well try to  send
   money but just picking it up would make him  a  target  for  crime.   His
   mother had little money: she was working wo jobs and paying full rent for
   her home, as well as supporting his father, who was currently  very  ill.
   The appellant did not think she could afford to send him money if he were
   in the DRC.

69. He had a new partner.  Their relationship had lasted only a  few  months
   so far but she visited him regularly in prison and he  was  hopeful  that
   the relationship could last.

Appellant's oral evidence

70. The appellant adopted his witness statement  to  stand  as  his  primary
   evidence in chief.  He was asked supplementary questions by his  Counsel,
   Ms McCarthy. He stated that his  new  relationship  had  begun  6  months
   before his present incarceration.  His new partner was a British citizen.
    He did not wish to drag his new partner into these proceedings or to put
   himself at risk as he had been with his second partner.

71. The appellant identified his two brothers and his father at the back  of
   the Court.  He had not expected to see his father, partly  because  their
   relationship had been so poor, but mostly because  his  father  had  been
   living in Belgium for the last 6 months, visiting Congolese  friends  and
   having treatment there for his health problems. They were back in contact
   and the appellant had forgiven his father's past abuse.

72. Asked why the Upper Tribunal should believe that he  had  changed  since
   the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal in 2014, the appellant stated that
   that he was now in his thirties and  had  learned  how  to  get  hold  of
   himself.  He was ready to  move  forward.   He  had  a  good,  supportive
   partner now and just wanted to have a normal life, which for as  long  as
   he could remember, had not been the case.  He had been drug  free  for  8
   years and had a better relationship with alcohol.   Previously,  although
   not dependent on it, he had been binge drinking, but now he had  attended
   courses about the dangers of alcohol and its effect on his  judgment  and
   everyday life. His Sainsbury's job remained open; he had  been  suspended
   in 2015 because he could not prove that he had the right to work.

73. In cross-examination,  the  appellant  confirmed  that  his  father  was
   spending a lot of time in Belgium for his health, staying with  Congolese
   friends in the Brussels area. His father still spoke French  and  watched
   the news in French, flicking through the French television channels.  The
   appellant did not watch French programming, out  of  choice.   He  stated
   that he did not understand French television now.

74. The appellant stated that he came  to  the  United  Kingdom  not  having
   learned any English in the  DRC.   In  1993  he  spoke  only  French  and
   Lingala.  Schooling was in French, but mainly, he spoke Lingala.  He  had
   continued to hear mainly Lingala at home for 3-4 years after  he  arrived
   in the United Kingdom (so to the age of 12 or 13).  When  other  children
   shouted in Lingala, giving him nightmares, he  stated  that  he  did  not
   understand the language but just knew what it sounded  like,  and  became
   scared.

75. Asked whether he accepted responsibility for his criminal  actions,  the
   appellant stated that he did, but it was clear on closer questioning that
   for every one of his convictions, he in fact blamed  others.   He  denied
   having brought the army-style knife into school, as his  teachers  stated
   that he had, and asserted that he had not used the bicycle  chain,  which
   he brought only for defensive purposes.  If he had used  it,  the  police
   would have been involved.

76.  The  appellant  had  regretted  every  offence  he  committed.  He  had
   undertaken Think First and Calm courses while  in  prison.   He  accepted
   that he had gone on to commit further  offences  after  completing  those
   courses.

77. In relation  to  the  most  serious  incident,  the  2005  robbery,  the
   appellant did not accept that he had hurt the young boy behind the  till,
   although the sentencing remarks record that the child  was  bruised.   He
   stated that he might have caused stress and fright but did not set out to
   hurt the boy.

78. In relation to his history of damage to  property  and  battery  against
   two of his partners, the appellant accepted that he had been found guilty
   but continued to say that the charge by his first partner was false,  and
   by his second partner, that the magistrates had erred  in  believing  her
   because she 'did well in the witness box'.

79. The appellant denied responsibility for any of the  incidents  in  July,
   October and November 2015 in relation to  his  second  partner.   He  had
   pleaded not guilty to those.  The  appellant  stated  that  he  had  very
   strong feelings for his second partner and that 'sometime when you are in
   love, you do things'.  The judge had believed her, and not him.

80. The appellant had pleaded guilty to the breach of the restraining  order
   as he wanted to get out of prison and save his job.  His  second  partner
   had offered to assist in the removal of the restraining  order,  and  had
   gone so far as to write a statement for his lawyers,  but  they  had  not
   organised a court date before the order came to an end.

81. It had been very hurtful not to have the documents enabling him to  work
   and study and so on, like a normal person. That had caused the  appellant
   a tremendous amount of stress.  He did not accept that  he  had  offended
   continually while in the United Kingdom: he  had  only  had  3  custodial
   sentences.

82.  The  appellant  had  not  had  any  mental  health  treatment,  despite
   recommendations by his doctors.  He had been given depression  medication
   the first time he was in prison, but had stopped taking it because he did
   not want to be dependent on medical drugs.  All such medicines  had  side
   effects, and he was feeling much better and did not need it.  Nor had  he
   ever been prepared to seek treatment for his  nightmares.   Instead,  the
   appellant worked out at the gym which kept him focused and helped him  to
   sleep at night.

83. The appellant had not received family visits during his first  sentence,
   until near the end.  His mother wanted to punish  him.   In  his  present
   detention, the appellant received family visits  weekly  or  fortnightly,
   mainly from his brother.  His mother came sometimes, but he did not  like
   her doing that because she was working two jobs to  support  the  family.
   Also, he did not like her  seeing  him  in  prison.    He  spoke  on  the
   telephone to his family members, mother, brothers and sisters, every  day
   or every other day, including his youngest brother when  he  was  not  in
   college.

84. When not in prison, he lived at his mother's home in Enfield.   Most  of
   his family members also lived in Enfield.  Although the appellant managed
   to come off drugs in 2008, he went on to commit further offences, despite
   his family support.  He  stated  that  he  was  a  hard  worker  and  his
   criminality was not by choice.  He was not a career criminal; it was just
   a question of his circumstances.  He knew now that  the  self-destructive
   path he followed was not the right way, and with his family's support, he
   wanted to do better.

85. The appellant accepted that he could keep in touch with his family  from
   the DRC as he now did from prison, though it might be more difficult.  He
   considered that return to the DRC would 'knock him back':  he  had  never
   lived alone or had any normality in his life.  Return to  the  DRC  would
   take away that chance permanently.

86. The appellant considered that he had no skills acquired  in  the  United
   Kingdom which he could put to use in the  DRC.   It  was  a  third  world
   country, as he understood the  position,  and  constantly  at  war.   The
   appellant did not think that he would be safe in the DRC,  where  he  had
   nothing but bad memories.  He was being  returned  to  the  circumstances
   which his family came to the United Kingdom to escape.

87. His step-brother had no relatives of his own in the DRC:  there  was  no
   contact  between  the  appellant's  step-siblings  and  their  biological
   mother.  The appellant's mother raised her step-daughter and  stepson  as
   though they were her own children.  The  appellant  was  unaware  of  any
   aunts or uncles in the DRC who could help him adjust.  Everyone in  their
   right minds had left or dispersed,  and  the  majority  of  his  father's
   brothers and sisters were in Europe.  The  appellant  corrected  that  to
   state that all of his paternal uncles and aunts were outside the DRC.

88. The appellant was asked why there was  no  medical  evidence  about  the
   scar from his knife wound  in  any  of  the  material  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal.  He offered to show the scar, but that was not really an answer
   to the question.

89. In relation to his names, the appellant  stated  that  his  first  names
   West African because his paternal grandfather was from there.  His family
   name came from his mother's side and was Congolese.

90. There was no re-examination and no Tribunal questions.

Mother's evidence

91.  The  appellant's  mother  has  given  evidence  at  all  three  of  his
   deportation hearings.  In February 2007, she confirmed that the appellant
   was ejected from the family home a month before the index offence, due to
   his deteriorating behaviour.  His mother appeared remorseful about  that.
   She told the Tribunal that she felt partly responsible for his  behaviour
   and she satisfied the Tribunal that she and his brothers and sisters were
   supportive of the appellant.  The Tribunal accepted  that  the  appellant
   'shows every sign of reforming in the United Kingdom and we find that  if
   he was removed from the United Kingdom that he would [be] likely to enter
   into a downward spiral of criminality without the support of his family'.
   There is no more detail about the mother's evidence in that decision.

92. At the hearing in December 2010, the appellant's mother stated that  his
   troubles began when they got into an argument and she asked him to  leave
   the family home, in 2005.  The appellant began living  rough,  fell  into
   bad company, and started to use drugs.  In response to  a  question  from
   the Tribunal, the appellant's mother stated that she had not  been  aware
   that the appellant was using drugs at the time.  She only found out  that
   he was doing so after his conviction.  She did not believe  now  that  he
   was taking drugs.

93. When he was released from prison on that occasion, she  had  5  children
   living at home and the house was quite full. The appellant wanted to move
   out and have his own space.  She believed now that it had been a  mistake
   to let him do that.  The appellant found it  difficult  to  obtain  state
   benefits or a job, and was under money pressure: his mother felt she  had
   not been  sufficiently  supportive  because  she  was  studying  for  her
   accounting course and did not realise until too late that he was again in
   difficulty.

94. Since the appellant's release from prison this time, he had  focused  on
   changing his life, helping with family and friends, spending hours on the
   internet looking for work, and helping his sister with her  children.  He
   listened to his mother; their relationship  improved and he was a regular
   church attender on Sundays, with all the family, which he  had  not  done
   since he was a small child.  She spoke to him daily and would know if  he
   was in difficulty.  He listened to her more than before and was now  more
   of a family man.

95. None of the appellant's other brothers and  sisters  had  committed  any
   criminal offences: it was not something the family did.  The  appellant's
   mother considered that he got into trouble because of the bad company  he
   kept, and the drugs he was taking.  He was now ready to settle  down  and
   change his life.  The appellant's father was unhappy with his drug taking
   but 'stuck with him' and  all  of  the  family,  including  her  husband,
   visited the appellant in prison this time.  It  is  interesting  to  note
   that in 2010 the appellant's mother spoke  of  his  drug  taking  in  the
   present tense.

96. Before the third Tribunal in March 2014, the  appellant's  mother  again
   stated that he was a  different  character  compared  with  when  he  was
   younger.  He had a caring nature and contributed towards his family.   He
   was 'a devoted father to his nephews'.  Her son had made unwise decisions
   in his life but those did not justify deportation.

Mother's oral evidence

97. The appellant's mother  prepared  a  witness  statement  for  the  Upper
   Tribunal hearing.  She adopted and relied upon that  statement,  and  was
   then cross-examined. In her statement, she said that the appellant's  new
   representatives had asked her far more questions about what  happened  to
   the family in the DRC.   The appellant's mother stated that she was  born
   in Kinshasa in 1961 and married the appellant's father when she was about
   21.  In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, she worked at an office job
   for Unilever.

98. Her husband owned some shops and a printing works.  He was a  member  of
   the  UDPS  and  used  his  print  works  to  print  UDPS  leaflets.   The
   appellant's mother was also a UDPS member  and  ran  seminars  for  women
   members, but was not as politically active as her husband.  She wanted to
   support him.

99. In 1991, the authorities found  out  what  the  appellant's  father  was
   doing.  He fled, taking two of the children with him, one who was 12, and
   one who was only 2.   The  children  were  at  the  appellant's  maternal
   grandmother's house and he just took them.  The  appellant's  mother  was
   left behind  with  a  baby  daughter,  her  two  step-children,  and  the
   appellant to care for.

100. The appellant's mother described an attack in 1991 about 6 weeks  after
   her husband left Kinshasa.  Soldiers came looking for her husband at  the
   family home.  They beat her  and  asked  where  her  husband  was.   They
   threatened to come  back  and  kill  her.   The  appellant  was  stabbed:
   neighbours took him to the hospital, and his maternal grandparents helped
   the appellant's  mother  and  the  baby  to  leave  the  DRC,  via  Congo
   Brazzaville.  The appellant was then still in hospital, and  remained  so
   for a number of weeks. His mother left him, and her two step-children, in
   the care of her parents and various friends.

101. The appellant's mother took the baby with her.  She  spent  a  year  in
   Congo-Brazzaville, and eventually the appellant's father got word to  her
   that he was in the United Kingdom, where the appellant's mother  rejoined
   him.  He made arrangements for the other children  to  join  them  there,
   through various  friends.   They  all  arrived  separately.    Her  step-
   daughter did not arrive at all: she was ill  and  died  on  the  journey.
   They do not know where she is buried.

102. The appellant was skinny, unhealthy and sad on  arrival.   Since  then,
   the family had been trying hard to put events in  the  DRC  behind  them.
   They spoke French and Lingala at  home  for  the  first  few  years,  but
   eventually stopped and started speaking English.  The appellant's  mother
   said in her statement that her two youngest children had only ever spoken
   English at home, but in her oral evidence, she contradicted that.   Until
   her youngest child was 2 years old, she told me that she spoke French and
   Lingala with him as well as English, but he was late talking and she  was
   advised to keep to just one language.  It appears,  therefore,  that  the
   family were still using all 3 languages up to 14 years  ago  (at  least),
   when the appellant would have been 18 years old.

103. The  appellant's  mother  sets  out  the  history  of  the  appellant's
   schooling, which is uncontentious.  She noted that he  really  wanted  to
   learn English at school and be the same as  his  friends.   She  asserted
   that he 'doesn't really speak any French or Lingala any  more'.   On  the
   evidence, both from his schooldays  and  in  relation  to  the  languages
   spoken at home, I do not accept that is true.

104. The appellant's mother continues to  blame  herself  for  'kicking  him
   out' in 2005.  She clarified that the family knew very little about drugs
   and thought that ejecting him would make him realise that he  should  not
   be taking drugs and he would stop. She describes him locking  himself  in
   the bathroom and knowing that something was seriously wrong.  She  states
   that when she found out that he had been taking drugs, the appellant  was
   asked to leave the family home. The appellant's mother's evidence here is
   inconsistent with her earlier evidence that the family was  unaware  that
   the appellant was taking drugs until after his first robbery conviction.

105. The appellant's mother then described the  cramped  conditions  in  the
   family home when the appellant came out of  prison,  and  his  moving  to
   hostel accommodation and returning to  drugs,  this  time  dealing.   She
   stated that he had been 'clean' since the second prison period.

106. The appellant's mother described the  appellant's  second  partner  and
   his move to St Alban's to live with her.  The family did not approve, and
   she  blamed  the  second  partner  for  his  recent   convictions.    The
   relationship breakdown got very messy.  The appellant's mother  was  glad
   that relationship had ended.

107. The appellant's  mother  considered  that  of  all  her  children,  the
   appellant was the most traumatised by  what  happened  in  the  DRC.   He
   missed getting British citizenship because of what she  described  as  'a
   minor conviction'.  The appellant's mother thought he  had  suffered  and
   had life made very difficult; she did not consider him to  be  a  bad  or
   violent person.

108. If the appellant were returned to the DRC,  his  mother  did  not  know
   whether the authorities would be interested in him because of his  family
   background, now some 25 years ago.  The authorities  were  unpredictable.
   The family had no links there now and he would have no  support  network.
   She was convinced that he would end up on the street or be a  target  for
   crime.  His mother would try to send money but it would be unsafe for him
   to collect or use it.  It would be very difficult for her to spare  money
   to send him, with all her commitments.  She considered that  sending  the
   appellant back to the DRC would be like sending him  to  his  death.  She
   still felt really guilty for leaving him behind in hospital in 1991,  and
   would be emotionally devastated if the appellant were returned to the DRC
   again without her.

109.  In  her  oral  evidence,  the   appellant's   mother   answered   some
   supplementary questions from his Counsel.  She stated that this  was  the
   first hearing her husband had attended, and that the  appellant's  father
   had not told him he  would  attend.   Her  husband  wanted  to  give  the
   appellant his support.  The father-son relationship was much better now.

110. The appellant's mother stated  (as  she  often  has  before)  that  the
   appellant had changed, that he was not hanging out with  his  friends  as
   much, and that he was more family minded.  He wanted to keep his job  and
   support his family.  When he worked, the appellant would give  her  money
   if he was living at home.  He was not able to do so after he moved to his
   partner's house.  She stated that her son had a  golden  heart.   In  his
   mother's opinion, the appellant would be a different person if  he  could
   work and had identity documents. He was no longer doing  drugs  or  using
   alcohol.

111. In cross-examination, the appellant's  mother  accepted  that  she  had
   said these things before.   When  he  lived  in  her  house,  his  mother
   supported the appellant by putting food on the table.  He would take  his
   youngest brother to his sports activities,  and  give  his  time  to  the
   family.  The youngest boy was 17 now, but nobody took him  to  sport  any
   more.  The appellant would collect his nephew from school, when he could.
    The family took that in turns.

112. The appellant's mother accepted that  the  appellant's  difficult  past
   and lack of identity documents did not entitle him to turn to crime.  She
    told him that if he was not going to change, she could not support  him.
   She was getting older and she needed the appellant to  support  her  now.
   All his brothers and sisters and the  appellant  supported  their  mother
   mentally.  It would be nice if the appellant had really changed now.

113. The appellant's eldest brother was in France, where he worked  in  Lyon
   as a salesman.  The eldest daughter was a science technician, working for
   the local Council, and had a son.  Her other daughter  also  had  a  son.
   Her stepson was a salesman in Norwich, with children of his own.  Another
   son was a driver, and the youngest was at college.   With  her  children,
   the appellant's mother spoke only English now.  She  made  that  decision
   when her youngest son was about 2 years old  and  was  having  difficulty
   speaking.

114. The appellant's father was now retired and spent time  in  Belgium  for
   his health.  They  had some problems in the marriage but  resolved  them.
   Her husband spoke French and was able to stay with  friends  in  Belgium.
   With her husband, she spoke a mixture  of  French,  English  and  Lingala
   still.  The appellant's mother also still spoke French: she was  a  grown
   woman when she came to the United Kingdom.  In her evidence,  she  had  a
   noticeable French accent.  She  qualified as an accounts  technician  but
   now that she had grandchildren, the appellant's mother worked as  a  care
   assistant, which was more flexible and allowed her to help her  daughters
   with their sons.

115. The appellant's mother had not provided the appellant  with  any  money
   while he was in prison.  She did not think anyone had.  She would like to
   support him financially if he went to the DRC but her life in the  United
   Kingdom was hard, financially, and it might not  be  possible.   She  was
   working morning and night to fund his expenses here.

116. The appellant's mother had lost her own mother in the DRC now  and  had
   no connection at all with the country.  There were many bad memories.  At
   this point in her evidence, the appellant's mother was  overcome  and  we
   took a short break for her to compose herself.

117. When her evidence resumed, the appellant's mother said  that  they  had
   left the shops behind.  There was no time to salvage anything.  She  said
   that the appellant must still have a scar from his stabbing  in  the  DRC
   but accepted that no medical evidence of that was before me.

118. The appellant had not  always  lived  with  his  mother  while  he  was
   growing up.  Sometimes he was in care.  Sometimes he  was  living  rough.
   He  lived with his second partner for 3-4 years, but  always  coming  and
   going from home, because of the troubles in that relationship.  She would
   not describe him as independent yet.

119. In re-examination, the appellant's mother said that she tried to  teach
   French and Lingala to her youngest child, when the appellant was about 17
   or 18, because the older children were forgetting it.  They had forgotten
   everything but English now.

Appellant's step-brother

120. In his witness statement, signed at the hearing, the appellant's  step-
   brother gave evidence about the first offence  in  2003,  which  was  the
   reason why the appellant did not get British citizenship along  with  the
   rest of his family.  In his statement, the appellant's step-brother  said
   that the police stopped them  for  no  reason  and  started  to  hit  the
   appellant.  The appellant did not hit the police but he  did  get  really
   angry and begin shouting  at  them.   They  arrested  him,  but  not  the
   appellant's step-brother: there was no other reason to arrest them.   The
   appellant pleaded guilty, but his step-brother considered that he had not
   done anything wrong.

121. In his oral evidence, the appellant's step-brother  said  that  he  was
   born in the DRC in the same  year  as  the  appellant.   He  adopted  his
   witness  statement  and  confirmed  that  he  lived  in   Norwich.    The
   appellant's step-brother came last to the United Kingdom, when they  were
   both about 13 or 14.  He then spoke  only  French  and  Lingala:  he  had
   learned English here. At first, the  appellant's  step-brother  spoke  to
   other family members in French.  English became easier over time.  Again,
   this is evidence that the use of French within the family  survived  into
   the appellant's mid- to late-teens (at least).

122. In cross-examination, the appellant's step-brother said that his  birth
   mother had never been in the picture.  He knew nothing about her.  He had
   been brought up by his step-mother and when she  left  Kinshasa,  by  her
   parents. He had no contact with family in the  DRC  and  now  spoke  only
   English.  It was put to the witness  that  he  had  been  heard  speaking
   French with his father outside the court room.   He  admitted  that  when
   speaking to his father he used 'a type of French'.  He could not remember
   what languages his step-mother had used to the youngest child.

123. In the United Kingdom, the appellant's step-brother worked as  a  sales
   assistant.  He did not visit the appellant in prison.  It  was  too  far.
   He spoke to his brother occasionally by phone, perhaps once a month.   He
   did not help his step-mother financially as he had 3 children of his  own
   to support.  He did not help the appellant financially  either.   He  did
   not know if anyone sent him money in prison.  He had no idea whether  the
   family would help if the appellant had to go back to the DRC.

124. As regards the 2003 offence,  the  appellant's  step-brother  confirmed
   that he regarded it as a racist attack by police but that the family  had
   not asked for that to be investigated.  There was no re-examination.  The
   appellant's step-brother told the Tribunal that he would  like  to  leave
   immediately after his evidence because he did not want to  speak  to  his
   father, who had ill-treated him.

Other family members

125. I asked whether it was possible to hear evidence from  the  appellant's
   father.  By this time, it was 3 p.m.  The  appellant's  father  had  felt
   unwell and gone home.  Counsel said that she had been able  to  speak  to
   him in English outside Court but that he was unwilling to  give  evidence
   to assist the appellant.  He had come  only  for  moral  support  to  the
   appellant and was not a well man.

126. I also  had  in  the  appellant's  bundle  an  unsigned  draft  witness
   statement from the appellant's sister.  She is away on a family  holiday.
   Her memory, she says, is that the family always communicated in  English.
   The sister was just under 2 years old when she reached the United Kingdom
   and did not remember the DRC at all.  She could not really speak Lingala,
   but had learned some  French  at  school.   She  had  no  memory  of  the
   appellant speaking any language other than English.   I  can  give  these
   assertions only limited weight as  the  statement  is  unsigned  and  the
   witness did not attend to be cross-examined.

Expert evidence

127. I have before me the psychiatric report of  Dr  Katharine  Boucher  and
   the country expert report of Dr Muzong Kodi.  Neither expert attended  to
   be cross-examined so I must give their reports such weight as  they  will
   bear.

Dr Katharine Boucher's report

128. Dr Boucher is a clinical psychologist working  in  St  Saviour,  Jersey
   who qualified in 2007 with a Doctorate in Clinical  Psychology  from  the
   University of Surrey.  She is also a partner in a private practice  based
   in Jersey, London and the Netherlands. She has previously worked  at  the
   John Howard Centre, a Forensic Medium Secure  Unit  in  Hackney,  dealing
   with mentally disordered offenders from all  East  London  boroughs,  and
   more recently at HMP  Bronzefield,  a  female  prison  which  also  takes
   restricted status prisoners.

129. Dr Boucher's  report  dated  16  July  2016  goes  to  the  appellant's
   psychological state.  It is based on an interview with him  conducted  on
   11 July 2016 over a period of 3 hours on 11 July 2016.   Dr  Boucher  has
   never been the appellant's treating physician.  She was instructed by the
   appellant's solicitors to  assess  his  mental  state  and  make  a  risk
   assessment.

130.  Dr  Boucher  had  access  to  the  appellant's  background   documents
   including all the Tribunal decisions, a previous report in September 2010
   by Dr Amlan Basu, the Police National Computer printout  to  April  2013,
   which she noted did not include the appellant's most  recent  conviction,
   an  up-to-date  PNC  printout  as  at  18  July  2016,  all  his  special
   educational needs assessments and school documents, his mother's  witness
   statement, and probation assessments from 2005 and 2010.

131. The risk assessment was prepared using the Historical,  Clinical,  Risk
   Management tool HCR-20 version 3, a set of structured clinical assessment
   guidelines regularly used in various psych and  forensic  locations.   It
   consists of a checklist of  20  risk  factors,  10  being  historical,  5
   'present' and 5  future.   It  is  used  to  make  an  evaluation  of  an
   individual's future risk of violent offending, and the  doctor  considers
   it useful for the  purpose  of  assessing  general  recidivism  for  this
   appellant.

132.  Dr  Boucher's  report  is  careful  and  thorough.   She   noted   the
   difficulties which arose around the appellant's drug use.   She  recorded
   his denial of violence towards his second partner but noted that  he  had
   been convicted of those offences and considered that the  violence  might
   have been 'a means of controlling his relationship  and  because  he  was
   unable at the time to manage his anger'.

133. Dr Boucher considers that the appellant presents a moderate risk of re-
   offending, in terms of illicit drug use, theft and future  violence.   He
   would require  some  special  management  strategies  and  more  frequent
   monitoring.  That assessment is based on his being abstinent  at  present
   from drugs and alcohol, and no longer in a conflictual relationship.   If
   any of those factors were to change, the risk would increase. The  doctor
   recommends 'individual psychological support to understand how  his  past
   experiences have  impacted  on  his  self-esteem,  his  ability  to  form
   attachments and manage interpersonal difficulties, and  to  acquire  pro-
   social ways of managing feelings of anger and  distress'.  The  appellant
   was not suicidal.  Dr Boucher was satisfied that he had a subjective fear
   of return to the DRC which made him anxious.

134. The appellant does not currently meet the criteria for a  diagnosis  of
   post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), though Dr Boucher  considers  that
   when he arrived in the United Kingdom and for some years  thereafter,  he
   did meet those criteria.  His anxiety symptoms are consistent  with  that
   history, but now are at a low level.  She  considers  that  psychotherapy
   would help.  The appellant is coping at present by going to the  gym  and
   volunteering to be a Violence Reduction Representative in prison.  He had
   cooperated well with rehabilitation interventions in prison and  had  now
   abstained from drug use for 8 years.

Dr Muzong Kodi's report

135. Dr Kodi was born in Kinshasa in 1946 and is an acknowledged  expert  on
   the DRC.   He has  lived  and  worked  in  Africa  over  many  years  and
   published papers in both English and French.  Since 2010, he has been  an
   Associate Fellow with the Africa Programme at Chatham House.

136. Dr Kodi was  instructed  to  prepare  the  present  report  by  Wilsons
   Solicitors.  Dr  Kodi  had  access  to  the  witness  statements  of  the
   appellant and his mother, to his mother's asylum  interview  record,  the
   Secretary of State's refusal letter for his father, and all of the First-
   tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal decisions, as well as  the  decision  to
   deport made on 4 September 2013.

137. Dr Kodi visited the appellant in prison and assessed him as  unable  to
   speak either French or Lingala, in common with many  young  Congolese  in
   the United Kingdom. He found  him  to  present  as  a  young  westernised
   Londoner with no understanding of cultural  practices  in  the  DRC.   He
   considered that the appellant would  suffer  discrimination  in  the  DRC
   because of his lack of linguistic fluency in French and Lingala and  that
   he would find assimilation difficult.

138. Dr Kodi did not consider that the  past  political  activities  of  the
   appellant's parents with the UDPS would be a risk factor for  him  today.
   He was very clear that if the  appellant's  father  had  been  forced  to
   return at the time when the family left, he would have been at risk,  and
   that the claim made by the appellant's father was quite plausible,  given
   the circumstances then. However, the circumstances had altered.  The UDPS
   opposed the regime of President Mobuto, which had  been  toppled  by  the
   father of the incumbent, President Joseph Kabila, in May 1997.

139. Dr Kodi did consider that the appellant  would  find  it  difficult  to
   obtain legal employment in Kinshasa; the Government there  dealt  harshly
   with Congolese criminals and if he strayed back into crime the  appellant
   would risk arrest  and  detention  in  'horrible'  prison  conditions  in
   Kinshasa.  The Catholic Church and  the  public  were  fully  behind  the
   Government's 'zero tolerance for banditry'.

140. If the  appellant's  past  offending  became  known,  he  risked  being
   ostracised.  If he resumed it, he risked detention, torture or inhuman or
   degrading treatment.  This conclusion, unlike the rest of the evidence in
   paragraph 6 of Dr Kodi's report, is his own unsourced opinion.

141. Dr Kodi considered it highly likely that the appellant would fall  into
   destitution if returned to the DRC because of  the  difficulty  he  would
   experience in finding work or accessing goods  and  services  there.   He
   would only be offered expensive 'foreigner' accommodation and  would  end
   up homeless, because of his linguistic inadequacies. He would be seen  as
   rich and be at increased risk of crime, violence or exploitation for that
   reason.

142. There was a long tradition of impunity  for  the  police  and  security
   forces, going right back to  President  Mobutu's  time.   Congolese  NGOs
   provided little support and were  themselves  vulnerable  to  harassment,
   arrest and even being killed by the security forces.  Again, this opinion
   is unsourced.

143. On the basis that the appellant would be  returned  undocumented,  with
   only an emergency travel document, Dr Kodi considered that he would be in
   harm's way on return and would be more thoroughly interrogated than other
   returnees.   His  West  African  first  names  would  make  that   worse,
   suggesting  to  immigration  officers  that   he   was   not   Congolese.
   Redocumentation through the embassy would mean that the  DRC  authorities
   would be well aware of the appellant's history.  Dr Kodi does not seem to
   have been told that the Home Office have the appellant's valid  Congolese
   passport which was  obtained  without  difficulty;  if  it  has  expired,
   presumably there would be no difficulty in renewing it.

144. Dr Kodi had last conducted a research mission in the DRC  in  June-July
   2014.  He had then interviewed  10  immigration  officers  and  12  human
   rights activists, all of whom spoke to him on condition of anonymity  and
   trusted him, as an academic and a former professor at the  University  of
   Lubumbashi.  He did not say for which NGOs the interviewees  worked.   He
   was not given information  regarding  specific  instances  where  foreign
   national offenders (FNOs) were tortured.

145. Dr Kodi's evidence was that in 2014, all  his  interviewees  confirmed,
   separately,  that  all  returnees  who  had  a   criminal   record   were
   'systematically arrested and incarcerated in Congolese main  prisons  and
   smaller  detention  centres,  where   living   conditions   are   equally
   appalling'.  This was because  of  the  Congolese  Government's  concerns
   about banditry.  At paragraph 19, the report says this:

         "...While undertaking research for this  report,  on  29  September
         2015 I checked with one immigration official and two  human  rights
         activists who all confirmed  that  the  DRC  authorities'  attitude
         towards returned foreign national offenders has not changed.  Since
         the DRC Government is cracking down on all types  of  criminals  in
         the country, it is unlikely  that  they  would  allow  a  convicted
         criminal, like [the appellant] to roam freely in  the  country  and
         risk reoffending in Congo.  [The  appellant],  a  criminal  in  the
         United Kingdom, would be perceived as a serious threat to  law  and
         order in the  DRC,  just  like  those  Kuluna  criminals  who  were
         targeted by Operation Likofi.  So, contrary to the judgment of  the
         Upper Tribunal in the cases of BM and Others (returnees -  criminal
         and non-criminal) (CG) [2015] UKUT 293, as  a  convicted  criminal,
         [the appellant] would likely be arrested, detained in one of  these
         prisons or other detention centre in the country and  subjected  to
         torture and other inhuman and degrading treatment."

146. At paragraphs 20 - 24 of his opinion, Dr Kodi set out why he  disagreed
   with the findings of the Upper Tribunal in BM and others. He disputed the
   weight given to the statements in 2012 regarding the treatment of FNOs by
   Mr Barnabe Kikaya Bin Karubi, the DRC's then  Ambassador  to  the  United
   Kingdom.  He considered that it was not open to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
   give the weight it did to the respondent's Country Policy Bulletin 2/2014
   because it did not include evidence  from  the  French  Embassy  and  the
   Eglise du Christ au Congo in 2012 on the treatment of FNOs on return.

147. Dr Kodi noted that  none  of  the  countries  who  were  consulted  had
   representatives at N'Djili airport who saw FNOs through to departure from
   the airport.  Canada's Regional Officer made occasional visits.   Belgium
   monitored charter flights, but would monitor individual  returnees  after
   return only if a request was made before the flight.  Dr Kodi  considered
   that the Home Office evidence was unreliable and should have  been  given
   no weight.

148. At paragraph 24, Dr Kodi says this:

         "24. The immigration officials I interviewed  in  my  research  are
         employed by the Direction Generale de Migration  informed  me  that
         they have a keen interest in all returnees,  not  only  those  with
         criminal matters outstanding in the DRC.  It is, therefore,  likely
         that [the appellant] will be detained on arrival  in  Kinshasa,  as
         many human rights  organisations,  my  informants,  and  Ambassador
         Kikaya have stated.  I have no reason  to  doubt  the  accuracy  of
         their statements."

149. There are a number of points on which further information from Dr  Kodi
   in oral evidence would have been useful, in particular, what his  opinion
   would have been if he had known (as I find  to  be  the  case)  that  the
   appellant does still speak French and Lingala, and had, or could  get,  a
   valid Congolese passport on which to travel.

Other relevant documents

150. The appellant's special needs statement in 1997  (when  he  would  have
   been 13 years old) stated that 'English is his 3rd language.   He  speaks
   French and Lingala'.  It also stated that on arrival  the  appellant  was
   suffering severe PTSD, that his family were refugees and his parents  and
   younger brothers and sisters came to the United Kingdom without him,  the
   appellant joining them in July 1993.

151. In August 1996, when he was 12, a special  needs  statement  said  that
   the appellant's French was better than his English.   However,  when  the
   Senior Educational Psychologist spoke to him,  the  appellant  would  not
   reply in English.  The report recorded that the appellant needed to trust
   adults working with him, to feel safe  and  secure  in  his  new  working
   environment, and to come to terms with his  difficult  life  experiences.
   He needed to experience success in a consistent way and  learn  different
   ways of relating to other children.  The Child and Family  Service  would
   need to remain involved and  all  documents  should  be  translated  into
   French for the appellant's mother and father.   Regular  reviews  between
   his  parents  and  teachers  would  require  a  French/Lingala   speaking
   interpreter  to  be  arranged  by  the  school  and  should  involve  the
   educational psychologist, and a social worker when appropriate.

152. The record of his Educational Assistant's views on 3  August  1996  was
   that 'his spoken English is good considering that  he  speaks  French  at
   home.  His understanding is much better than his actual reading...he  has
   not yet mastered joined up writing.  He  copies  well  [in  English]  but
   isn't very proficient in free writing'.

153. His parents' views in June 1996 were recorded as part  of  the  special
   needs assessment.  They had said that the appellant was 'as  helpful  and
   cooperative as any normal 12-year old'.  They  were  concerned  that  'he
   displayed a very short attention span which has modified  a  little,  but
   much of this, it is thought, has arisen because of his struggle with  the
   English language'.

Police National Computer extracts

154. The  appellant's  PNC  record  (for  July  2016)  shows  the  following
   information.  The appellant in his offending has used not  just  his  own
   name (in 8 very similar variants) but also his half-brother's name  on  3
   occasions as his own.   He  was  first  reprimanded  in  June  2002,  for
   handling stolen goods, when he would have been 18 years  old.   His  last
   reprimand was in May 2004, for possession of cannabis,  then  a  Class  C
   controlled drug, when he was 20 years old.

155. In August 2003, the appellant  was  convicted  at  Enfield  Magistrates
   Court of using threatening, abusive, or insulting words or behaviour (the
   car incident, with his step-brother).   He was fined �145 and ordered  to
   pay costs.

156. On 7 January 2005, the appellant was convicted  at  Thames  Magistrates
   Court of using a vehicle while uninsured  on  19  October  2004,  driving
   without  a  licence,  and  failure  to  surrender  to  custody.   He  was
   disqualified from driving for a year and fined.  He did not pay his  fine
   and served a day's imprisonment.

157. On 15 April 2005, the  appellant  was  arrested,  the  first  time  for
   driving whilst disqualified.  This time he was  disqualified  by  Enfield
   Magistrates Court for 2 years.  He went to prison for a month.

158. On 17 April 2005, the appellant committed a robbery, stealing the  till
   from a small corner shop and using violence against a 13-year old boy who
   was behind the till, trying to defend his sister with a wooden table leg.
    On that same day, he was arrested for robbery, theft,  and  for  driving
   uninsured and without a licence.  Enfield Magistrates Court convicted him
   on the driving offences and disqualified him from driving  for  2  years.
   On the robbery charges, in December 2005, St Albans Crown Court sentenced
   him to 3 years' imprisonment, with a concurrent sentence of 3  months  on
   the theft charge.

159. In her sentencing remarks, HH Judge Catterson noted that the  appellant
   had attacked a 13-year old boy, who tried to defend the till, taking from
   him the piece of wood with which he was  trying  to  defend  his  sister,
   knocking the boy down, kicking and prodding him, and bruising  his  chest
   with the other end of the piece of wood.  The appellant was  released  on
   licence on 20 February 2007.  His sentence was due to expire  on  31  May
   2008.

160. On 2 May 2008, at St Albans Crown Court, the  appellant  was  convicted
   of  a series of drug dealing offences, beginning less than 6 months after
   he was released from prison, and while he  was  still  on  licence.   His
   offences were committed between 17 September 2007  and  2  October  2007.
   The drugs in question were heroin and crack cocaine, both Class A  drugs.
   The appellant went to prison again, this  time  for  2�  years.   In  his
   sentencing remarks, HH Judge Plumstead noted that

         "Last time you came out, your good intentions did not  last.   Next
         time when you come out you must make a big decision.  With previous
         for robbery and Class A dealing I can think, and I  think  you  can
         think, how a judge is going to look at you if  you  reoffend  after
         that.  You have put yourself  in  a  position  where  you  are  not
         somebody who fell into bad company; you will be somebody  who  will
         be treated like bad company.  So, please, for your own  sake  quit.
         All right?   Go  drug  free  in  prison,  contact  (inaudible)  and
         everybody else or CARAT, so that when you  come  out  you  are  not
         looking straight for gear.  That way you will  give  yourself  [the
         option] of not being a long, long prisoner.  That is where you  are
         going if you are not careful."

161.  On  26  November  2010,  the  appellant  was  convicted   at   Enfield
   Magistrates Court for possession of cannabis, now a Class B drug,  having
   been arrested for that on 16 November 2010. That offence gives the lie to
   the evidence of the appellant and his mother that he was clear  of  drugs
   from 2008.

162. On 28 January 2011, the  appellant  was  arrested  while  on  bail  for
   driving a motor vehicle  with  excess  alcohol.   On  11  February  2011,
   Haringey Magistrates Court imposed a further 17 months'  disqualification
   from driving, to be reduced if the appellant took an appropriate course.

163. On 6  June  2011,  the  appellant  was  arrested  for  making  a  false
   representation for gain (the car hire incident) and failing to  surrender
   to custody.  In September 2011, Mid-North Essex Magistrates Court imposed
   a community penalty and one day's detention at Court for the  failure  to
   surrender.

164. The appellant did not stay out of trouble.   Just  a  month  later,  in
   November 2011, he committed a further robbery, for which  on  11  January
   2012, Wood Green Crown Court sentenced him to 12 months' imprisonment.

165. Shortly after his release,  on  31  October  2012,  the  appellant  was
   arrested for being in charge of a mechanically  propelled  vehicle  while
   unfit through drink.  On 1 November 2012, North London Magistrates  Court
   bailed him to reside at his mother's address and  disqualified  him  from
   driving pending pre-sentence reports. The sentence imposed on 5  November
   2012 was an unpaid work requirement and another  2-year  disqualification
   from driving.  That order was revoked on 18 April 2013.

166. On 19 November 2012, just 2 weeks later,  the  appellant  was  arrested
   for battery of his then partner and pleaded guilty.  He  went  to  prison
   for 7 weeks and a restraining order was imposed until 16  December  2014.
   On 24 February 2013, the appellant breached  the  restraining  order  and
   pleaded guilty at West and Central Hertfordshire  Magistrates  Court  the
   next day.  He was sentenced to a  community  order,  with  a  supervision
   requirement, which was revoked on 18 April 2013.

167. The appellant's troubles continued.  On 20  March  2013,  less  than  a
   month after his last offence, he was arrested for committing  an  offence
   whilst a community order was in force, taking  a  motor  vehicle  without
   consent, resisting or obstructing a constable in  the  execution  of  his
   duty, and for using a vehicle with no  test  certificate,  driving  while
   uninsured, and driving whilst disqualified.  He was sentenced to 2 weeks'
   imprisonment and disqualified from driving again for 2 years.

168. There was then a lull in the appellant's offending until  the  offences
   against his second partner in 2015.  He was  convicted  at  North  London
   Magistrates Court, after pleading not guilty, on offences of battery on 9
   July 2015 and 11 July 2015, criminal  damage  on  11  July  2015  and  17
   October 2015, and battery again on 9 November 2015.   The  appellant  was
   sentenced to a total of 6 months' imprisonment and  a  restraining  order
   protecting his partner from harassment until 27 January 2021.





Respondent's submissions

169. For the respondent, Ms  Isherwood  relied  on  her  skeleton  argument,
   served before the hearing.  The respondent relied on the country guidance
   in BM and others, and submitted that the appellant's claim did not  reach
   the relevant threshold for Article 3 risk.

170. In relation to the evidence of  Dr  Kodi,  the  respondent  asked  that
   little weight be placed thereon because the sources were  relatively  old
   and because it raised no reasoned basis for departing from BM and others.
    As to the appellant's linguistic ability, Dr Kodi had tested that simply
   by speaking to him,  and  appeared  to  have  placed  no  weight  on  the
   appellant having arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  speaking  French  and
   Lingala, then learning English and Spanish at  school.   The  appellant's
   second partner was Congolese.  He had an aptitude for languages and would
   have had to speak French and Lingala at home.

171. Regarding the assistance received by the DRC, Ms  Isherwood  relied  on
   two reports, one from the Canadian Embassy and the other  from  NORAD,  a
   Norwegian agency.  These showed  some  investment  in  the  DRC  by  both
   countries.

172. Overall, Ms Isherwood submitted that the evidence  did  not  reach  the
   Article 3 threshold.  The appellant had  remained  in  Congolese  society
   while in the United Kingdom and would have available  the  assistance  of
   the Assisted Voluntary Return  Program  and  his  family  in  the  United
   Kingdom, if he chose to use them. He  was  not  currently  suffering  any
   mental  health  problems  but  he  continued  to  deny  elements  of  his
   offending, blaming others for his actions and/or his  lack  of  progress.
   There was no risk to the appellant from his father's UDPS  activities  in
   the present political circumstances in the DRC.

173. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the appellant had  a  long  and  significant
   offending history, which continued  up  to  2016  and  he  was  presently
   remanded in custody.  It seemed that family life was not now relied upon,
   but the appellant relied on his private life.  The respondent  considered
   that paragraphs 398(b) and 399/399A, taken with part 5A of the  2002  Act
   were the applicable provisions.  Ms Isherwood accepted that the appellant
   had spent most of his life in the United Kingdom and that paragraph  399A
   was applicable.  The test of 'very compelling circumstances' was not made
   out.  The 'very significant obstacles to integration' in part 5A was  the
   same test as that in paragraph 399A and was not met.

174. The appellant continued to commit crimes and disregard the law.   There
   was insufficient evidence to warrant departing from the country  guidance
   in BM and others.

175. In her oral submissions, Ms Isherwood noted that this was  not  a  case
   of a second chance, but a fourth chance.  The appellant  had  continually
   committed offences in the United Kingdom  over  a  period  of  13  years,
   including battery against  two  former  partners.    He  had  an  obvious
   disregard for the law of the  United  Kingdom  and  blamed  everyone  but
   himself for his actions.  Dr Boucher found  him  to  be  intelligent  but
   underperforming, with good potential.  The appellant was not telling  the
   truth about  his  languages;  he  spoke  to  his  step-brother  in  those
   languages in his mid-teens;  he  had  nightmares  which  included  people
   speaking in Lingala; and on his mother's  evidence,  Lingala  and  French
   were being spoken to his youngest brother when he was 17-18 years old and
   still living at home.  It was a multi-lingual family,  with  one  brother
   living in France and his father spending most of his time in Belgium.

176. The allegation that he would be destitute because he did not speak  the
   language was unsustainable.  Dr Kodi's evidence should  not  outweigh  BM
   and others, not least because in that decision  it  was  found  that  NGO
   evidence could be tainted.  The appellant's second partner was originally
   Congolese.  The evidence before the Tribunal was insufficient to outweigh
   the respondent's right to deport him as a foreign criminal, either having
   regard to Article 3 or Article 8 ECHR.

Appellant's submissions

177. For the appellant, Ms McCarthy relied on her  skeleton  argument.   She
   relied on the previous Tribunal's findings, despite the Upper  Tribunal's
   direction to the contrary in the material error  of  law  decision.   She
   cited STARRED Secretary of State for the Home Department v D [2002] UKIAT
   000702.  She relied on Maslov v Austria [2008]  ECHR  546,   and  on  the
   appellant's substantial private and family life in  the  United  Kingdom,
   formed while he was here (mostly) lawfully.

178. If he  were  removed  to  the  DRC,  Ms  McCarthy  submitted  that  the
   appellant would be at real risk of destitution or of torture, inhuman  or
   degrading treatment at the hands of the Congolese authorities. Even while
   in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  appellant  had  spent  periods  of   time
   impecunious and homeless, or living in cars,  and  had,  for  periods  of
   time, been unable to pay for  legal  representation  in  his  deportation
   appeal, even with family help.  Ms McCarthy  relied  on  the  appellant's
   asserted lack of fluency in Lingala and French, his lack of knowledge  of
   the DRC, the absence of family  support  in  the  DRC  and  his  criminal
   record (if disclosed).  The appellant's family would not be in a position
   to assist him financially and the collection of such funds would put  him
   at risk in the DRC.

179. As regards the appellant's risk of Article 3 serious  harm  other  than
   destitution, Ms McCarthy relied  on  Dr  Kodi's  opinion  that  his  West
   African first and second names, and lack of linguistic ability in  French
   and/or Lingala, would put him at risk.   Dr Kodi's discussions  with  his
   sources pre-dated the BM and others decision.   In  effect,  Ms  McCarthy
   invited me to  prefer  his  evidence  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
   guidance.

180. Paragraph 399A was applicable to the appellant, who  was  socially  and
   culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.  Ms McCarthy  observed  that
   the appellant had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  most
   of his life  and  had  demonstrated  that  there  were  very  significant
   obstacles to his integration into the United Kingdom.   The appellant was
   not a career criminal: his offences were opportunistic, not  premeditated
   and linked to desperation and/or drug or alcohol use.  The level  of  his
   criminality had decreased, not increased, over time.  He was not  a  gang
   member.  He was a young adult, who had not yet founded a  family  of  his
   own and Maslov remained applicable to him.

181. In her oral submissions, Ms McCarthy repeated much of what was  in  her
   written skeleton argument.  Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) did not apply to this appellant  because  he
   had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom at the  time  of  almost
   all his offences.  He had withdrawn  from  speaking  both  the  languages
   spoken in the DRC. He had been estranged from his French-speaking  father
   for many years.  The family were  so  traumatised  that  they  could  not
   discuss what happened in the DRC, but the worst effect had been  on  this
   appellant.

182. The appellant had been in the care of strangers in the DRC, who  abused
   him.  He had been skinny, unhealthy and 'sad' on arrival and was  seeking
   leeway and compassion.  The appellant should be treated as a  traumatised
   child, not an adult who simply could not be corrected.

183. The appellant had been in employment twice in the 23 years he spent  in
   the United Kingdom.  His evidence, and  that  of  his  mother  (there  is
   nothing independent from the employers) was that he worked hard for  both
   employers, but the absence of his passport endorsed with indefinite leave
   to remain presented a high hurdle.  He was making some limited  progress:
   his offences were becoming less serious over time.   He  had  been  clean
   from drugs since 2008 and the trigger offence for these  proceedings  was
   now  over  5  years  old.   The  appellant  had  occupied  positions   of
   responsibility in prison and taken pride in his work there.  He kept  fit
   in the prison gym.  If allowed to remain, the  appellant's  brothers  and
   sisters would push for his documents to be issued, entitling him to work.



184. The appellant would not be able to pass  for  a  native  Congolese  and
   would have access only to expensive accommodation for  foreigners,  which
   he would be unable to afford.  His criminal  convictions  in  the  United
   Kingdom would put him at risk of harm on return, as set out in Dr  Kodi's
   report. Dr Kodi's credentials were impeccable and he could be trusted  to
   give reliable information from his sources, even  though  they  were  not
   names.   BM  and  others  did  not  consider  evidence  from  the  French
   authorities or French NGOs which was relevant to the  question  of  risk.
   Dr Kodi's  credentials  brought  him  to  the  opposite  conclusion.   Ms
   McCarthy asked me to allow the appellant's appeal.

185. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

Factual findings

186. I first consider what facts can be found in the light of  the  evidence
   before me.  I note that no findings from the First-tier Tribunal decision
   are preserved, although as agreed at the hearing, there  is  very  little
   dispute about the appellant's scholastic and criminal   history,  or  the
   events which brought his family to the United  Kingdom.    I  accept  the
   family history, to the point  where  the  appellant  reached  the  United
   Kingdom.  I accept that he arrived in a poor state and  traumatised,  and
   that on arrival he spoke only French and Lingala.  There  is  no  medical
   evidence of the stab wound he suffered, but the respondent has not sought
   to dispute that either.

187. I note that the appellant has his mother and some brothers and  sisters
   in the United Kingdom, also two nephews (his sisters' children).  Neither
   he nor his step-brother in  Norwich  spoke  of  any  substantial  contact
   between the appellant and his step-brother's children.  He has a  brother
   in France, and a father who  spends  most  of  his  time  with  Congolese
   friends in Belgium, where he is being treated for  heart  problems.   The
   appellant has a new partner but does not rely  on  that  relationship  in
   these proceedings.

188. The evidence is that the appellant's parents  and  his  family  members
   continued to speak French at home well into his teens and that his father
   still speaks mainly French. The appellant's second partner  was  a  woman
   originally from the DRC.  I reject the evidence of the appellant and  his
   family members that he no longer speaks French or Lingala or that he  has
   no cultural connections with that country. This appellant  has  grown  up
   around people (children and adults)  speaking  Lingala  and  French,  the
   languages of his  country  of  origin.   His  parents  still  speak  both
   languages.  His second partner was originally from the DRC and his father
   spends his time in and around Brussels, visiting friends from the DRC.  I
   do not accept that the appellant and his family have told the truth to me
   or to Dr Kodi in relation to the appellant's cultural links to  the  DRC,
   although it may be true that there is no family there now.

189. The appellant's criminal offending is as set out in the PNC record  for
   July 2016.  It shows a lack of respect for the law of the United  Kingdom
   and a tendency to  theft,  drug  dealing  and  violence  against  others,
   particularly his partners. The appellant has not integrated into  British
   society, although he has had the benefit of support, both in and  out  of
   prison, from the authorities and during  his  schooling,  and  also  from
   family members.  The appellant accepts no  real  responsibility  for  his
   actions, although he says he does.   He  shows  very  little  remorse  or
   understanding of the effect of his actions on others.   He  continues  to
   consider that any offence he commits is  someone  else's  fault,  and  he
   continues to commit offences.

190. It is now 23 years since the appellant came to the United  Kingdom  and
   however bad his experiences in the  DRC,  he  has  no  identified  mental
   health problems and has chosen not to access any mental  health  support,
   medication or psychotherapy when it was offered. His  past  offences  are
   serious and his criminal career almost uninterrupted, except when he  has
   been incarcerated, and for a period between March 2013 and mid-2015.

191. The appellant has a Congolese passport, although  it  is  currently  in
   the possession of the Home Office, and has been for  several  years.   He
   will not need to return to the DRC on an emergency travel  document.   If
   his passport has expired, it could be renewed at the DRC Embassy  in  the
   ordinary way.

192. If he chooses to do so, he can make use of  the  respondent's  Assisted
   Voluntary  Return  Programme,   which   provides   some   financial   and
   resettlement assistance.



Article 3 ECHR

193. The appellant puts his Article 3 argument in two ways: first,  that  he
   will be destitute and/or in danger as a  foreigner,  because  he  has  no
   links to the DRC and does not speak its languages; and second, that he is
   at risk of ill-treatment  by  the  security  forces  at  the  airport  or
   thereafter, by reason of his United Kingdom convictions and his return on
   an emergency travel document as a FNO.

194. The appellant does  not  rely  on  any  risk  in  connection  with  his
   parents' UDPS activities: as stated in Dr Kodi's report, the objective of
   the UDPS has been achieved and the present Government is not  hostile  to
   its members. The appellant does not claim to be or have  been  active  in
   APARECO in the United Kingdom or anywhere else.

195. My starting point  is  the  country  guidance  decision  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in BM and others, in which the  judicial  headnote,  so  far  as
   relevant, is as follows:
      1. A national of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  ("DRC")  who  has
      acquired the status of foreign national offender in the United Kingdom
      is not, simply by virtue of such status, exposed to  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3  ECHR
      in the event of enforced return to the DRC.
      2. A national of the DRC whose attempts to acquire refugee  status  in
      the United Kingdom  have  been  unsuccessful  is  not,  without  more,
      exposed to a real risk of persecution or serious  harm  or  proscribed
      treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR in the event of  enforced  return
      to DRC. ...
      4. The DRC authorities have an interest in certain types of  convicted
      or suspected  offenders,  namely  those  who  have  unexecuted  prison
      sentences in the DRC or in respect of whom there are unexecuted arrest
      warrants in the DRC or who allegedly committed  an  offence,  such  as
      document fraud, when departing the DRC. Such persons are at real  risk
      of  imprisonment  for  lengthy  periods  and,  hence,   of   treatment
      proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.

196. That appears to be dispositive of  the  argument  in  relation  to  the
   appellant's status as a FNO.   I  consider  whether  Dr  Kodi's  evidence
   should lead me to a different conclusion.  I note that Dr  Kodi  referred
   to the 2014 Operation Likofi as a risk factor for  this  appellant.   The
   Upper Tribunal in BM and others considered that argument at [69]-[70] but
   came to the opposite conclusion:

         "69.  We turn at this juncture to consider the  discrete  issue  of
         "Operation Likofi". This features with some prominence  in  the  AI
         Report. In its report, AI advances a thesis. This is to the  effect
         that, having regard to Operation Likofi, returning foreign national
         offenders who have committed offences comparable to  those  of  the
         DRC criminals against whom this police operation was  directed  are
         at risk of serious harm or other ill  treatment.  This  is  how  we
         construe  the  terminology  "deportees  with   certain   particular
         categories of offence and profile" quoted in [27] above. We  reject
         this thesis for the following reasons.

         70. The evidence concerning "Operation  Likofi"  makes  clear  that
         this was a crackdown, accompanied by significant violence,  carried
         out in a concerted  police  operation  in  2014  against  organised
         street gangs in an endeavour  to  eradicate  all  kinds  of  street
         crime. Having studied the background material, it does not surprise
         us that the DRC authorities acted in this way. However, it  is  not
         possible to extrapolate from the circumstances of this operation  a
         risk faced by returnees, whatever their background. It was  clearly
         directed against criminal gangs then operating and did not entail a
         more widespread campaign against all those  with  a  past  criminal
         record. AI has devised a thesis, or has formulated a mere  opinion,
         which, in our view, fails  to  engage  with  the  nature,  purpose,
         vintage and duration of this discrete police operation.  We  reject
         this thesis accordingly.

         71. We further consider that the AI evidence suffers  from  readily
         identifiable frailties: the lack of detail,  particularisation  and
         concrete evidence of individual cases; the failure to  engage  with
         the post-2012 evidence; the vintage of the specific  instances  and
         illustrations provided; the candidly acknowledged  shortcomings  in
         some of the opinions expressed; the prevalence of pure opinion  and
         the  absence  of  supporting  substantiation;  and  the  disharmony
         between many of the assertions and opinions expressed (on  the  one
         hand) and the frameworks of the Appellants' cases (on  the  other).
         We take into account further that those assertions and opinions  in
         the AI report which, superficially, support the  Appellants'  cases
         are undermined and confounded by more recent evidence to  which  we
         have determined to accord substantial weight.

         72.  As we have noted above, certain HRW evidence  is  incorporated
         in the AI report. This barely featured in the submissions on behalf
         of the Appellants and we find nothing  in  it  lending  support  to
         their cases. Equally, we place no measurable weight on  the  report
         in The Observer, digested in [30] above. We  consider  this  to  be
         eclipsed by more persuasive evidence of recent vintage,  especially
         that reviewed in [37]-[43] above, to which the  tools  of  judicial
         analysis and evaluation can be more readily  applied.  Furthermore,
         it is uncorroborated by other evidence."

197. With the greatest respect to Dr Kodi, his  evidence  on  the  important
   questions is unsourced and is in the nature  of  a  disagreement  with  a
   carefully reasoned decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  which  is  otherwise
   binding upon  me.   I  do  not  accept  that  evidence  from  France  was
   overlooked in BM and others:  see [79]-[82]:

         "79. ...One aspect of this body of evidence which  is  striking  is
         the information provided to  the  Embassy  by  a  foreign  national
         offender who returned to DRC on 11 December  2014.  Notwithstanding
         that this person had disclosed to the DRC  authorities  in  London,
         pre-departure, his criminal history  and  was  accompanied  by  two
         escorts throughout the journey and during  the  first  phase  post-
         arrival, his passage thereafter was entirely uneventful. The  state
         agencies operating at the airport had no interest in  his  previous
         criminality, he has attracted no  unwanted  attention  subsequently
         and, indeed, it appears that he was not  even  required  to  pay  a
         bribe upon disembarking.

         80.  We juxtapose this evidence, which we accept, with that of  the
         eleven IGC states who  participated  in  the  survey  and  provided
         "returns" data in respect of the years 2012, 2013 and 2014 which we
         also consider persuasive. Making due allowance for  the  manner  in
         which  the  data  has  been  compiled  and   provided,   it   seems
         uncontroversial to find that in excess of  700  persons  have  been
         returned from the states in question to DRC during a period of just
         under three years, up to late 2014. We have no reason to find  that
         the states in question were other than assiduous in  providing  the
         figures  and,  indeed,  the  contrary  was   not   suggested.   The
         significance of this discrete segment of evidence is that only  one
         complaint was made out of this cohort of returning  nationals.  The
         recipient  state  was   Belgium   and,   upon   investigation,   no
         substantiation was established.  We  consider  it  compelling  that
         there is no substantiated evidence that any member  of  this  large
         group has been persecuted or ill treated or  arbitrarily  detained.
         The consistency of experience of the eleven IGC states concerned is
         a matter of obvious moment and, further, entirely  harmonious  with
         the data and other information provided by the United Kingdom.

         81.  In our evaluation of this  body  of  evidence,  we  take  into
         account also that the two states who returned the highest number of
         DRC nationals, Belgium and France, both contain a  substantial  DRC
         diaspora, for historical and other reasons. We find nothing in  the
         evidence to counter the suggestion that the members of these groups
         in particular would be expected to communicate relevant  complaints
         to the communities to which they belonged in the  returning  states
         and/or the Embassies of those states in  Kinshasa.  While  we  note
         that Dr Kennes disagrees with this assessment,  it  appears  to  us
         logical, realistic and consistent with the evidence of high  levels
         of activity, much of it organised and concerted, among  members  of
         the DRC diaspora.

         82.  In their critique of the evidence emanating from the  IOM  and
         the IGC states highlighted immediately above, the  Appellants  draw
         particular  attention  to  the  limited  monitoring   of   returned
         nationals which  is  carried  out  and  the  intrinsic  limitations
         thereof. This submission is well made. However, there is no counter
         punch. We consider  that  this  submission  neither  mitigates  the
         frailties in the  Appellants'  preferred  evidence  which  we  have
         identified nor undermines our assessment of the  Respondent's  body
         of evidence which we prefer. While we accept the evidence that  the
         IOM is involved only in the  cases  of  voluntarily  returning  DRC
         nationals,  we  find  nothing  in  the  evidence  to  support   the
         submission  that  the  DRC  authorities  pay   attention   to   the
         distinction between those  nationals  who  return  voluntarily  and
         those who do so under compulsion, subject to the limited exceptions
         of those who have an unexecuted prison sentence or  an  outstanding
         arrest warrant in DRC or who committed an offence such as  document
         fraud when leaving DRC: see our finding in [74] above."

198. The underlying evidence from the respondent which was before the  Upper
   Tribunal in BM and ors is now  summarised  in  the  respondent's  Country
   Information and  Guidance  Report,  Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo,
   September 2015[1].

199. I do not consider that Dr Kodi's evidence in  general  is  such  as  to
   enable me to depart  from  the  country  guidance.   In  particular,  his
   opinion does not identify the one immigration officer or the two  members
   of NGOs with whom he spoke when preparing his report  in  2015,  for  the
   reasons he sets out.  The  most  important  parts  of  his  evidence  are
   unsourced, and I note that he has not travelled to the DRC since 2014.

200. Dr Kodi's opinion cannot outweigh the country guidance decision  if  it
   is not possible to set the evidence which he received (mainly  pre-dating
   the country guidance decision) in the context of that  considered  in  BM
   and others.   I consider that I remain bound to follow BM and others  and
   I am not satisfied that the appellant, if returned to the DRC,  would  be
   at risk of a breach of his Article 3 rights, merely by reason of being  a
   FNO.

201. As regards the risk of destitution, given the very limited  credibility
   of the evidence of the appellant and his family,   his  having  grown  up
   within a Congolese  household  and  had  a  Congolese  partner,  and  his
   father's continuing Congolese connections in Belgium,  where  his  father
   has travelled for health reasons and stayed for long periods, I  also  do
   not accept that the appellant would not be able to make his  way  in  the
   DRC.  He was born in Kinshasa, which is much changed from  the  place  he
   left in 1992 or 1993.  He speaks the local languages and  he  is  healthy
   and willing to work.  His family name is Congolese,  although  his  first
   names are West African.

202. The Article 3 claim is not made out and I dismiss it.

Article 8 ECHR

203. The appellant does not rely on family  life  either  with  his  present
   partner, or with his second partner, who still has  a  restraining  order
   against him.   His bonds with his other family members do not  reach  the
   level of dependency required for family life and it is  not  asserted  on
   his behalf that they do.

204. The Article 8 claim is advanced  on  private  life  grounds  alone.   I
   consider first the effect of  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in
   Maslov, on these facts.  It is stretching the account  to  say  that  the
   appellant is a young adult who has not yet founded a  family:  he  had  a
   strong relationship with his second partner and her daughter, living with
   her intermittently for up to 4 years.

205. However, even if he falls into  the  Maslov  'young  adult'  group,   I
   remind myself that Article 8 is a qualified right  and  that  the  United
   Kingdom is entitled to pursue, as a legitimate  aim,  the  prevention  of
   disorder or crime.  I must have regard to the following factors  set  out
   at paragraph 71 and following in the Maslov judgment:

          . the nature and seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
            applicant;
          . the length of the applicant's stay in the  United  Kingdom,  and
            the age at which he arrived;
          . the time  elapsed  since  the  offence  was  committed  and  the
            applicant's conduct during that period; and
          . the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with  the  host
            country and with the country of destination.
          . the appellant's age, and whether he committed the offences as  a
            juvenile or as  an  adult  (see,  for  instance,  Moustaquim  v.
            Belgium,  18 February  1991,  �  44,  Series  A  no.  193,  and
            Radovanovic v. Austria, no. 42703/98, � 35, 22 April 2004).
   The Court held at [75] that "for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent
   all or the major part of his or her  childhood  and  youth  in  the  host
   country very serious reasons are required to justify expulsion.  This  is
   all the more  so  where  the  person  concerned  committed  the  offences
   underlying the expulsion measure as a juvenile."

206. Applying those tests here, the appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom
   as a child and has had his education here.   His  social  ties  with  the
   United Kingdom outside his family are not strong, and within  the  family
   there are difficulties between him and his father, and sometimes  between
   him and his mother, although she does her best to be supportive.

207. All of his  convictions  were  for  offences  committed  as  an  adult,
   between the ages of 19 and  32.   The  index  offence  was  committed  in
   November 2011, since when he has been arrested for being in charge  of  a
   mechanically propelled offence while drunk;  for  battery  of  his  first
   partner, leading to a restraining order which he breached;  for  motoring
   offences while a community order was in force; and for all of the battery
   and criminal  offences against his second partner.

208. I do not consider that Maslov avails the appellant in relation  to  his
   proposed removal to the DRC.  There  has  been  no  rehabilitation  here,
   despite the assertions by the appellant and his mother to the contrary.

209. I consider next the effect of paragraph 398 and 399A of the Rules:
         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and ...
         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or
         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
         399. [Inapplicable]
         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -
            (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
            his life; and
            (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
            (c)  there  would  be  very  significant   obstacles   to   his
            integration into the country to which  it  is  proposed  he  is
            deported."

210. In this case, the appellant has been sentenced to a period of at  least
   12 months for the index offence.  He is also, I find, a person who  shows
   a particular disregard for the law, as is indicated by all the  occasions
   when he drove uninsured in someone else's car, without a driving  licence
   or whilst disqualified, and by his  breaches  of  restraining  orders  in
   relation to both his first and second partner.

211. Section 117C, so far as relevant, is as follows:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-
             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,
             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and
             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported. ..."

212. It is not disputed that the appellant has  been  lawfully  resident  in
   the United Kingdom for most of his life.  Despite Dr Kodi's  evidence,  I
   find that this  appellant's  lifestyle  does  not  indicate  that  he  is
   socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom, and even if I
   am wrong about that,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  would  be  very
   significant obstacles to his integration into the DRC.  The appellant and
   his family members have been prepared to lie about his linguistic ability
   and it cannot be ruled out that  they  have  not  told  the  truth  about
   continuing links to the DRC. I note, in particular, that his father seems
   to live his life in French,  including  watching  French  television  and
   speaking to his sons in that language,  and  that  his  father  has  many
   Congolese friends in the Brussels area, with  whom  he  has  been  living
   while having treatment by the Belgian health authorities.

213. The most recent guidance on integration is the decision  of  the  Court
   of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Kamara  [2016]
   EWCA Civ 813. Lord Justice  Sales,  with  whom  Lord  Justice  Moore-Bick
   agreed, observed that the test of integration in paragraph  117C  and  in
   paragraph 399A is the same.   He  approved  the  Upper  Tribunal's  self-
   direction that

         "...notwithstanding the lack of relatives in  Sierra  Leone,  there
         might be other relevant factors such as social or cultural ties  of
         a nature which would provide him with the basis for establishing  a
         private life and thus integration  in  that  country;  it  reminded
         itself "that there are  many  migrants  who  seek  a  new  life  in
         countries other than their own"."

214. At paragraph 14, the Court held that:

         "14. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
         into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported,  as
         set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a  broad  one.
         It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to  sustain
         life while living in the other country. It is  not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a court  or  tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea  of
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life."

215. Mr Kamara's circumstances were different from those of this  appellant.
    His natural mother was from Sierra Leone but his father was from Lebanon
   and he was brought up by his father's wife, Mr Kamara's step-mother,  who
   does not seem to have been Sierra Leonean.  The lack of cultural  context
   was absolute.  Mr Kamara spoke English, but none of the 23  languages  of
   Sierra Leone.  He had studied hard and  to  good  effect  whilst  in  the
   United Kingdom and wished to complete his studies  and  find  employment.
   He had shown real remorse for his offence of dealing in Class A drugs and
   had not offended again.

216. The appellant, like Mr Kamara, is a healthy young man  who  is  capable
   of working. That is where the comparison ends.  This appellant has a long
   history of criminal offences.   He  has  shown  little  respect  for  the
   United Kingdom's legal system  and  no  real  remorse  or  acceptance  of
   responsibility for his actions.  He has been  disqualified  from  driving
   for long periods, but nevertheless drove on a number of  occasions  while
   disqualified, on  several  occasions  taking  his  second  partner's  car
   without her consent.  He has a number of offences of battery against  his
   first and second partners.   Contrary  to  his  evidence,  he  was  still
   involved with drugs in November 2010.  His most  recent  offences,  while
   the deportation proceedings were pending, took place  in  November  2015.
   He is the subject of a restraining  order  to  January  2021  and  is  in
   immigration detention. The appellant  has  no  identified  mental  health
   issues now.

217. The appellant has not satisfied me, on the  balance  of  probabilities,
   that he has  is  integrated  into  British  society  or  that  there  are
   substantial obstacles to his  integration  into  the  DRC.   I  therefore
   consider whether, as required by paragraph 398  (c),  the  appellant  has
   shown that there are very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
   factors.  I am not satisfied that there are.  I do not consider that  the
   appellant's  personal  circumstances  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
   deporting him.

DECISION

218. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  dismissing
   the appellant's appeal.



Date:         12 August 2016                 Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson
-----------------------
[1][2] https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/democratic-republic-of-
congo-country-information-and-guidance

