
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02077/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 January 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                                     I R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Naik of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Jamaican citizen who will be 40 years old  in  2015.
    In a letter dated 30 September 2013 the appellant  was  served  with  a
    decision that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies  to  him
    and a deportation order was made against him also  dated  30  September
    2013.  He appealed the decision.

 2. At a hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 3 March 2014 the  First-
    tier panel dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted and at a  hearing
    before me on 9 June 2014 I determined that the  Tribunal  had  made  an
    error of law and I set aside the decision. A copy of  my  decision  and
    reasons has already been served on the parties. I gave directions for a
    resumed hearing before me which was thereafter listed for  8  September
    2014.

 3. It is of importance that in between those dates and since 28 July  2014
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 inserted into  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Sections 117A-117D part 5A  which  part
    deals with "Article 8 of the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations".   I
    will turn to those provisions later in this decision.

 4. Following a written application for an adjournment of the  8  September
    2014 hearing the appeal was relisted for hearing on  8  December  2014.
    On that day the appellant, who is a serving prisoner, was not produced.
    Everyone was ready to proceed. We waited all  morning  and  were  given
    information from time to time  that  the  appellant  was  on  his  way.
    Ultimately the hearing was adjourned once again because by about 2.30pm
    the appellant had still not been produced. Information received at that
    time was that he would not arrive for an hour or more and  it  was  not
    felt appropriate that the case should start so late in the day.

 5. Although I am continuing with my enquiries the information that I  have
    received thus far as to why the appellant  was  not  produced  is  that
    although  the  Upper  Tribunal  administrative  staff  sent   out   the
    appropriate hearing notices stating that the case was due to  start  at
    10am the production notice was sent in error to Depmu/Tascor.  This  is
    not likely to have caused the problem because the production notice was
    then forwarded to HMP Highpoint on 10 October 2014.  On the day of  the
    hearing it is said that HMP Highpoint  handed  over  the  appellant  to
    Serco at 8.50am.  The  explanation  for  the  delay  in  producing  the
    appellant appears to be that Serco had "multiple drop offs on their way
    to London".  It is then said that Serco arrived with the  appellant  at
    the RCJ at 2.30pm and departed at 2.50pm when told that  the  appellant
    was no longer needed.

 6. If that information is correct there is still a lot of explaining to do
    particularly as the appellant was required to be available at  10am  to
    enable the hearing to commence.  There is no  satisfactory  explanation
    either as to what appears to  be  false  information  provided  to  the
    Tribunal throughout the morning as to  the  appellant's  movements  and
    expected time of arrival. Furthermore, information  was  passed  to  me
    after the hearing  that  the  appellant  had  in  fact  been  moved  to
    Pentonville Prison the night prior to the hearing presumably so that he
    would be close to the RCJ and more easily brought  there  for  10am  as
    that prison is only about 3 miles from the RCJ.  If the  appellant  had
    been moved to Pentonville the day before then HMP Highpoint  could  not
    have handed him over to Serco at 8:50 am on the morning of the hearing.

 7. In the circumstances I had little choice but to adjourn the appeal  and
    this was to 19 January 2015. The appeal  proceeded  on  that  date  and
    following the hearing I reserved my decision.



Documentation

 8. The documentation that I have  before  me  comprises  the  respondent's
    bundle sent  under  cover  of  a  letter  dated  25  October  2013;  an
    appellant's  bundle  numbered  1-9   comprising   witness   statements,
    documents and testimonials; a skeleton argument handed in on 19 January
    2015 replacing that  which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal;  an
    updated PNC record in respect of the appellant dated 30  December  2014
    sent under cover of a letter  dated  6  January  2015;  an  independent
    social work report  prepared  by  Marlyn  Samuels;  a  further  witness
    statement of the appellant's wife ("Mrs W") dated 12 January 2015,  and
    other supporting documents including character references.  I was  also
    referred to a number of cases during the course of the hearing.

The Appellant's Evidence

 9. I heard evidence from the appellant. He was asked about a caution  that
    he received on 4 September 2010 after he had been found  in  possession
    of a bladed article. He explained that the article was in the nature of
    a nail file that he used for  painting  and  decorating.  He  had  just
    purchased it.  He has been a painter and  decorator  for  some  six  or
    seven years and it was to be used by him in the course of his work.  He
    accepted that he had also received a fine for driving without insurance
    in 2007.  The car that he was driving was insured in  his  wife's  name
    and he was driving it using  a  Jamaican  licence,  but  he  had  a  UK
    provisional licence.

10. He went on to say that since he has been in prison his wife has come to
    see him approximately two or three times per month.   It  is  difficult
    for her to get to the prison because she works  full-time.   He  has  a
    very close relationship with his daughter.  As for his 14-year-old  son
    he is in the USA where he lives with his mother.

11. The appellant regrets "every single day" that he committed the  offence
    of robbery for which he received a four year sentence and he  finds  it
    really hard when he speaks to his wife.  He is due to  be  released  in
    March 2015 and his wife and daughter are looking forward very  much  to
    seeing him.

12. As to the offence itself he never  left  the  house  intending  to  rob
    anyone. On 15 April 2012 he was at home with  his  wife.  She  suddenly
    felt like fried chicken and chips and he agreed  to  quickly  pop  into
    Catford to get them for her.  While he was there he said that  a  fight
    started and one man approached him with a traffic  cone.   He  did  not
    take anything from the victim himself and there is absolutely no chance
    of such a thing happening again.  If he had to return to Jamaica he has
    no family there and nothing to go back to.  He does  not  know  how  he
    would manage.  His wife has  been  to  Jamaica  on  two  occasions,  in
    February and October 2009, once for the wedding of a friend of hers and
    the other on the anniversary of the funeral of her father's death.   It
    would be really hard if he was deported.  It is not a situation that he
    wants to think about.  It would be really difficult  for  them  all  to
    live in Jamaica as they have their home here.

13. Cross-examined by Mr Whitwell the appellant said that he kept the  nail
    file with his tools.  It was kept in a plastic bag  with  his  painting
    equipment.  Every Saturday he and his mates  go  to  shop  to  buy  new
    materials.  They were stopped on their way home in a car.  He  did  not
    know why the police did not accept that the file was part of  his  work
    tools.  He gets to work by train and also gets a lift sometimes.   When
    he drives he always has someone with him in the  car  who  has  a  full
    driving licence.  When asked why it would be difficult for him  to  re-
    establish in Jamaica he said that he left there a  long  time  ago  and
    does not know the system there now.  He has not  discussed  what  would
    happen if he had to return there alone.  He did not think that his wife
    and daughter would manage to live in Jamaica.  His wife is working  and
    his daughter is at school.  It would be quite harsh and unfair on them.
     They could not live without each other.

14. In answer to questions from me the appellant said that he last saw  his
    son in 2009.  He has not been in touch with his son recently because it
    is hard for him now that he is in prison.  The appellant confirmed that
    his mother is in the UK as are his  sister  and  cousins.   He  has  no
    friends in Jamaica and contacts no one there.  He then  said  that  the
    impact on his wife and daughter of him  having  to  leave  the  country
    would be very harsh.

Mrs W's evidence

15. I next heard evidence from the appellant's wife Mrs W who confirmed her
    two written statements to be true.  She is in full-time work and  rents
    her home.  She has an elder daughter who lives nearby, is an adult  and
    has two children of her own.  Mrs W has two jobs.  Her husband used  to
    take their daughter ("S") to school but she is now old enough  to  take
    herself there and return.  S is aware of the date that her  husband  is
    due to be released.  They have discussed the matter together  but  they
    have not discussed the situation if her husband is deported.  She would
    be devastated for herself and S if he is deported and she would also be
    devastated for him because there would be nowhere  for  him  to  go  in
    Jamaica.  She has not contemplated moving there because she would  have
    to give up her work, home, family and friends.  She was born  here  and
    has lived here all her life.  She has been to Jamaica approximately six
    times.  The first time was in 1995 with a girlfriend and she  has  been
    on other occasions to a wedding and her stepmother's birthday, although
    she is now in the UK.  Mrs W then confirmed the position with regard to
    the  caution  and  motoring  offences.   As  to  the  robbery  she  was
    absolutely devastated.  She felt as if her world had come to an end and
    she is absolutely certain that  such  a  situation  would  never  arise
    again.

16. Mrs W was then asked what impact this has had on S.   Mrs  W  said  she
    found it difficult to describe how it was.  S tries to  get  away  with
    "bits and pieces".  S says she wishes her dad was here because he would
    understand.  They seem to have their own bond.  As to the Secretary  of
    State's comment that being a  single  parent  is  nothing  out  of  the
    ordinary Mrs W said that she wanted to marry and have  a  family.   Her
    first relationship broke down.  The appellant has become a part of  his
    stepdaughter's life also.  As for Mrs W her health has deteriorated  in
    the last couple of years.  She has had high blood pressure  for  years.
    Since the appellant has been incarcerated she has had  a  lump  in  her
    breast and suffers from a frozen shoulder; she is borderline  diabetic,
    has high cholesterol and thrush  all  of  which  she  thinks  has  been
    brought on by stress.  She confirms that the appellant has no family in
    Jamaica.  She herself has relations there  but  her  grandparents  have
    died and she has no contact with her father's half-brother in  Jamaica.



17. In answer to questions from Mr Whitwell, Mrs W  said  that  during  the
    holidays she tries to get S on a play  scheme.   Mrs  W  herself  works
    flexi hours but has often to  go  in  early  and  go  home  late.   She
    arranges for a friend to look after S.  Her other daughter  helps  also
    but works herself.  Mrs W's father had  S  for  a  week  but  he  is  a
    pensioner and is unable to provide much excitement for her.  She  would
    not leave with her husband to form a family unit in Jamaica.  It  makes
    no sense for someone to be sent back to Jamaica with no one to  go  to.
    He would not reoffend here and will pose a  low  risk  to  the  British
    public.  She thought he  had  permission  to  stay  when  he  made  his
    application for permission to remain.  He did  not  apply  for  a  full
    driving licence because he had difficulty with  the  theory  test.   It
    would be very expensive for her to go to Jamaica to visit  him.   Where
    would he go there anyway as he would be homeless?

SM's Evidence

18.  I  then  heard  brief  evidence  from  SM  who  is   the   appellant's
    stepdaughter. She works full-time as a recovery officer.   She  thought
    the offence was "a bit out of character" and she was "a bit upset about
    it".  She had discussed it with the appellant and it seemed that he was
    at the wrong place at the wrong time.  He realises what he has put  his
    family through and he would not jeopardise the family again.   She  has
    visited him in prison.

19. Cross-examined she said that it was hard on Mrs W and  S.   She  offers
    what help she can but she has two children of her  own.   Her  role  is
    really as a big sister.  Because of health issues  and  the  fact  that
    they are pensioners her mother's parents are only able to give  limited
    help.  If the appeal is unsuccessful it  will  affect  her  mother  and
    sister "very, very, hard".

Submissions

20. I heard submissions from both parties.  Mr  Whitwell  relied  upon  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter and made the point that this appeal was  now
    subject to Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.  The appellant  had  his
    formative years in Jamaica and was employed there and bearing  in  mind
    that the appellant received a four year custodial sentence  he  is  not
    able to show that there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in exception 2 of 117C(5).   It  is  acknowledged
    that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying partner and a parental relationship with a qualifying  child
    but he would need to show that the effect of his  deportation  on  them
    would be unduly harsh and, because he received a  four  year  sentence,
    there would have to be very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    unduly harsh for him to succeed and he would not be able to show  that.
    Mr Whitwell referred also to the written evidence  of  the  independent
    social worker who could not  be  cross-examined.   There  were  several
    matters in the report with which he did not agree  and  he  would  have
    wished to ask her questions about what she had written.

21. Ms Naik relied upon the updated skeleton argument.  She  accepted  that
    if I had been in a position to determine the appeal prior  to  28  July
    2014 when the new statutory provisions came into force I would not have
    to apply them, but as it is I have to.

22. I have read,  taken  into  account  and  weighed  in  the  balance  the
    statements, documents and  testimonials  set  out  in  the  appellant's
    bundle. These include the further statement  of  RL  dated  19  January
    2015. She is a close family friend who was  not  called  to  give  oral
    evidence.

The Independent Social Work Report

23. This report is dated 1 September 2014.  It is through no fault  of  its
    author or the appellant and his family that she was  unable  to  attend
    the hearing on 19 January.   I  accept  Ms  Naik's  statement  that  Ms
    Samuels is unwell and unlikely to be well enough to  be  able  to  give
    evidence for some time. No adjournment was sought. Ms  Samuels  was  at
    court and ready to give evidence on 8 December 2014.  It appears to  be
    the case that the statement has not been signed but I have little doubt
    that she intended to speak to that statement when she was due  to  give
    evidence.

24. In the introduction to her report Ms Samuels  states  that  she  is  an
    independent social worker; a practising children's guardian;  a  social
    work  consultant;  child   protection   case   conference   coordinator
    independent reviewing officer; family group conference facilitator  and
    trainer.  She has received "the appellant's bundle" and refers to S  as
    black British of Jamaican heritage, she being the  only  child  of  her
    parents.  S attends a private school that she has been attending  since
    reception class.  The home in which S and her mother live  is  a  well-
    maintained three bedroom house rented from a Housing Association.  In a
    conversation with S she was asked about her  wishes  and  feelings  and
    with regard to her father she said :-

         "Well!, well I wish for my dad to come back to my family  unit,  it
         feels weird because dad  usually  cooks  my  dinner,  takes  me  to
         school, takes me out and makes me laugh.  When I do go and see  him
         my dad he is so happy and he gives me a big hug and kiss.  He calls
         me almost every evening."

    When asked what if he was to be sent back to Jamaica; she said "I would
    be upset and I would try and call him every day  but  I  would  not  be
    happy at all."

    Ms  Samuels  then  states  that  she  does  not  believe  S  has  truly
    conceptualised the prospect of her father being deported  and  answered
    the question in an impromptu way.  When asked  if  there  was  anything
    else that she chose to tell Ms Samuels S said "To be honest  with  you,
    my dad isn't a bad guy.  He grew up with a  good  Christian  background
    and he cares for all people and loves everyone.  Even if he saw someone
    out on the street who was hurt, he would try to  help  them."   S  then
    went on to tell Ms Samuels about her summer holidays, that she  attends
    a play scheme, but she does not tell anybody where he  (the  appellant)
    is; she says that he has gone on holiday and that she misses him a lot.



25. At this point I refer to a letter from the appellant's school dated  27
    February 2014.  That letter refers to an earlier one which  is  in  the
    respondent's bundle and states  that  to  the  school's  knowledge  the
    appellant has always been involved in the general development of S.  He
    has always dropped and picked her up regularly from school and been  in
    attendance as occasion  demands  at  parents'  evenings,  sports  days,
    Christmas presentations and other school events.  The 27 February  2014
    letter states

         "... Although  we  are  not  trained  psychologists,  it  has  been
         observed however  that  S  shows  a  slight  dip  in  her  academic
         performance.  We cannot categorically link this to the  absence  of
         the dad but we  are  of  the  opinion  that  his  presence  in  her
         daughter's development especially at this stage can only be  better
         for S."

    Ms Samuels comments that she is in total agreement with  the  "essence"
    of the letter but is of the opinion that the school is not in the  best
    position to make such comments and the court should be mindful of this.
     In her opinion as an independent social worker she would make the link
    of her father's absence to the decline in S's academic performance.

26. In the conclusion of her report Ms Samuels  says  that  the  impression
    gained from the interviews that she has undertaken with both the  child
    and her mother is that "if ever there was a genuine case to be  had  it
    was this one.  (The parents)  constitute  a  family  along  with  their
    daughter (S).  For the reason of (his) immigration status and initially
    being unable to seek employment (the appellant) became and has remained
    the primary carer for his daughter S.  His working conditions were more
    flexible than those of  his  wife  so  when  he  gained  employment  he
    continued to remain as (S's) primary care giver.  He  undertakes  equal
    share of the household  duties  and  undertakes  the  majority  of  the
    cooking for the family."

27.  The  conclusion  continues  that  Mrs  W's  health  has   deteriorated
    considerably since the appellant's imprisonment and if  this  continues
    she will not be able  to  remain  in  full-time  employment  and  would
    therefore be unable to pay the necessary school fees for S's final year
    in primary school.  There has already been a decline in  S's  emotional
    wellbeing which has been noted by the school since the incarceration of
    her father.  The appellant and S are extremely close and therefore  the
    person that will be most affected by  the  proposed  deportation  with,
    "the right to family life" will be S.

28. In Ms Samuels' opinion  any  deportation  of  the  appellant  would  be
    contrary to the provision of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
    Immigration Act 2009 which imposes a statutory duty upon the  Secretary
    of State to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children.   "It  has
    been stated  throughout  the  papers  that  the  incident  in  which  I
    understand he did not take part in but was a bystander, was totally out
    of character.  It would not be in S's best interests if her father  was
    deported as it would clearly deprive her of the right to family life."

The Burden and Standard of Proof

29. In immigration and deportation appeals the burden of proof  is  on  the
    appellant.   The  standard  of  proof  is  that  of  the   balance   of
    probabilities that the appellant falls within the relevant  Immigration
    Rules applicable to remain in the United Kingdom.  The appellant claims
    that his removal would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
    the 1950 Convention with particular regard to Article 8 thereof and  as
    such removal would breach his rights to family and  private  life.   On
    that matter it is for the appellant to show  that  there  would  be  an
    interference with his human rights.  If that  is  established  and  the
    relevant Article permits, it is then for the  respondent  to  establish
    that the interference would be justified.  The appropriate standard  of
    proof in relation to Article 8 claims is  the  civil  standard  of  the
    balance of probabilities.  Under exception 1 of Section 33(2) of the UK
    Borders Act 2007 exception 1 is applicable in cases  where  removal  in
    pursuance of the deportation order would breach the appellant's  rights
    under the European Convention on Human Rights or the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention.   The  appellant  has  not
    claimed that the United Kingdom would be in breach of  its  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention but does  claim  that  his  removal  would
    breach his and his family's rights under Article 8 ECHR.

My Findings of Fact

30. In the main I accept the  appellant's  evidence.   However,  I  do  not
    accept as true everything that he has said.  I find that he has  played
    down the circumstances surrounding the  caution  that  he  received  in
    relation to the bladed instrument.  If the circumstances were  such  as
    he describes it is difficult to  see  how  what  occurred  led  to  him
    receiving even a caution.  Nevertheless  this  is  a  relatively  minor
    matter.

31. I accept that the appellant's immediate family is in the United Kingdom
    and has migrated here over a number of years.  The appellant's  son  by
    another relationship lives in New York and the appellant has  not  seen
    him since 2009.  The appellant says that he knows  no  one  in  Jamaica
    now.  I find that likely to be a distortion of the truth.  He was  born
    and brought up in Jamaica from birth in  1975  until  he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in April 2001, some 26 years later.  He attended  school
    and worked in Jamaica.  He will have made friends.  He has returned  to
    Jamaica on at least two occasions. I do not accept that  he  would  not
    know anyone there. Although he  will  have  friends  and  acquaintances
    there I accept that he may not be in touch with them and whether any of
    them  would  be  able  and  willing  to  assist  in  any  way  such  as
    emotionally, financially or practically is not something about which  I
    speculate.

32. From his reaction at the hearing (at one point he broke down as he  was
    giving evidence) it is clear to me that he realises the  problems  that
    he has caused Mrs W and S by his behaviour.

33. I found Mrs W to be straightforward and honest and she did her best  to
    answer truthfully the questions that were put to  her.   Understandably
    she is likely to have relatively little knowledge of what friends  and,
    perhaps, more distant relatives her husband has in Jamaica.

34. I give less weight to the evidence of other  witnesses  who  have  done
    their best to support the  appellant  and  his  family  in  this  whole
    unfortunate matter.  Having said that it is clear from all the evidence
    that has been put before me that S has a very  good  relationship  with
    her father and he with her.

35. The appellant will be 40 years old in 2015.  He was born in Jamaica and
    spent approximately the first 25 years of his life there.  He worked as
    a painter and decorator and "in catering".  From a relationship that he
    had in Jamaica he has a 14 year old son who lives in the USA  with  his
    mother. I assess from the son's date of birth that the  appellant  came
    to the United Kingdom approximately 7 months after his  son  was  born.
    There has been some contact between the appellant and his son but  none
    recently. The appellant last  saw  him  in  2009.  I  accept  that  the
    appellant's close family members have migrated to the United Kingdom.

36. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor  on  27  April
    2001 and was later granted further leave which expired  on  27  October
    2001.  He did not return to Jamaica.  In May 2003 he  made  an  out  of
    time application for leave to remain as a student.  I do not  know  the
    particular details and, for instance, whether the appellant  chased  up
    that application but it seems that no decision was made in relation  to
    it until 2008.  During the intervening period  he  met  Mrs  W.   Their
    daughter S was born in January 2004 and is at the time of  hearing  now
    11 years of age.  The appellant and Mrs W married in September 2004 and
    in December of the same year he made an application for leave to remain
    on the basis of his marriage.  Again there  was  no  decision  on  that
    application until September 2008  when  he  was  granted  discretionary
    leave for a period of three years.  He submitted a further  application
    in September 2011 for further leave to remain outside the  Rules  which
    was considered in conjunction with the deportation order.

37. The appellant first came to trial on 9 October 2012 for  robbery.   The
    jury were unable to reach a verdict in relation to the  charge  against
    the appellant but his co-defendants were convicted.   After  a  retrial
    the appellant was convicted on 7 May 2013 of robbery on  the  basis  of
    joint enterprise for which he received a four year prison sentence.

38. Although the matter does not appear to have  been  raised  elsewhere  I
    note that the appellant  wrote  a  letter  to  UKBA  on  9  March  2012
    referring to him having been released on bail in October  2011  pending
    his trial on 16 January 2012.  He writes to advise UKBA that "as of  16
    January 2012 I was acquitted of all  charges  against  me  at  Woolwich
    Crown Court ...".  I know nothing further about that matter and do  not
    take it into account as the  appellant  says  that  he  was  acquitted,
    although he must have been charged with  an  offence.  The  only  other
    relevant matters are that, according to the appellant, in June 2006  he
    was fined for driving other than in accordance with his licence and  on
    another occasion for driving without insurance. He was fined  for  both
    offences.

39. The sentencing  remarks  of  the  judge  following  his  conviction  at
    Woolwich Crown Court include the following:-

         "I have watched the video of that robbery on many occasions in  the
         course of the trial that I conducted and I have  no  doubt  at  all
         that the jury were right to convict you; the evidence you (sic) was
         overwhelming.

         You and the two other men hid down a side passageway late at  night
         and attacked Mr M when he was completely unsuspecting  and  on  his
         own.  It was a cowardly attack, three men on one, which  must  have
         been extremely frightening for Mr M.

         ...  I take the view that your involvement in this robbery was  not
         as great as the man who actually conducted the robbery, Mr  B,  who
         removed the wallet, but equivalent to that of Mr P.

         I take into account that Mr  B  has  a  serious  previous  criminal
         record and that both  you  and  Mr  P  have  effectively  not  been
         involved in any serious way with the law.

         Nevertheless, this is a very serious matter indeed.  A  robbery  of
         this kind, late at night, weapon was used and it  was,  as  I  have
         said, an ambush, means that I have to take this very seriously  and
         only a sentence of imprisonment is appropriate.

         ...  I have listened to  the  matters  that  were  put  forward  in
         mitigation and I have to say - and I say it in open  court  because
         your wife is present, I understand, so  she  can  hear  it  -  that
         unfortunately the consequences for  your  family  are  consequences
         which you have brought upon them.  They are not mitigating factors,
         they are simply the consequences of  this  behaviour.   You  should
         have stood back, you should not have been party to that ambush, you
         should not have got involved at all  and  you  should  have  walked
         away.  Why you were weak on that night and got involved, I  do  not
         know.

         But I am able to  balance  the  aggravating  factors  that  I  have
         mentioned against the fact that you  have  effectively  a  previous
         good record and have tried hard to look after your family while you
         were here and that is why the sentence is exactly  the  same  as  I
         have said and will be four years.

         You will be released on licence after two years but you are  liable
         to be recalled if you get into trouble again afterwards."

40. It appears to be common ground that the appellant did not seek leave to
    appeal against conviction or sentence.

41. The appellant has provided documentation to show that for some  of  the
    period anyway that he has been in the United Kingdom he has worked as a
    subcontracted  painter  and  decorator  and   has   paid   income   tax
    appropriately.  He has provided statements of payment and deduction for
    months ending 5 May 2009 to 5 February 2010 and then 5 July 2010  to  5
    November 2010.

42. I have read and give some weight to the character references that  have
    been forthcoming from prison officers at HMP Highpoint who have clearly
    been very impressed by the appellant who always does as he is asked and
    goes beyond what is expected of him to help staff and other  prisoners.
    There is reference to him being a devoted father and  husband  who  has
    been committed to maintaining his strong family ties during his time in
    custody by means of social visits, letters and through using the prison
    telephone.  Also through hard work, patience and his faith in the  Lord
    it is said that he has managed to show remorse for any wrong  doing  in
    the past and has made real steps to improve  and  progress  during  his
    time in custody and upon his release.

43. I give some weight to the pre-sentence report prepared  for  the  Crown
    Court in May 2013.  I do not set out here everything that is  contained
    within that report but there are some matters which would not allow  me
    to conclude with certainty that once the  appellant  is  released  from
    custody he would return to the bosom of his family, be an ideal working
    father to S and husband to W, and keep  out  of  trouble.   I  note  in
    particular at page 7 of 9 in the report under "Thinking and  behaviour"
    that in respect of "thinking skills" the circumstances of  the  offence
    indicate a  distinct  lack  of  consequential  thinking  and  impulsive
    behaviour which is indicative of  deficits  in  problem  solving.   The
    appellant's  behaviour  appears  to  have  been  fuelled  by  what   he
    interpreted as the victim's initial "flashing of lights", "looking  for
    a fight", and alleged  "insult"  when  he  approached  the  group.   In
    assessing  this  it  is  clear  that  the  appellant  sought  no  other
    alternative to address  what  had  been  perceived  as  offensive,  and
    resorted to violently robbing the victim to retaliate.   There  appears
    to be no remorse for his actions which  further  indicates  a  lack  of
    victim empathy and a failure to accept responsibility for his  actions.
    The appellant was assessed as demonstrating some level of interpersonal
    skills and appropriate  thinking  but  his  ability  to  disregard  and
    respect social and legal boundaries constitutes risk issues  linked  to
    offending and likelihood of causing serious harm.

44. Under "Attitudes" the appellant  is  said  not  to  appear  to  overtly
    condone pro-criminal activities.  However in discussing the offence  he
    did remark that the victim/s "looked like they wanted a fight"  and  it
    is possible that this may have contributed to his behaviour.  Therefore
    the assessment was that the appellant's attitudes contribute  to  risks
    of offending and likelihood of causing serious harm in the future.   It
    is noted that of offenders with similar age, gender,  criminal  history
    and social/personal risk  factors,  about  two  in  ten  are  known  to
    reoffend violently and about one in ten non-violently within two years.
     He was thereafter assessed as posing a medium  likelihood  of  causing
    serious harm to members of the public; those specially  vulnerable  are
    individuals perceived to be carrying valuable items or who  may  be  on
    their own.  That risk would be increased if he were in the  company  of
    other  pro-criminal  associates,  therefore  boosting  his   level   of
    confidence in commission of an offence.  In  determining  dangerousness
    the court had to be confident that there was a significant risk of  the
    appellant committing further specified offences.  Although  the  nature
    of the index offence is serious he did not have a history of committing
    specified offences and therefore  he  was  assessed  as  not  currently
    satisfying the criteria to be assessed as  "dangerous".   There  was  a
    comment in the conclusion on page 9 of the report that the  appellant's
    denial of the offence serves as an aggravating feature of  the  offence
    indicating his lack of insight into his behaviour and how  it  affected
    the victim.  There is a further conclusion that to his credit he has no
    previous convictions or evidence of similar behaviour either in a group
    or on his own and the offence appeared to have  been  an  opportunistic
    venture.  His behaviour appeared to be out  of  character  and  it  was
    therefore possible that on this occasion the influence of the group may
    have affected his behaviour.

45. I  have  also  considered  the  result  of  the  request  for  offender
    management information provided to the Home  Office  Criminal  Casework
    and others that assesses that the risk  of  the  appellant  reoffending
    within two years is low but that if he did reoffend the risk of serious
    harm level would be "medium".  The risk would be  greatest  on  release
    and when in the company of other pro-criminal associates.  He is likely
    to involve in behaviour indicative of a likelihood of  causing  serious
    harm and has been assessed as medium likelihood of causing serious harm
    in those circumstances.

Findings in Relation to Mrs W

46. Mrs W is now 51 years old.  She was born in the United Kingdom and is a
    British citizen.  She has a daughter by  a  previous  relationship  who
    herself has two children.  They all live in the same  neighbourhood  in
    London.  Mrs W describes the marriage to the appellant as a very  happy
    one, albeit not without its ups and downs.  She has  met  and  gets  on
    with all of his family as he does hers.  The relationship  between  the
    appellant and their daughter S she describes as "truly fantastic".  Mrs
    W works full-time and in addition has a part-time  job  which  she  has
    held for many years.  She took that job to earn a little extra cash  to
    help with meeting the costs of raising her own daughter which  she  had
    to do as a single parent.  The nature of  the  appellant's  work  means
    that he has far more flexibility than she and as a result  he  is  very
    much involved in S's care.  She describes  the  appellant  as  a  self-
    employed decorator who is also an excellent cook  and  has  a  sideline
    catering for functions.  The relationship between S and  the  appellant
    is "fantastically close".  She is a typical daddy's girl and  he  takes
    her to and collects her from school, prepares her meals and helps  with
    her homework.  She considers  that  in  all  respects  he  could  quite
    properly be regarded as her primary carer.

47. Mrs W's shock at the appellant being found guilty of robbery  and  sent
    to prison was only surpassed by the feeling of "utter  devastation  and
    disbelief when I learned he was to be deported".  The marriage is  both
    genuine and subsisting and  the  notice  of  decision  which  seeks  to
    justify the decision to deport disappointed her.  There appears to be a
    complete disregard of the traumatic effect that forced separation  will
    have upon her and S's rights to family and private  life.   Mrs  W  was
    born in the UK and has lived her whole life in south London  where  she
    went to school and where her family and most of her close friends live.
     She has a very close relationship with her elder daughter and the  two
    grandchildren.

48. Although it has been said that Mrs W has been able to  care  for  their
    daughter without any outside assistance and has been able to depend  on
    extended family members to assist her should  this  be  required,  this
    demonstrates a serious failure to understand the important  role  of  a
    father generally but more importantly it fails to recognise the special
    bond that exists between the appellant's daughter and her father.

49. Her other daughter's father played no part in her  life  despite  being
    relatively close by and she would not want the same  to  happen  to  S.
    The impact of the  separation  upon  S  has  already  seen  an  adverse
    reaction both at home and in relation to her progress at  school.   She
    is a  very  forward  child,  which  can  make  her  appear  cheeky  and
    argumentative.   Her  father  has  always  been  responsible  for   her
    discipline but since he has been in prison Mrs W  has  often  found  it
    difficult to get her to do as she is told, including her homework.  She
    has no idea whatsoever how she would deal with S if in reality he is to
    be deported and prohibited from ever returning.  S had understood  that
    her father would be coming home in May 2015 and has been  able  to  use
    that light at the end of a very long tunnel as a comfort for her.   She
    is currently considering whether some form of counselling would help  S
    to get back on track as regards her attitude and behaviour  at  school.
    This is particularly important as Mrs  W  will  soon  be  starting  the
    process  of  identifying  and  applying  for  S's   secondary   school.
    Currently she attends a small independent school but Mrs W would not be
    in any position to continue to  pay  fees  when  she  starts  secondary
    school.

50. Mrs W states that the threat of deportation has taken its toll  on  her
    health  and  has  affected  her  own  wellbeing.    This   is   clearly
    attributable  to  the  trauma  and   uncertainty   of   her   husband's
    deportation.  There is a letter from Mrs W's GP who states that she has
    been seen on several occasions with stress related problems.   He  then
    describes these and states that Mrs W is very stressed and upset  about
    the "pending review for deportation back to Jamaica" and it is having a
    significant impact on her health.

51. Much of what is set out in the previous paragraphs in relation to Mrs W
    was taken from her statement which  is  dated  26  February  2014  i.e.
    almost a year ago.  In her latest statement  of  12  January  2015  she
    states that S's schoolwork continues to suffer because her  father  has
    not been there to support her homework which  he  always  did.   Mrs  W
    still carries out two jobs which means that she has not  been  able  to
    compensate for the time that S  had  spent  with  her  father  and  her
    studies at home.  Mrs  W  is  now  borderline  diabetic  and  has  been
    suffering from a frozen shoulder for which she has  received  cortisone
    injections,  but  her  condition  is  worsening  because  the  pain  is
    radiating down her  arm  and  neck.   She  considers  that  having  the
    appellant to support her would be a considerable help.

52. Financially things have been  very  tough.   She  is  behind  with  her
    daughter's school fees which would  not  have  been  the  case  if  the
    appellant  had  been  there  to  contribute  to  the  finances  of  the
    household.  S has had to learn to go to school on her own and return in
    the same way.

53. Mrs W continues to use various family members to  support  S  and  look
    after her when Mrs W has to be at work.  Mrs W and S continue to  speak
    regularly to the appellant on the telephone and to  continue  to  visit
    him when they are able.  If he were to be removed from the UK it  would
    be incredibly difficult for S and the appellant to continue that  bond.
    S is due to move schools at the  end  of  the  summer  and  this  is  a
    difficult time of change for any  young  person.   As  she  enters  her
    teenage years it will be more important than ever having regard to  the
    fact that her father is her main  carer  that  she  has  him  there  to
    support her through this time.

54. Mrs W maintains that it would not be possible or practical  for  S  and
    her to join the appellant if he were to be deported and this could only
    result in the continued deterioration of S's wellbeing  and  education.
    The financial  strains  that  would  inevitably  result  could  not  be
    sustained by them as a family unit and the only  way  that  they  could
    deal with the issues would be by the appellant being allowed to  remain
    with his family in the UK.  She asks that the Tribunal finds  that  the
    circumstances of the special bond between S and her  father  are  truly
    exceptional and that his deportation in consequence of  his  conviction
    that was entirely out of character is disproportionate so as to  amount
    to a breach of their rights.

55. My findings in relation to Mrs W are that she is  a  hardworking  woman
    who is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with the appellant.  In
    the past she struggled to bring up SM on her own whilst  working  full-
    time and additionally taking a part-time job to help  make  ends  meet.
    Nevertheless she clearly made a good job of bringing her up as SM has a
    good job and is raising two children also. Since the appellant has been
    in prison Mrs W has had to face the same situation of bringing up S  on
    her own and dearly wishes to avoid that continuing for any longer  than
    it already has.  I accept that the appellant's hours of work  would  to
    some extent be more flexible than Mrs W's and that for some of the time
    he was not working.  However, there would have  been  times  also  when
    they were both working and sharing the responsibility for  bringing  up
    S.  Mrs W has health problems.  She is  receiving  appropriate  medical
    care for them but it appears likely to me that stress is affecting  her
    health adversely.  She has had to endure a lot of stress because of her
    husband's participation in the robbery in April 2012.

The Child S

56. S has recently  reached  her  11th  birthday.   S  wrote  a  letter  in
    September 2013 which is a plea to the  Home  Office  not  to  send  her
    father to Jamaica because he cooks her dinner and takes her  to  school
    but now her mother has to.  That is very hard because Mrs W has to  get
    to work for a certain time.  He is her father and she will not be  able
    to see him again and her education is very low because he is not  there
    to pick her up.  He is part of her life and  she  loves  him  so  much.
    There is a further letter from S written, it seems likely, just  before
    the hearing before me in which she states that her dad is her life  and
    they speak every day.  He calls her every morning before she leaves for
    school and when she returns from school.  She  misses  him  as  he  has
    always cooked for her.  She hopes and prays that he can come back  into
    the family unit.  She would be upset and unable to cope if he  was  not
    able to return.

57. S attends a small private school close to where she  lives.   According
    to the social worker report Mrs  W  pays  "�490  per  month,  totalling
    �1,400 per term for school fees".   There  are  two  letters  from  the
    principal of this school dated 5 September 2013 and 15 January 2015.  I
    have already referred to these two letters but there is a  further  one
    which is wrongly dated 16 January 2014 and which  must  be  16  January
    2015.  The principal is the same person that  wrote  the  previous  two
    letters who expresses her amazement that the issue of S being away from
    her father not having been resolved is  quite  amazing.   S  has  often
    spoken about missing her father with peers "to the hearing of teachers"
    and  the  principal  feels  this  could  be  the  cause  of  her  being
    absentminded sometimes.  "We believe that his continued presence in her
    (sic) daughter's development especially  at  this  stage  can  only  be
    better for S."

58. There is a school progress check for autumn term 2014  which  sets  out
    her achievement and efforts in a range of  subjects  which  are  mainly
    shown to be Cs with some Bs and one A, where A is excellent, B is  good
    and C is satisfactory.  The teacher's comments are:-

         "S is a capable member of  the  class.   She  has  the  ability  to
         produce good work in most of the subjects.  S responded well to one
         to one teaching but sometimes needs to be reminded to stay  focused
         on the task at hand.  She has the  ability  to  do  better  if  she
         maintains a more positive attitude to work."

59. From all that I have heard and read I find that S and her father have a
    close relationship.  He has played a major part in her  life  up  until
    his remand in custody and/or imprisonment.  S has  no  physical  health
    problems.  She is very sad that her father is  currently  incarcerated.
    She is clearly aware that he faces deportation and  has  some  idea  of
    what that will mean for her,  her  mother  and  father  if  deportation
    becomes a reality.  Her school work has been affected to an  extent  by
    this even though I appreciate that there could be many  reasons  why  a
    child of her age would not "stay focused on the task  at  hand"  or  be
    "absentminded sometimes".  As to whether she would be "unable to  cope"
    if her father is deported it seems to me  somewhat  speculative  and  a
    difficult concept for someone of her age to envisage with any degree of
    understanding as to what  this  would  mean.   Nevertheless  given  the
    relationship as described there is little reason to doubt that she will
    be badly affected by his removal.  I tend to  agree  with  Mrs  W  that
    knowing he is to be released in the  near  future  would  help  her  to
    function more normally than would be the case if he is to be removed.

60. I have only one particular concern in relation to the  report  from  Ms
    Samuels and that is at 4.2 where she states that it is her  opinion  as
    an independent social worker that  she  would  make  the  link  of  the
    appellant's absence to the decline in S's performance.  Whereas  I  can
    accept that the fact is that there has indeed been  a  decline  in  S's
    academic performance it is not deemed to be unsatisfactory as is  shown
    by the school progress check referred to above.  I do not find that the
    report is particularly  helpful.   Much  of  what  is  written  in  the
    conclusion seems to deal with matters that are for me to decide  and  I
    do not understand the statement made at 5.2 that the impression  gained
    from the interviews that Ms Samuels has undertaken with both the  child
    and her mother is "if ever there was a genuine case to be  had  it  was
    this one".  Any family caught up in deportation proceedings is bound to
    suffer and it is not demonstrated why this particular case is any  more
    "genuine" than any other.

The Best Interests of S

61. I turn now to assess the best interests of S.  Under Section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  the  respondent  has  to
    make arrangements for ensuring that in  relation  to  any  immigration,
    asylum or nationality functions regard must be taken  to  the  need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   This  is  a  duty  that  the  respondent  states  that   she
    recognises.

62. The Secretary of State in the notice of decision is of the opinion that
    it is in the best interests of S who is a British citizen to remain  in
    the United Kingdom in the care of her mother  as  she  has  done  since
    birth and where she may continue to receive support from family members
    and friends.  The respondent states that it has considered that  Mrs  W
    has been S's primary carer since the appellant's incarceration.   There
    is no evidence to suggest that this cannot continue or that S has  been
    emotionally or socially disadvantaged by this.  In addition it is noted
    that she is of school age and it is considered that she is in a settled
    environment  and  has  formed  relationships  with  friends  and  class
    teachers.  The appellant would be able to maintain contact with her  by
    modern forms of communication as he has done since  his  incarceration.
    Alternatively she could visit him in Jamaica.  It  is  also  said  that
    there is no evidence that S has suffered any  ill-health  or  that  her
    development has been impaired.

63. My own findings as set out above lead me to  conclude  that  there  has
    been some tangible adverse  effect  on  S's  schoolwork  and  emotional
    stability and development.  The appellant and Mrs W  have  shared  care
    responsibilities in the past as is shown from  the  evidence  provided.
    The appellant has at times been the primary carer, particularly when he
    has not been working. At  other  times  that  responsibility  has  been
    shared. Since the appellant's imprisonment there is  no  doubt  at  all
    that Mrs W has been the primary carer and  would  continue  to  be  S's
    primary carer in the future once the appellant has been deported.

64. I assess that there is a  low  chance  of  the  appellant  reoffending.
    Despite him being a poor role model in the sense that  he  committed  a
    serious offence he has been  a  good  father  and  husband.  The  ideal
    position for S would be for the appellant to return to the family  home
    as this would benefit the appellant, Mrs W and S in terms of stability,
    and both financially - assuming that the appellant obtained work  which
    is likely to be the case - and emotionally.  It would be best for S  to
    be brought up by both her parents.

65. I have borne  in  mind  that  although  S  has  already  been  affected
    adversely by what has occurred it  is  difficult  to  assess  what  the
    consequences would be in the short, medium and long term of her  father
    being deported.  It would certainly not be beneficial to  her.   In  my
    view undoubtedly some harm would be  caused  and  I  give  considerable
    weight to that. It is true that S is in a settled environment and  will
    have  formed  relationships  with  classmates  and  teachers.   She  is
    currently at a private school and she will be changing schools later in
    2015 when she goes to  secondary  school.   This  is  likely  to  be  a
    difficult time for  her  with  the  change  of  schooling,  making  new
    friends, and getting to know new teachers.

Other Considerations

66. It has not escaped my notice that Mrs  W  has  been  paying  for  legal
    representation and is actually said now to be behind with paying school
    fees.  One hopes that once such fees are no longer payable there  would
    be a benefit to the family purse which  could  be  utilised  in  making
    visits possible to Jamaica if the deportation of  the  appellant  takes
    place.  I acknowledge that  "modern  forms  of  communication"  are  no
    substitute for a relationship where the  parties  live  together  as  a
    proper family.

67. I have already stated that as far as Mrs  W  is  concerned  this  is  a
    genuine  and  subsisting  marriage.   The  effect  of  the  appellant's
    deportation to Jamaica would have adverse consequences for her  without
    a doubt although she has in the past brought up another  daughter  with
    help from family members and  others  and  would  be  doing  so  again.
    Others would be less  affected  by  the  appellant's  deportation,  but
    affected nevertheless.  Amongst these in  particular  are  SM  and  the
    grandchildren  although  they  lead  largely  independent  lives.   The
    appellant has his mother and other family members here.  They  will  be
    affected by his departure and the  appellant  in  turn  will  miss  his
    relatives and friends that he would be leaving behind. I am quite  sure
    that  he  would  be  adversely  affected  by  his  deportation  and  in
    particular the loss of his family.

68. The appellant would be returning to Jamaica with no  immediate  members
    of his family there.  I do not accept  that  he  will  know  nobody  in
    Jamaica for reasons that I gave earlier. He is of an age  that  he  can
    work and he may well be able to return to similar work in Jamaica  that
    he was doing in the United Kingdom, and prior to that  in  Jamaica,  up
    until the age of 25 when he came to the United Kingdom.

69. I note from pages 7 and 8 of the notice of decision that there are said
    to be currently two NGOs offering emergency accommodation for  men  and
    there are a number of organisations that "have helped deported  persons
    to resettle in Jamaica over the years".  They are said to offer support
    in finding accommodation, reuniting deported persons with relatives and
    friends,  support  and  advice,  referrals  to   other   services   and
    redocumentation.  There has been no challenge, as far as I am aware, to
    what the respondent says about  what  support  might  be  available  in
    Jamaica for the appellant, should he require it. There is  the  further
    point that the appellant is said to be a church member and god-fearing.
     If that is indeed so it is quite possible that he could be  helped  by
    the church in Jamaica - I use the word "church" in its broadest  sense.



The Law

70. As already stated Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 inserted  part
    5A into the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  new
    Sections 117A - 117D set out statutory guidelines that must be  applied
    when the Tribunal has to decide  whether  an  immigration  decision  to
    remove someone from the UK would be in breach of Article 8 rights.  The
    Immigration Rules were amended on 10 July 2014 (by HC 532) and apply to
    all ECHR Article 8 claims made by foreign criminals which  are  decided
    on or after 28 July 2014, as in this appeal.

71. Under 117C the deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
    interest.  The appellant is categorised as a foreign criminal  who  has
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years.  Therefore
    under 117C(3) the  public  interest  requires  his  deportation  unless
    exception 2 applies.  That exception applies where the appellant has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,
    and the effect of his deportation on the  partner  or  child  would  be
    unduly  harsh.   In  this  appeal  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with both a partner and a child.  Therefore the
    question to be asked is whether the effect on them of  his  deportation
    would be unduly harsh.  However, that is not the only  question  to  be
    considered. Under 117C(6) where (as in this  case)  the  appellant  has
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four  years  the
    public interest requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in exception 2.  That  is
    a very high hurdle for the appellant to overcome.

72. Ms Naik on behalf of the appellant submits  in  the  skeleton  argument
    that there are very compelling circumstances that exist over and  above
    the provisions in the applicable exception because there is not only  a
    qualifying wife but a qualifying child also.   They  are  both  British
    citizens.  It is submitted that greater weight should be given to cases
    where the appellant can meet both limbs of the exception.  The  further
    point is made that the statutory provisions make no distinction between
    a British child who has lived in the UK for over seven years and a non-
    British child who has done so.  They are treated equally.   This  fails
    to consider the impact  of  the  loss  of  the  importance  of  British
    citizenship itself along with the length of residence here of the child
    in determining the question of proportionality.

73. In considering any appeal under Article 8 of the  1950  Convention  the
    following separate questions have to be determined in  accordance  with
    the House of Lords decision in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27:-

      i) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  appellant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private life or (as the case may be) family life?

     ii) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

    iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

     iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

      v) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         end sought to be achieved?

74. I accept that it is necessary to evaluate whether the  public  interest
    in deportation outweighs the Article 8 rights  of  the  appellant,  his
    wife and child.  I take into account that the length of the appellant's
    sentence being 4 years but no more is a factor to be taken into account
    in the proper assessment of proportionality outside the Rules. Although
    I cannot assess this as a near miss argument I can give some weight  to
    that fact given the arbitrary nature of the statutory threshold.

75. I have found that the interests of Mrs W and S are best served  by  not
    disrupting their present circumstances by leaving the UK to  live  with
    the appellant in Jamaica.  Nevertheless, that is an option open to them
    if the appellant is deported.  The possibility of moving to Jamaica,  I
    gather from  the  evidence,  has  not  been  discussed  as  a  rational
    alternative because the family is hoping that the appellant will remain
    in the United Kingdom.

76. Jamaica is not entirely unfamiliar to Mrs W, she having  visited  there
    on six occasions.  Nevertheless the link to  Jamaica  is  now  somewhat
    tenuous and would entail massive upheaval for all the  family  if  they
    were to settle there.  Although the possibility of moving to Jamaica is
    a decision that might be taken by the family I  do  not  find  that  it
    would be reasonable to  expect  Mrs  W  and  S  to  relocate  with  the
    appellant to Jamaica.

77. Factors that are in favour of the appellant,  his  wife  and  child  in
    considering  the  Article  8  position  are  the   quality   of   their
    relationship and the difficulties of relocating to Jamaica; the  strong
    ties that Mrs W and S have with the UK; the effect as  I  have  already
    stated upon each of them, and in particular S; the  effect  upon  other
    family members by the severing of the appellant's  private  and  family
    life here; the fact that the appellant has resided in the UK  for  some
    thirteen years mostly lawfully and thereafter with discretionary  leave
    as the spouse of a  British  citizen;  the  four  year  sentence  which
    triggers the exceptionality provision in the Rules is at the lower  end
    of the scale,  and  the  likelihood  or  perhaps  rather  the  lack  of
    likelihood of reoffending.

78. Against those matters are the statutory guidelines as already  set  out
    and the weight to be given to the fact that the appellant is a  foreign
    criminal who has received a four year prison term.

79. On the facts as I have found the effect of his deportation on Mrs W and
    S would be  harsh  and  possibly  even  unduly  harsh  given  that  the
    expression "unduly harsh" is almost incapable of precise definition but
    in any event I am not able to  find  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the exception as set out in 117C(5) of the
    2002 Act. The public interest in  deporting  foreign  criminals  is  so
    great that only in exceptional circumstances will it be  outweighed  by
    other factors, including the effect of deportation on any children.

80. As was said in AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 at [39] - [41] the fact
    that the new rules are intended to operate as a comprehensive  code  is
    significant, because it means that an official  or  a  tribunal  should
    seek to take account of any Convention rights of an  appellant  through
    the lens of the new rules themselves,  rather  than  looking  to  apply
    Convention rights for themselves in a freestanding way outside the  new
    rules.  This  feature  of  the  new  rules  makes  the  decision-making
    framework in relation to  foreign  criminals  different  from  that  in
    relation to other parts of the Immigration Rules, where  the  Secretary
    of State retains a general discretion outside the rules in exercise  of
    which, in some circumstances, decisions may need to be made in order to
    accommodate certain  claims  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    Convention rights, as explained in Huang and R (Nagre) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

81. SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 550 and MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 as well  as  AJ  (Angola)
    all emphasise that  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
    deportation and something very compelling (which will be "exceptional")
    is required to outweigh the public interest in removal.

82. The consequence for this family is serious. The  heavy  weight  that  I
    have to place in the scales in favour of deportation as required  under
    the statutory guidelines and in the rules I find is not  outweighed  by
    other factors. There are no very  compelling  reasons  over  and  above
    factors set out in rules 398, 399 and 399 A or elsewhere which outweigh
    the public interest in deportation. In coming to  my  decision  I  have
    taken all matters into account including the evidence  before  me;  the
    submissions made and also the general Article 8 factors  considered  in
    cases such as Uner v The Netherlands [2006] ECHR 873 ;  the  applicable
    Immigration Directorate Instructions of 28 July 2014 and  January  2015
    and case law.

83. The First-tier Tribunal  decision  has  already  been  set  aside.   My
    conclusion is that the appellant does not succeed  in  his  appeal  and
    this is for the above reasons.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

I make an anonymity direction to protect the identity of S who is a child.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
