
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02037/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 19 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G C
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Ganejan, Counsel employed by Scarmans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent to this appeal, hereafter "the claimant", is  a  citizen
    of Lithuania.  He was born in June 1954 so is now  61  years  old.   He
    appealed successfully to the First-tier  Tribunal  a  decision  of  the
    appellant, hereinafter "the Secretary of State", on 29 October 2014  to
    make him the subject of a deportation order.

 2. The order says  that  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  "pursuant  to
    Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006, that it is justified on the grounds of public  policy
    to deport" the claimant from the United Kingdom.

 3. The decision is explained in a supporting letter dated 29 October 2014.
     According to the letter on 22 October 2001 the claimant was  convicted
    at  the  Vilnius  Regional  Court  Lithuania   of   the   offences   of
    "organisation  and  management  of  and   participation   in   criminal
    conspiracy", "extortion" and "aggravated murder".  He was sentenced  to
    nineteen years' imprisonment  varied  on  subsequent  appeals  down  to
    fourteen years' imprisonment.  He was released on parole on 26 May 2010
    subject to  conditions  of  reporting.  The  letter  noted  that  under
    Regulation 19(3)(b) of the 2006 Regulations the Secretary of State  may
    deport an EEA national when  that  person's  removal  is  justified  on
    "grounds of public policy, public security or public health".

 4. When considering the claimant's offending the letter referred to murder
    being a "particularly insidious  offence"  which  was  said  to  be  "a
    subject of paramount concern to  the  public".   The  letter  said  how
    murder, in the opinion of the Secretary of State, can impact upon wider
    society by causing a climate  of  fear  and  insecurity  and  that  the
    claimant had demonstrated through his actions that he  was  capable  of
    causing harm to others.  At paragraph 29 the Secretary  of  State  said
    that "the nature of your offence shows that you have the  potential  to
    act violently."

 5. At paragraph 25 the letter says:

         "While the Home Office has seen no evidence that you have  repeated
         these very serious offences since your release from prison,  it  is
         considered that insufficient time has passed to establish that  you
         no longer present a risk of doing so."

 6. At paragraph 28 the letter asserts "you did not give any thought to the
    consequences of your actions" and at paragraph 29  the  letter  asserts
    "you appear to have given no consideration to the consequences of  your
    actions."

 7. I find these astonishing claims to make when at paragraph 24 the letter
    says "the circumstances of your offence are not known".

 8. At paragraph 33 the Secretary of State said:

         "... all  the  available  evidence  indicates  that  you  have  the
         propensity to reoffend and that you represent  a  genuine,  present
         and sufficiently serious threat  to  the  public  to  justify  your
         deportation on grounds of public policy."

 9. I am not able to deduce  from  the  letter  what  "available  evidence"
    points to such a conclusion.

10. The letter then dealt with Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights and Section 117A  to  Section  117D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

11. I do not criticise the Secretary of State for considering human  rights
    separately.  However this is essentially an EEA case and I see no  need
    to look into the human rights of the claimant.

12. I am rather concerned by the second sub-paragraph of  paragraph  49  of
    the letter which states:

         "Due to your criminal convictions in  Lithuania  you  were  refused
         submission to the UK on 10 March 2014 at Calais.  You submitted  an
         out of country appeal against this  decision  which  has  now  been
         withdrawn  as  despite  being  refused   entry   at   Calais   your
         representative advised you entered the UK a few days later  through
         Heathrow."

13. I do not understand what point has been made here.  It is a  fact  that
    the claimant was refused admission at Calais and a  fact  that  he  had
    entered through Heathrow shortly afterwards.  If it is the Secretary of
    State's case that the claimant has in some way been deceitful or  acted
    improperly or worse then she should say what she means.  This  part  of
    the letter looks more like gratuitous prejudice than part of a reasoned
    decision.

14. The claimant was not in the United Kingdom when his appeal was heard.

15.  His  wife  gave  evidence.   Much   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination considers that evidence which dealt with the  history  of
    their relationship and  is  of  limited  value.   I  do  note  that  at
    paragraph 19 the Tribunal recorded the appellant's wife's  evidence  to
    the effect that the claimant did not  understand  why  he  was  refused
    entry at Calais.  He was aware that the  Border  Agency  officers  were
    shouting at him and gave him papers that he did not understand.  I make
    no finding about this.  I mention it in part because it demonstrates my
    concern about the criticisms in the refusal  letter  which  are  wholly
    unexplained.  Nevertheless  it  was  part  of  the  appellant's  wife's
    evidence that the appellant was not justly convicted but is the  victim
    of the corrupt state.

16. The claimant's wife explained that his release from prison in Lithuania
    followed the payment of E20,000 to a solicitor in  Lithuania  who  said
    that some of the money was to pay officials.   It  was  the  claimant's
    case that he was eligible for release but he had been  refused  release
    on two occasions and corrupt payment was necessary  to  facilitate  his
    departure from prison.

17. These things enabled  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to submit that the claimant has refused to accept  his  guilt,
    that  he  was  willing  to  use  bribery  and  his  refusal  to  accept
    immigration decisions suggested a propensity to re-offend.

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the contention that the claimant
    had not been guilty of the offences for which he was convicted.

19. At paragraph 46 of her decision the judge considered a judgment of  the
    Kaunas Regional Court dated 26 May 2010 dealing with an appeal  against
    the claimant's application for release being refused.  The judge quoted
    from a translation of the judgment and said:

         "During the period of the serving of the sentence,  [the  claimant]
         made  five  violations  of  the  regime  and   was   imposed   with
         disciplinary penalties four times for their commitment.   The  last
         penalty was imposed on 15/02/2006, it was abolished on  04/09/2006.
         From this time onwards, the convict has not violated the Rules  ...
         In contrast to the statements contained in the ruling under appeal,
         the correction on institution has not provided any data  that  [the
         claimant]  participated  in  the  mass  disobedience  campaigns  of
         February  2009  ...  the   administration   of   the   correctional
         institution positively characterises the  convict  ...  and  states
         that taking into account the personality, education, speciality and
         course of re-socialisation of the convict during the serving of the
         sentence, positive integration  of  the  convict  into  society  is
         likely ..."

20. The judge  noted  aspects  of  the  evidence  that  she  found  to  the
    claimant's discredit.  It did not help  the  claimant's  case  that  he
    continued to maintain his innocence.  Neither did his  re-entering  the
    United Kingdom when entry had been refused.

21. The judge did not accept the account given by the claimant's wife  that
    he did not understand what had happened.   She  clearly  preferred  the
    evidence in the report from a Border Agency officer that  the  claimant
    was very reluctant to admit that he had been convicted  of  murder  and
    that his inability to understand English was selective.

22. Nevertheless the judge  accepted  that  the  claimant  was  a  reformed
    character and said unequivocally at paragraph 48:

         "I cannot go so far as to find that the [claimant]  is  a  genuine,
         present and serious threat to public policy.  It is clear from  the
         ruling from the court that the  [claimant]  was  considered  to  be
         rehabilitated and to no longer be a threat to society."

23. The judge then also accepted evidence that  the  claimant  had  behaved
    himself in the United Kingdom and noted there was no evidence or even a
    suggestion of further convictions.

24. She found that the claimant's discreditable  conduct  in  entering  the
    United Kingdom was offset to some extent by his drawing himself to  the
    attention of the authorities very soon after arrival.  The judge  found
    it much more telling that the claimant had  not  had  any  disciplinary
    problems with the prison since 2006, that he appeared to have  complied
    with his conditions of probation and that he had not been convicted  of
    any further offence.

25. The judge concluded that the respondent had not shown that there  is  a
    "genuine, present  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  society"  if  the
    claimant remained in the United Kingdom.  She concluded therefore  that
    deportation was not in accordance with the Regulations and allowed  the
    appeal.

26. It was the essence of the Secretary of State's  case  set  out  in  the
    grounds that the judge had not explained adequately  her  finding  that
    the claimant did  not  present  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to society.

27. The first point made under 1(b) is that the finding that  the  claimant
    had not committed offences  since  2002  "flies  in  the  face  of  the
    evidence" because the claimant  had  been  involved  with  disciplinary
    proceedings in prison and then goes on that the judge  failed  to  take
    account of the fact that one of the main reasons the claimant  had  not
    committed offences was that he had spent much of his time in prison.

28. This does not need detailed analysis.  The fact there were disciplinary
    offences in prison does not  mean  there  were  any  criminal  offences
    committed.  By the time the First-tier Tribunal heard  the  appeal  the
    claimant  had  been  at  liberty  for  about  five  years  which  is  a
    significant time for a person alleged to have a propensity to  criminal
    activity to have been out of trouble and it is, I  believe  well-known,
    that the period immediately after release is one of the most  difficult
    times for a person trying to give up life of crime.

29. Paragraph (c) complains  that  the  claimant  cannot  be  rehabilitated
    because he did not admit his guilt, (d) notes that the judge must  have
    disbelieved the claimant and it is therefore hard to understand why she
    found  his  evidence  and  the  evidence  of   those   supporting   him
    sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  concerns  raised  by   the
    Secretary of State, (e) says there was no  evidence  of  rehabilitation
    measures and paragraph (f) asserts that the appalling criminal  history
    itself reflects a sufficiently serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society  and  complains  that  the  judge  has
    failed to  explain  why  they  were  not  considered  to  amount  to  a
    sufficiently serious threat.

30. Mr Tufan relied on these grounds.

31. He also  submitted  that  the  past  conduct  alone  can  amount  to  a
    sufficiently serious reason.  Mr Tufan supported this with a  reference
    to the decision of R v Bouchereau (Case 30-77) [1978] 1QB 732 which was
    cited by the Court of Appeal in SSHD  v  Straszewski  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    1245.  This confirmed the theoretical possibility of past conduct alone
    amounting to a sufficiently strong reason and was in the context  of  a
    person who was convicted a second  time  for  supplying  banned  drugs.
    However this is not really how the case was being put  in  the  refusal
    letter and therefore not the case that had to be answered  and  in  any
    event the Secretary of State is somewhat  hampered  by  knowing  little
    about the offences.

32. I did not accept it is a fair criticism of the judge to  say  that  she
    did not explain why the offences in themselves were not  sufficient  to
    justify the claimant's removal.

33. I have considered the submissions by Mr Ganejan including his extensive
    skeleton argument.

34. Far from erring it seems to me that the judge is to  be  commended  for
    keeping her eye  on  the  ball.   She  did  not  allow  herself  to  be
    distracted by complaints about the fact of the conviction or  the  harm
    done to the claimant's credibility by his  lack  of  candour  with  the
    immigration authorities.  She did what she was there to do which was to
    decide if the claimant presented a "genuine, present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat" to society.

35. She noted that he committed very serious offences in 2002, that he  had
    been released in 2010 and he had not committed any offences since then.
     He had lived discreetly in the United  Kingdom  and  in  Lithuania  in
    accordance with his terms of probation.  He had not reoffended.

36. Most significantly of all, the judge was impressed with the finding  of
    the Lithuanian court that he was ready to be released. It seems  to  me
    this is possibly the most important part of the case.  The  authorities
    in Lithuania have decided that this  man  who  has  been  convicted  of
    serious offences is entitled to be released because of the way  he  had
    conducted himself subsequently and that his positive  integration  into
    society was  likely.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  assume  that  the
    authorities in Lithuania would not be anxious to release somebody  into
    their community who  was  thought  dangerous.   It  is  not  a  perfect
    equation but it is not perverse to find that a person who is fit to  be
    released from imprisonment in Lithuania is not a  sufficiently  serious
    threat to society in the United Kingdom.

37. Far from erring in law I find that the judge has picked her way through
    conflicting strands of evidence and has concentrated on the point  that
    matters and has  reached  an  entirely  rational  conclusion  which  is
    explained adequately.

38. I therefore dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 February 2016               |

