
[pic]
IAC-hw-mp-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02180/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2014                               |On 6 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     F s
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hanley  and  Dr  P  L
    Ravenscroft) in which they dismissed his appeal against the decision by
    the respondent made on 5 July 2013 to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation
    order signed against him.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who arrived in the United Kingdom on
    1 June 2000 and claimed asylum on arrival.  His application was refused
    on 1 July 2004 and on 16 June 2006 the respondent made  a  decision  to
    deport the appellant pursuant to Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
    1971, the appellant having been  convicted  on  25  separate  occasions
    between 16 September 2002 and 30 May 2006 in  the  Magistrates'  Court.
    The convictions were predominantly for  shoplifting  but  also  include
    possession of class A drugs.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed.  Following that, a deportation order was signed on 23 August
    2007 but he was not removed.

 3. On 7 April 2008 a fresh claim for  asylum  was  submitted  and  in  the
    meanwhile his offending behaviour  continued  resulting  in  a  further
    seven convictions, the most recent being on 7 May 2013 for battery.

 4. The fresh claim for asylum was based on two strands:-

      a) documents in support of the original claim showing that he had been
         summonsed to a Revolutionary Court in Shiraz; and,

      b) claiming that he had converted to Christianity.

 5. The respondent refused the claim for asylum for the reasons set out  in
    the refusal letter dated 5 July 2013. As the appellant no longer  seeks
    to rely on a claim for asylum, there is no need to refer to this in any
    detail suffice to say that the respondent did not accept his claims.

 6. It is the appellant's case  that  his  deportation  to  Iran  would  be
    contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article  8  of
    the  Human  Rights  Convention  given  that  he  is  now  in  a  stable
    relationship with Miss A  who, as a result of  a  long-standing  mental
    illness including bipolar affective disorder, is a vulnerable adult who
    could not relocate to Iran; and, were they to be separated,  is  likely
    to suffer a relapse such that she is likely again to be detained  under
    Section 3 of the  Mental  Health  Act  as  she  has  on  six  occasions
    previously.

 7. The Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant and Miss  A;  they  also
    had before them a substantial bundle  of  material  including  material
    relating to Miss A's condition.  The Tribunal found:-

      i)  the  appellant  is  not  a  person  of  interest  to  the  Iranian
         authorities and is not at risk arising from any events he claims to
         have taken place in Iran prior to his life in  the  United  Kingdom
         [74];

     ii) the appellant was not a convert to Christianity; any conversion was
         not genuine [75], noting  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  his
         Anglican Church he claimed to attend finding it wholly  lacking  in
         credibility that  if  he  were  a  genuine  man  from  an  Anglican
         congregation as claimed, regularly attending his local church  over
         a significant period of time there had been no evidence  from  that
         church [78];

    iii) the appellant and Miss A are in a relationship  and  live  together
         but that they had not lived together as long as claimed [85]  given
         the lack of documentary evidence to that effect;

     iv) Miss A was a somewhat defensive witness [87];

      v) that Miss A had accepted that she had been well before she met  the
         appellant and had been well for the last four years or so [88];

     vi) that they were not satisfied that the relationship with Miss A  was
         a  compassionate  circumstance   warranting   revocation   of   the
         deportation order noting that she had been stable for  at  least  a
         year  or  two  before  she  even  met  the  appellant  and  as  the
         relationship  had  been  commenced  in  the  full   knowledge   the
         appellant's immigration status was precarious;

    vii) that the appellant was a persistent petty criminal  and  they  were
         not persuaded that he had been rehabilitated.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    grounds that:-

      i) the Tribunal had failed to give  any  reasons  in  support  of  the
         finding that the appellant  was  not  rehabilitated,  the  Tribunal
         giving no reasons for disregarding the  appellant's  own  oral  and
         written evidence and there being no analysis of the seriousness  of
         his reoffending;

     ii) the finding as to the length of cohabitation was flawed and that it
         was not sufficiently reasoned, the Tribunal failing to give  weight
         to the oral and written evidence of all three witnesses;

    iii)  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  compassionate  circumstances  was
         incomplete in that  they  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
         evidence from Miss A, her mother, the consultant  psychiatrist  and
         the outreach team leader in assessing  the  likely  effect  of  the
         appellant's deportation on Miss A's  health  and  failed  also,  in
         their approach to Miss A's evidence, to take into account that  she
         is  a  vulnerable  witness  as  defined  in  Section  59   of   the
         Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act.

 9. On 22 May 2014 I granted permission to appeal stating:

         "It is arguable that in assessing the  compassionate  circumstances
         with respect to the appellant's partner,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         failed to take into account the medical  evidence  indicating  that
         she may have  a  significant  relapse  were  the  appellant  to  be
         deported."

10. I heard submissions from both representatives.  I deal with each of the
    grounds in turn:-

Ground 1

11. It is not in dispute that the appellant has been convicted on  over  30
    occasions between September 2002 and May 2013.   It  is  also  accepted
    that he has suffered from drug addiction.  The last conviction was less
    than a year before the date of hearing and in this  context  and  given
    also the unchallenged adverse credibility findings with respect to  his
    claiming to have converted to Christianity, the panel were entitled  to
    conclude that he had not rehabilitated.  That was a finding of fact  it
    was open to them to reach on the evidence before  them  and  they  were
    entitled to conclude that  he  had  not  completed  the  rehabilitation
    programme and whilst their reasoning is succinct, it is in the  context
    of this case adequate and sustainable.

Ground 2

12. I accept that, as Mr Whitwell submitted, the Tribunal did at paragraphs
    33(f) and (g) set out the nature of the medical evidence  with  respect
    to Miss A, noting the evidence of both Kathy Owen, the team leader, and
    Dr Jason Read, that there was a concern on the part of both that if the
    appellant were deported to Iran then Miss A's mental  health  could  be
    unstable and that she might suffer a relapse.  The Tribunal said [89]:-



         "We take into account  [Miss]A's  medical  condition  and  recently
         submitted medical letters but we note that on her own evidence  and
         according to the medical professionals that she was stable  for  at
         least a year or  two  before  she  even  met  the  appellant.   The
         relationship has been commenced in  the  full  knowledge  that  the
         appellant's immigration status was precarious."

13. It is evident from this that the panel concluded that Miss  A  was  not
    likely to suffer a relapse.  In contrast, the letter from her  treating
    psychiatrist Dr Read, states:-

         "I am concerned if her partner were removed  to  Iran  this  would
         contribute to a relapse in her mental health  problems.   This  is
         evidenced  by  previous  episodes  in  the   past,   having   been
         precipitated by relationship difficulties."

14. Miss Owen, the assertive outreach team leader states "It is likely that
    if Miss A's partner is removed to  Iran  this  will  cause  her  mental
    health to become unstable."

15. There is insufficient evidence  that  the  Tribunal  engaged  with  the
    reports  when  concluding  that  she  was  unlikely  to  relapse.   The
    reference to her having been stable for four years and before  she  met
    the appellant is a fact referred to and known to both professionals and
    thus the rejection of their expert opinion is insufficiently reasoned.

16. Further,  there  is  no  indication  in  the  decision  that  they  had
    considered whether, in the alternative, if Miss  A  were  to  suffer  a
    relapse, what would flow from that and the degree  of  harm  which  she
    would suffer.

17. Whilst I note Mr Whitwell's submission that even  had  they  considered
    that Miss A would have a relapse, and nonetheless this would not amount
    to exceptional circumstances, I do not consider that this is a decision
    that would necessarily have flowed from such a finding and  thus  I  am
    satisfied that the error is material and that on this basis  alone  the
    determination must be set aside and remade.

Ground 3

18. Whilst I note that the panel gave no indication that they treated  Miss
    A as a vulnerable adult, as she is  given  her  diagnosis,  other  than
    their reference to her being a defensive witness, it  is  difficult  to
    see how this materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

19. Nonetheless, for the reasons set out above, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
    error of law, and I set it aside.



Remaking the decision

20. I heard further evidence from Miss A who confirmed that  she  had  been
    diagnosed  with  bipolar  affective  disorder  but  that  she  was  not
    currently taking medication as she is pregnant  and  that  she  has  an
    appointment to see a psychiatrist who specialises in the  treatment  of
    women with her condition who are pregnant on  13th  August.   She  said
    that she had stopped taking some of her medication at Christmas due its
    side effects and due to the fact that she was beginning  to  feel  more
    stable.  That had been before she had found out she was pregnant.   She
    added she that she also needed to take Thyroxine, as the lithium  which
    she had previously been prescribed owing to her severe  depression  had
    caused damage to her thyroid.  She said that she was unsure what  drugs
    she could or could not take safely and at various stages  of  pregnancy
    and would be taking advice from a psychiatrist on this matter.

21. Miss A said  that  she  had  been  discharged  from  the  care  of  the
    consultant psychiatrist  but  had  regular  contact  with  a  community
    psychiatric nurse by telephone and also in visits.  She  said  that  if
    the appellant were deported she would be devastated as she  had  become
    very close to him over time and felt that she had  with  him  a  second
    chance at life.  She said she did not know how she  would  be  able  to
    cope were he to be deported and that she believed that as had  happened
    to her in the past, she would become  extremely  depressed.   She  said
    that in the past she had, in her early 20s, had two periods of extended
    hospitalisation due to depression  from  which  she  had  undergone  25
    sessions of ECT and that this had been an extremely difficult time  for
    her  as  she  reacted  badly  to  being  hospitalised  which  made  her
    difficulties  worse.   She  said   that   her   bipolarity   had   been
    characterised by periods of high mania and extreme lows.  She said that
    in the past that when she deteriorated she  had  become  psychotic  and
    ended up in hospital and that this normally  lasted  for  some  two  to
    three months before she was released and the  effect  of  hospital  was
    damaging on her.

22. In cross-examination Miss A said that the pregnancy  had  been  planned
    and that she had taken the decision to have her  contraception  removed
    after the relationship had become stable.  She said that the fact  that
    the appellant was in a very precarious position  with  his  immigration
    status had not really been a factor in her deciding whether or  not  to
    become pregnant but that she felt also, at her age, this was  her  last
    chance.  It was put to her that the chances of her relapsing  were  not
    as great as suggested and she was embellishing it.  She said  that  was
    not the case and that the appellant was thoughtful, kind and someone on
    whom she depended.

23. In re-examination Miss A  said that she could not go to live in Iran as
    she would not be able to get appropriate  treatment  as  she  does  not
    speak Farsi and would not have the support network which she  has  here
    which includes her mother and the healthcare professionals on which she
    has relied on in the past.  She said that her parents live  nearby  and
    have supported her in the past but her mother is now 73 and her  father
    is 81.  They are happy that she is in a supportive  relationship.   She
    said that although she has two older brothers,  her  relationship  with
    them is not strong, she believes that this is  partly  because  of  the
    difficulties that had arisen between  them  due  to  her  long-standing
    illness but she is closer to their children.

24. In response to my questions Miss A said that some three to  four  years
    ago she had had cognitive behavioural therapy ("CBT") which had  helped
    her to  manage  her  condition  and  she  believes  it  has  been  very
    effective.   She  said  that  in  the  past  her  relapses   had   been
    characterised by extreme distress leading to anxiety and depression and
    then psychosis.  She said a pattern had been that every one and a  half
    to two years she would end up in hospital and on release it would  take
    her about a year and a half to recover from the experience.   She  said
    that the CBT that had been positive for her had occurred after her last
    relapse and she had not had one since.

25. I then heard submissions.  Mr Whitwell submitted that even taking  into
    account any possible relapse, and the effect on Miss A, it would  still
    be proportionate to deport the appellant given his history, convictions
    and the fact that the relationship had started when his  situation  was
    particularly precarious.

26. In reply Mr Harding submitted that on the basis of the medical evidence
    it was likely that she would suffer a relapse and that the consequences
    of that relapse would be particularly severe given her history and that
    this would have an effect on her moral  and  physical  integrity.   The
    effects of deporting the  appellant  would  be  to  condemn  her  to  a
    significant degree of distress which would in all the circumstances  of
    the case be disproportionate.

Discussion

27. This is an appeal against a decision to refuse to revoke a  deportation
    order against the appellant.  As this is  a  decision  which  has  been
    taken after 28 July 2014, I am bound by Section 117 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  to  take  into  account  the  certain
    matters in respect of foreign criminals. While I was not  addressed  on
    these at  the  hearing,  I  have  taken  into  account  the  subsequent
    submissions from Mr Harding produced  subsequent  to  the  hearing  and
    response to my directions. The respondent has not submitted any further
    argument and has chosen to make no submissions  in  response  to  those
    made by the  appellant.   I  am  satisfied  also  that,  following  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in YM (Uganda)v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292 that the Immigration Rules in force from 28 July  2014  are  those
    which must be considered.

28. Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended) provides:


      117A Application of this Part
      (1)This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a)breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
      under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
      Rights Act 1998.

      (2)In considering the public interest question, the court or  tribunal
      must (in particular) have regard-
         (a)in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b)in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
         considerations listed in section 117C.

      (3)In  subsection  (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
      question of whether an interference with a person's right  to  respect
      for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).


      117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

      (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
      interest.

      (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
      the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who  seek
      to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able  to  speak  English,
      because persons who can speak English-
         (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b)are better able to integrate into society.
      (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
      independent, because such persons-

         (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

      (4)Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.

      (5)Little weight should be given to a private life  established  by  a
      person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

      (6)In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a)the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b)it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom.


      117CArticle 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
      criminals

      (1)The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

      (2)The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
      greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

      (3)In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
      to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
      requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

      (4)Exception 1 applies where-
         (a)C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of
      C's life,
         (b)C is socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom,
      and
         (c)there would be very significant  obstacles  to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
      (5)Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect  of  C's
      deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

      (6)In the case of a foreign criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
      period of imprisonment of at least four  years,  the  public  interest
      requires deportation unless there are very  compelling  circumstances,
      over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

      (7)The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken  into
      account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to  deport
      a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision
      was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.



      117D Interpretation of this Part

      (1)In this Part-
      "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
      Rights;
      "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-
         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
      seven years or more;
      "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
      (a) is a British citizen, or
      (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
      Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
      (2)In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
      (a)who is not a British citizen,
      (b)who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
      (c)who-
      (i)has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12
      months,
      (ii)has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm, or
      (iii)is a persistent offender.

      (3)For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to an order
      under-
      (a)section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964 (insanity
      etc),
      (b)section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (insanity
      etc), or
      (c)Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order 1986
      (insanity etc),
      has not been convicted of an offence.

      (4)In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to a
      period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
         (a) do not include a person who has received a suspended sentence
         (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or any part
         of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
         (b)do not include a person who has been sentenced to a period of
         imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue of being
         sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate to that
         length of time;
         (c)include a person who is sentenced to detention, or ordered or
         directed to be detained, in an institution other than a prison
         (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution for young
         offenders) for that length of time; and
         (d) include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention,
         or ordered or directed to be detained, for an indeterminate period,
         provided that it may last for at least that length of time.


      (5)If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as to whether
      a person is a British citizen, it is for the person asserting that
      fact to prove it

29. It is not submitted in the refusal  letter  that  the  appellant  is  a
    foreign criminal. Indeed, at [94] it is accepted that he does not  fall
    within paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.  That is because he  has
    not committed an offence for which  he  was  sentenced  to  12  months'
    imprisonment, nor is it asserted that the  appellant  is  a  persistent
    offender who  has  shown  a  particular  disregard  for  the  law,  the
    alternate basis on which paragraph 398 could have applied to him.

30. There is no submission from the respondent that  he  falls  within  the
    amended version of paragraph 398, and I am not satisfied that he  does.
    I find that section 117C is not applicable as the appellant is a not  a
    foreign criminal as defined  in  section  117D  (2).  It  is,  however,
    evident that section 117B applies to this case.

31. The relevant provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  set  out  at
    paragraph 390:

       390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
       considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
       following:
         (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
         (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
         (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance of
         an effective immigration  control
         (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
       circumstances

       390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
       consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
       it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
       interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
       other factors.


       396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall
       be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the
       public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make a
       deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK Borders
       Act 2007

32. As paragraph 398 does not apply, paragraph 390A does not apply. This is
    not a case in  which  section  32  of  the  2007  Act  applies  either.
    Nonetheless, there remains  a  presumption  that  the  public  interest
    requires deportation

33. I found Miss A to be an articulate witness who has considerable insight
    into her condition.  I accept that she has in the past  been  sectioned
    under the Mental Health Act on some six occasions and also on the basis
    of the evidence from her doctor that this has been  traumatic  for  her
    given that hospitalisation has a detrimental effect on  her  condition.
    The letter from Dr Read of 21 July 2014 bears out her  evidence  of  an
    unfortunate  cycle  of  deterioration,  hospitalisation  and   recovery
    followed by a further deterioration, and so on.  The letter concludes:-

         "From 2011 until recently her mental state has been stable and  she
         has been discharged from the assertive outreach team.   Emma  tells
         me that her partner [the appellant] is a key part of  her  recovery
         process and I would concur that Miss A's psychotic illness has been
         characterised by  stress  -  vulnerability  picture  and  has  been
         precipitated by relationship breakups in the past.  Therefore it is
         not unreasonable, if thinking in psychodynamic terms that, now  she
         is in a steady and supportive relationship  this  does  not  occur.
         Therefore it would also seem logical that any  enforced  separation
         is likely to increase the risk of relapse.

         I am providing this report free of charge as  I  believe  Miss  A's
         relationship with  [the  appellant]  is  a  key  component  to  her
         recovery and ongoing wellbeing.  Given  the  intensity  of  support
         from statutory services and hospitalisation she has needed  in  the
         past there would seem to be financial benefit to the state as  well
         as the psychological benefit to Miss A  herself  of  allowing  this
         appeal."

34. In the light of this report I consider that there is a realistic chance
    that if the appellant were to be deported, that Miss A  would suffer  a
    relapse as she has in the past, resulting, as it has  done  on  several
    occasions, in her compulsory hospitalisation and treatment due  to  the
    psychotic nature of her illness. Given the  expert  evidence  that  the
    nature  of  her  condition   means   that   she   responds   badly   to
    hospitalisation, this exacerbates the likely effect

35. I do not consider that Miss A could reasonably be  expected  to  go  to
    Iran.  At present she has a significant support network and there would
    be, I accept, difficulties in her engaging with psychiatric therapy  as
    she does not speak Farsi.  She has also lived in the United Kingdom for
    42 years since birth.  It is evident that this support and treatment is
    something to which she is entitled as a British Citizen, and the effect
    of removal to a country where she would, apart  from  her  partner,  be
    isolated, is likely to cause serious distress owing to her illness.

36. I am, in the circumstances, satisfied that the effect of deporting  the
    appellant to Iran would cause very serious hardship to Miss A, and that
    there would be, in reality, insurmountable obstacles to her joining the
    appellant in Iran.  That is a factor which weighs  in  the  appellant's
    favour.

37. There is, however, little else in the appellant's  favour,  other  than
    the fact that he speaks English. He has a long criminal record,  albeit
    for relatively minor offences,  and  he  has  fabricated  a  claim  for
    asylum. His relationship with Miss A commenced well after a deportation
    order had been signed, and his status  here  was,  to  say  the  least,
    precarious. He had no leave to be here, although his presence here  was
    tolerated as his claim for asylum was under  consideration.  That  does
    not, however, make his presence lawful - see ST( Eritrea) v SSHD [2013]
    UKSC 12.  What is under consideration here is whether his presence here
    is lawful in the context of immigration, and  thus  what  was  said  in
    Szoma v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2006] 1 AC 564 is not
    applicable here.

38. Accordingly, by operation of section 117B (4), I attach  little  weight
    to the family life the appellant has developed with Ms A,  even  though
    the effect on her will be serious.  I also attach little weight to  the
    appellant's private life which in turn means I can attach little weight
    to the delay in this case.

39. I accept that by virtue of section 117A, the matters to be  taken  into
    account within section 117B are not exhaustive, and I accept that Ms  A
    is pregnant. It is not, however, arguable that the unborn child has any
    rights.

40. As noted above, the appellant does not have leave to be here,  nor  has
    he ever had leave to remain. There is a public interest in  maintaining
    Immigration Control, as set out in section 117B (1)  and  in  paragraph
    390 of the Immigration Rules.

41. In the circumstances, while I accept that the appellant has established
    a family life in the United Kingdom with Ms A, and that his deportation
    would cause her suffering to the extent that it would be unduly  harsh,
    in light of the factors set out in section 117B  of  the  2002  Act,  I
    cannot attach weight to the appellant's family life with his partner or
    to his private life, and accordingly, given the presumption  in  favour
    of deportation and  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  Immigration
    Control, I am compelled by statute to consider  that  the  interference
    with the right to respect for private and family life is proportionate.



42. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

 3. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal



Signed                                  Date: 5 November 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


