

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02015/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 14 July 2014                             |On 08th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                samuel pratt

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before me following a grant of permission to appeal on  29
May 2014.

The appellant is a citizen of Sierra  Leone,  born  on  14  April  1973.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 May 1994 and  claimed  asylum  on  entry.
His claim was refused and he was refused leave to enter. His appeal  against
that decision was unsuccessful. Between 1996 and 1997 he was  listed  as  an
absconder. On 25 September 1997 he made a  new  asylum  claim.  That  claim,
together with a further application for leave to remain, was  refused  on  4
September 2000, but the appellant was granted exceptional  leave  to  remain
until 4 September 2004. His appeal against the refusal of his  asylum  claim
was dismissed.

On 7 April 2004 the appellant was convicted  at  Cambridge  Crown  Court  of
wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and was  sentenced  to  four
years' imprisonment. On 7  February  2005  he  was  issued  with  notice  of
liability to deportation and he responded by reasserting his fear of  return
to Sierra Leone, which was considered as a  further  asylum  claim.  Another
notice of liability to deportation was issued in November 2005  and  further
submissions were made on the appellant's behalf. He  was  advised  that  his
asylum claim was in a backlog of cases and in  March  2013  he  was  advised
that his case was with the Case Assurance and Audit Unit (CAAU) of the  Home
Office. He was served with further notices of liability  to  deportation  on
29 April 2013 and 4 September 2013, the  latter  inviting  him  to  seek  to
rebut the presumption under section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002.

On 9 September 2013 the appellant's solicitors advised the  respondent  that
he had nothing to  add  to  his  asylum  claim  and  that,  given  that  his
conviction was as long ago as April 2004 and that  he  had  not  re-offended
since his release from prison in 2005 and since completing  his  licence  in
2007, the presumption under section 72 was rebutted.

On 17 September 2013 the respondent made a decision to  make  a  deportation
order by virtue  of  section  3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.  The
appellant's asylum application was refused for reasons set out in  a  letter
dated 12 September 2013. In that letter, the respondent concluded  that  the
appellant had failed to rebut the presumption that  his  continued  presence
in the UK would constitute a danger to the community and that his crime  was
serious. It was considered  that  section  72  of  the  2002  was  therefore
applicable to him. His asylum claim was accordingly refused on  the  grounds
that the Refugee Convention did not prevent  his  removal  from  the  United
Kingdom. The respondent referred  to  the  determinations  of  two  previous
Tribunals dismissing the  appellant's  asylum  appeals,  together  with  the
subsequent submissions made on his behalf, and concluded that  he  would  be
at no risk on return to Sierra Leone and that his removal would  not  breach
his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal  was  heard  before
the First-tier Tribunal, by a panel consisting of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
Kelsey and Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes.  The  appellant  maintained  before
the Tribunal that he was at risk on return  to  Sierra  Leone.  He  did  not
accept that he continued to constitute a danger  to  the  community  and  he
claimed that deportation would interfere with his established  private  life
and breach his Article 8 human rights, given his length of residence in  the
UK and the respondent's delay in considering his claim. The  panel  did  not
accept that the appellant would be at risk on return  to  Sierra  Leone  and
considered that he had not put forward a truthful account. They  found  that
he had failed to rebut the presumption under section 72 of the 2002 Act  and
they concluded that his deportation would not breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  appellant  in
person on general grounds disagreeing with the Tribunal's decision.

Permission to appeal was granted on 29 May 2014  on  the  grounds  that  the
Tribunal had arguably misdirected itself in law in regard to the  provisions
under which the deportation order was made and the section 72  certification
and had failed to consider the relevant immigration rules.

Appeal hearing

 The appeal came before me on  14  July  2014.  The  appellant  appeared  in
person without a representative. I gave him  an  opportunity  to  raise  any
concerns he had about the Tribunal's decision. He  said  that  he  had  been
made effectively stateless as he had been in  a  state  of  uncertainty  for
eight years awaiting a decision from the Home Office. He had told  the  Home
Office that his paperwork had been interfered with whilst he was in  prison.
He had been in the United  Kingdom  for  20  years.  Everyone  had  colluded
against him. He had no ties to Sierra Leone.

 Mr Avery submitted that whilst there appeared to have been  some  confusion
on the part of the Tribunal as to the provision under which the  deportation
order was made, there was no material error as the panel had looked  at  all
relevant issues. The section 72  certificate  was  not  relevant  since  the
appellant was found not to be at risk on return to Sierra Leone.  There  was
a lack of any compelling reasons for the appellant to be in the UK  and  the
outcome of the appeal was inevitable.

The appellant, in response, advised me that he wished to appeal against  his
conviction and asked me to grant permission to apply for judicial review.  I
informed him that those were not matters within my jurisdiction.

Consideration and findings.

In my view the Tribunal did not  make  any  errors  of  law  such  that  its
decision needs to be set aside.

Permission was granted on  the  basis  that  the  Tribunal  had  misdirected
itself in law in regard to the provisions under which the deportation  order
was made. However, whilst the panel referred  at  paragraph  14  to  section
32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, they correctly identified at  paragraph  1
of their determination  that  the  deportation  order  was  made  under  the
provisions of the 1971 Act. In any event it is clear that the issues  before
them were the same and essentially concerned the exceptions  to  deportation
under paragraph 397 of the immigration rules, namely whether  removal  would
be contrary to the UK's obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the
Human Rights Convention.

With regard to the section 72 certificate, it is the  case  that  the  panel
dealt with the matter in a cursory fashion, with  arguably  limited  reasons
in regard to the presumption in section 72(2). However I  would  agree  with
Mr Avery that any error on their part in that regard is not a material  one,
given their conclusion that the appellant would not in any event be at  risk
on return to Sierra Leone and thus did  not  require  protection  under  the
Refugee Convention. That conclusion was one that was open  to  them  on  the
evidence before them and was supported  by  cogently  reasoned  findings  at
paragraphs 20 to 22, in which they properly took account  of  the  decisions
in the appellant's  previous  appeals  and  noted  the  lack  of  supporting
evidence.

With regard to Article 8, the panel noted at  paragraph  12  the  submission
that the appellant had to demonstrate "exceptional circumstances"  in  order
for the public  interest  in  deportation  to  be  outweighed,  pursuant  to
paragraph 398 of the immigration rules. At paragraphs  19,  20,  23  and  24
they referred to an absence of evidence  of  family  or  meaningful  private
life in the United Kingdom.  Although  their  determination  may  well  have
benefitted from clearer and more detailed findings, the  panel  nevertheless
took account of all the evidence and reached a conclusion that was  open  to
them on the evidence before them. The delay by the respondent in making  the
deportation decision was not one that ultimately  could  have  affected  the
outcome  of  the  appeal  and,  as  Mr  Avery  submitted,  the  outcome  was
inevitable.

Taken as a whole, therefore, the determination contains adequately  reasoned
findings and conclusions which were  open  to  the  panel  on  the  evidence
before them. Neither the grounds of  appeal  nor  the  grant  of  permission
disclose any material errors of law in their decision.


DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law, such that the decision has to be set  aside.  I  do
not set  aside  the  decision.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
deportation appeal therefore stands.














                               Signed   [pic]


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
