
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02168/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2015                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             KEMAR DAMION MARTIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Victory Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Keane who, on 9  March  2015,  allowed
    the appeal of Mr Martin against a decision by the Secretary of State to
    deport him pursuant to the automatic deport provisions.

2.   Mr Martin is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 4 January  1981.   He  first
    entered the  United  Kingdom  on  27  February  2002  and  was  granted
    temporary admission after having been refused leave to  enter.  He  was
    removed to Jamaica on 19 January 2005 but re-entered the United Kingdom
    lawfully as the spouse of a British citizen on 1 December 2005.  On  29
    November 2011 he was found guilty of one count of supplying a  Class  A
    controlled drug and, on 20 November 2011, he was sentenced to a term of
    imprisonment of 24 months. On 3 October 2013  the  Secretary  of  State
    made a deportation order pursuant to Section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.   Mr Martin was represented by Ms Walker before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    In her skeleton argument Ms Walker made an unequivocal concession  that
    Mr Martin did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 399 and 399A of
    the Immigration Rules. The First-tier Judge noted  this  in  the  first
    paragraph of his written decision. In  light  of  this  concession  the
    First-tier  Judge  considered  whether  there  were   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A
    of the Immigration Rules that would entitle him  to  allow  the  appeal
    under paragraph 398.

4.   The Judge found that there were very compelling circumstances based  on
    Mr Martin's relationships with his wife, his 14 year old  stepson,  and
    his two biological children (an 11 year  old  son  and  a  7  year  old
    daughter born from his spousal relationship). In July 2008 Mr  Martin's
    biological son was diagnosed with autism. At the date  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal his son's autism continued  to  manifest
    itself through significant disruptive behaviour. Mr  Martin's  daughter
    was diagnosed with autism in  January  2010  and  was  also  displaying
    significant disruptive behaviour at the date of the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing. Mr Martin's wife suffered from sickle cell anaemia  and  would
    often get 'sickle cell crisis' which resulted in  severe  pains.  These
    pains  were  experienced  in  the  period  in  which  Mr   Martin   was
    incarcerated.

5.   The evidence relating to the autism of the two children  was  supported
    by an assessment report prepared by Paul Levy,  an  independent  social
    worker, which was dated 4 September 2014, a core assessment carried out
    by the London Borough of Lewisham dated 3 October 2012,  and  a  report
    prepared by Dr Tony O'Sullivan, a consultant  community  paediatrician,
    dated 12 November 2013.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from Mr Martin and his wife.  In
    his decision the Judge gave  detailed  consideration  to  the  evidence
    before him and noted several concessions made by the Secretary of State
    in her reasons for refusal letter. The Secretary of State conceded that
    Mr  Martin's  wife,  stepson  and  biological  children  were   British
    citizens, that they enjoyed genuine relationships with Mr  Martin,  and
    that it would be unreasonable for his wife and children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and relocate to Jamaica.

7.   At paragraph 11 of his decision the Judge again  noted  the  concession
    made by Ms Walker in respect of paragraphs 399 and 399A. The Judge then
    proceeded to consider whether the  appeal  fell  within  the  terms  of
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules with specific reference  to  the
    Court of Appeal case of MF [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

8.   In paragraph 12  the  Judge  acknowledged  and  took  into  account  Mr
    Martin's  poor  immigration  history  and  the  offences  that  he  had
    committed. The Judge made reference to Section 117C of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and noted that Mr Martin's  deportation
    was in the public interest. The Judge reiterated that Mr Martin had  to
    demonstrate that very compelling circumstances were  present  in  order
    for the appeal to be allowed. At  paragraph  14  the  Judge  noted  and
    accepted that Mr Martin expressed genuine remorse for his  criminality.
    At paragraph 15 the Judge noted that Mr Martin was, according to a NOMS
    report dated 24 December 2012, at low risk of reoffending.

9.   At paragraph 16 the Judge found that Mr Martin's wife would face:
         "... quite overwhelming difficulties, in effect those of  a  single
         parent of children suffering from a condition as serious as autism.
         Her experiences during  the  period  in  which  the  appellant  was
         incarcerated provided a likely  indicator  as  to  her  experiences
         after his deportation from the United Kingdom.  She would be caring
         for the children alone as a single parent while working seven  days
         a week. If she was able, as before,  to  obtain  some  childminding
         support from a friend  she  would  nevertheless  become  exhausted,
         tired and, it would not be an exaggeration, degraded dealing as she
         would  do  with  her  children  and  problems  resulting  from  the
         behaviour of [her children] on her  own.  The  deportation  of  [Mr
         Martin] would have a dramatic and highly negative impact on the two
         children. [Mr Martin] plays an important and positive role  in  the
         life of both children."

10.  The Judge then referred to a letter from  the  Head  teacher  of  Brent
    Knoll School dated 23 April 2013 indicating that Mr  Martin  worked  in
    close partnership with the school to put strategies in place so  as  to
    manage his son's challenging behaviour. The Judge also  noted  that  Mr
    Martin's daughter would be subject to a severe negative  effect  if  he
    was deported.  Her  dependency  on  routine  and  familiar  carers  was
    emphasised in a letter from the school dated 24 April 2013.  The  Judge
    found that her routine would be disrupted if Mr Martin was deported. In
    respect of the oldest child, not the natural  biological  child  of  Mr
    Martin, it was said that he would lose a father figure and would be  at
    risk of receiving a reduction in  attention  from  his  mother.  Having
    regard to these factors the First-tier Judge found that there were very
    compelling circumstances and allowed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal

11.  The Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  contend  that  the  Judge
    failed to make it clear under which provision of the Immigration  Rules
    the appeal was being allowed.  The  grounds  maintain  that  the  Judge
    failed  to  assess  his  factual  findings  through  the  lens  of  the
    Immigration Rules. It was  contended  that  the  Judge  misapplied  the
    appropriate standard of proof by accepting the explanation proffered by
    the Appellant's wife in relation to an earlier statement in  which  she
    mentioned that she had relatives residing in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    grounds also  claimed  that  the  Judge  failed  to  address  the  best
    interests of Mr Martin's children as required under Section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The  Secretary  of  Stat
    was of the view that the children's best interests would be served  "by
    the greater consistency of family life that would be likely  to  result
    from the appellant's deportation". The grounds  also  argued  that  the
    language used by the Judge was  unduly  emotive  and  was  inadequately
    meaningful or precise. Issue was  taken  with  the  use  of  the  words
    'overwhelming' 'degraded', and the term 'most vulnerable' when used  in
    respect of Mr Martin's family.

The Upper Tribunal hearing and discussion

12.  At the outset of the hearing we indicated our concern that  the  First-
    tier Judge did not have had in  mind  the  applicable  version  of  the
    Immigration Rules when he decided the appeal.  Paragraph  A362  of  the
    Immigration Rules, as it was at the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, indicates that, in determining an appeal involving  Article  8
    in a deportation context, the appropriate Rules  would  be  those  that
    were in existence on and after 28 July  2014  regardless  of  when  the
    decision under appeal was made. It was on that date that a  significant
    change in the Immigration Rules relating to deportation occurred. Prior
    to 28 July 2014 paragraph 399(a) applied if it was unreasonable  for  a
    child to leave the United Kingdom and there was no other family  member
    who was able to care for the child in the United  Kingdom.  Given  that
    the children's mother lived in the United Kingdom it was clear that  Mr
    Martin  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  this  version  of  the
    immigration rules. As such there would have been  good  reason  for  Ms
    Walker's concession. However, on 28 July 2014 paragraph 399(a)  applied
    if it was unduly harsh for the children to  live  in  Jamaica  with  Mr
    Martin and it was unduly harsh for the children to remain in the United
    Kingdom without him. Given  this  significant  amendment  to  paragraph
    399(a) we find it inexplicable that  Ms  Walker  would  have  made  the
    concession  identified  in  paragraphs  1  and  11  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision on the basis of the Immigration Rules as they  were
    after  28  July  2014.  We  can  only  rationally  conclude  that  both
    representatives before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge believed that the version of  paragraph  399  applicable
    when the deportation decision was made continued to  be  applicable  at
    the date of the appeal hearing. We pause  to  note  that  a  number  of
    similar situations have presented themselves before the Upper  Tribunal
    in recent months. Given that no clear reference was made in the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision to the wording of the  applicable  version  of
    paragraph 399(a) we are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  applied
    the wrong version of the immigration rules.

13.  Mr Duffy submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  entitled  to
    accept  the  concession  regardless  of  whether  it  was  made  on   a
    misapprehension of the applicable immigration rules. We  doubt  that  a
    concession based on a misunderstanding of the  applicable  law  is  one
    that a Judge is entitled to accept (R (on the application of Ganidalgi)
    v SSHD [2001] INLR 479) However, putting entirely to one side the issue
    of whether the concession was properly made and properly  accepted,  we
    are satisfied that the decision is, in any event, material  in  respect
    of the Judge's assessment under paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.
    This is because the grounds of appeal  attack  the  Judge's  assessment
    under paragraph 398. Of relevance  is  the  recent  Presidential  Upper
    Tribunal decision in Greenwood (No. 2)  (Para  398  considered)  [2015]
    UKUT 00629 (IAC).

14.  At paragraph 14 of Greenwood the President said this:
         "The gravamen of the argument on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
         is that the Judge erred in law by considering  paragraphs  399  and
         399A en route to his conclusions. We consider this argument  to  be
         fundamentally flawed. Logic, reason and common sense  dictate  that
         paragraphs 399 and 339A must be considered in  the  application  of
         the "over and above" test enshrined  in  paragraph  398.  Indeed  a
         failure to do so, if material, would itself be an error of law.  In
         cases where, as  here,  the  "over  and  above"  test  is  engaged,
         paragraphs 399 and 399A provide the bridge, or  link,  between  the
         application of the test and the resulting outcome. Giving effect to
         the ordinary and natural meaning of the  three  provisions  of  the
         Rules under scrutiny, we consider that:
         (a)  The first question is whether, having regard to  the  findings
         and evaluative assessments made, the Secretary  of  State  (in  the
         first  place)  and  the  FtT  (on  appeal)  considers  that  either
         paragraph 399 or 399A of the Rules applies.
         (b)  If the above exercise yields the assessment  that  neither  of
         the said paragraphs applies, it is then necessary to decide whether
         there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

15.  In light of Greenwood it cannot be said that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    lawfully concluded that there were very compelling  circumstances  over
    and above those described in paragraph 399(a) if there  was  no  lawful
    assessment under that paragraph. The absence of any  lawful  assessment
    under the relevant  version  of  paragraph  399(a)  prevents  a  lawful
    assessment under paragraph 398 as we do not know how and to what degree
    Mr Martin failed to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  399(a).  This
    amounts to a material error of law.

16.  We see  little  merit  in  the  remaining  grounds  identified  by  the
    Secretary of State. We are  satisfied  that  the  Judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for accepting the explanation offered by Mr Martin's  wife  for
    previously stating that she had family members in the  United  Kingdom.
    We are satisfied that the Judge clearly and  concisely  considered  the
    best interests of the children and we are satisfied that, on the  basis
    of the evidence before him, the Judge was entitled to  his  conclusions
    relating to the impact on the various family members.

Notice of Decision

17.  Following further  discussions  Mr  Duffy  accepted  that  the  factual
    findings at paragraph 16 of the decision were not seriously disputed by
    the Secretary of State.  On this basis we have  decided  to  remit  the
    appeal back to the same First-tier Judge, (Judge Keane), to enable  him
    to apply the correct legal test under paragraph 399 and  399A  and,  if
    necessary, under paragraphs 398 on the basis of the material facts that
    he has already found.

18.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    15 January 2016
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
Judge Blum
