
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02183/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 10 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer, of Counsel


                          DECISION  and DIRECTIONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Russell,  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 21 January 2015 allowed  the  appeal  of  OS  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State to deport the appellant  made  on  1
    October 2013.  Although the Secretary of State is the appellant  before
    me I will, for ease of reference, refer to her as the respondent as she
    was the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will  refer
    to OS as the appellant as  he  was  the  appellant  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.   At the beginning of the hearing Mr Singer stated that as it was  I  who
    had granted permission to appeal I should not hear the  appeal  on  the
    issue of whether or not there was an error of law in the  determination
    of the First-tier Judge.  He therefore asked that I recuse  myself.   I
    stated that I would not do so.  In granting permission to appeal I  had
    stated that the grounds of appeal were arguable.  I had not stated that
    there was a material error of law in  the  determination.   I  had  not
    prejudged the case and I would be  hearing  submissions  from  both  Mr
    Singer and Mr Norton  before  deciding  whether  or  not  there  was  a
    material error of law.  I pointed out that the decision  was  different
    from  that  in,  for  example,  a  judicial  review  application  where
    permission to bring judicial proceedings was  considered  substantively
    and, if refused, could be renewed orally.  In  those  circumstances  it
    might well be the case that it was inappropriate for the judge who  had
    refused permission to hear the oral renewal of the application.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  7  December  1969  who
    entered Britain in 1987, being granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    May 1992.   In  September  2012  he  was  convicted  of  two  kinds  of
    dishonesty making false representations to make gain  for  self/another
    or to cause loss and of  possessing/controlling  articles  for  use  in
    fraud in 2010 and 2011.  He was sentenced to a term of  twenty  months'
    imprisonment.

4.   Thereafter the Secretary of  State  having  considered  representations
    made on the appellant's behalf by his solicitors decided  to  make  the
    deportation order which was signed on 1 October  2011.   The  appellant
    appealed, his appeal was dismissed by a panel sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    on 27 February 2014 but the appeal was then remitted on 15 July 2014 by
    order of Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane.   The  remitted  hearing  was
    heard by Judge Russell at Taylor House on 16 January 2015.

5.   Judge Russell noted that the appellant had three children here and  had
    lived with his partner whom he had married in a customary  marriage  in
    either 1993 or 1994.  He heard evidence from the  appellant,  his  wife
    and his youngest son David, who was born on 3 August 2000.

6.   He referred to the terms of Section 32 of the Borders Act 2007  and  to
    paragraphs 396, 398 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.   He  also  made
    reference to Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended.  He noted that the appellant's two eldest children are
    at university although his eldest  child  had  recently  had  a  mental
    breakdown and was at that time detained under the Mental Health Act.

7.   In paragraph 30 he set out his  conclusions  on  the  factual  evidence
    before him and in paragraph 31  referred  to  issues  relating  to  the
    appellant's youngest child.

8.   In paragraph 32 onwards he referred  to  the  appellant's  relationship
    with his partner and in paragraph 37 set out his conclusions  regarding
    the  appellant's  long  residence.   He  reached  his  conclusions   in
    paragraph 41 and then stated that the  appeal  was  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  As the appeal before me related to what  the  judge
    actually said in the determination I now set out paragraphs 30  through
    41 of the determination as follows:-

         "30. Having looked at the evidence of the appellant's  relationship
             with  the  children  in  the  round  I  draw   the   following
             conclusions:

             a.   The evidence of what role  the  appellant  plays  in  the
                  lives of his children is limited;

             b.   The evidence of what role  the  appellant  plays  in  the
                  lives  of  his  eldest  children  is  both  negative   and
                  positive; the breakdown of his eldest child is ascribed to
                  the appellant's conviction, while he is also said to  have
                  been a positive influence to his daughter;

             c.   There is no evidence of financial support to the children
                  in the form of earnings to support the  current  household
                  income;

             d.   There is extremely little evidence of responsibility  for
                  the children in the form of  taking  important  decisions,
                  exerting parental authority, discussions  of  the  future,
                  the giving of guidance, interaction with teachers etc.;

             e.   The youngest child is doing averagely well at school  and
                  has outside interests: he has had trouble in the past  but
                  says that he is doing better since  his  Father  re-joined
                  the household: there  is  no  objective  evidence  of  the
                  stabilising influence the appellant provides David;

             f.   The appellant was prepared to  undertake  multiple  trips
                  overseas in pursuit of  a  criminal  enterprise  and  risk
                  imprisonment,  separating  himself  from  his  family  for
                  several years in both the execution of  the  offences  and
                  the punishment.

         31.  From the foregoing, I find that it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect the youngest child to relocate to Nigeria.  I  bear  in
             mind the important juncture at which he finds himself  in  his
             education  and  transition  to  adulthood.   The  analysis  of
             education provision in Nigeria contained in  the  reasons  for
             refusal is shallow and unpersuasive and does not  reflect  the
             importance of education to this  particular  family.   I  also
             note that education is but one part of any  child's  life  and
             there is no consideration of the impact  of  rupturing  social
             connexions would have on David or how that  affects  his  best
             interests: s.55.  That being said, it appears to me  that  the
             appellant plays a minimal role in the lives  of  the  children
             and does not prioritise their interests.  Taking into  account
             what is accepted by the Home Office  and  para.399(a)  I  find
             that the appellant has not established that it would be unduly
             harsh for the children to remain in the UK without him.

             Exception relating to a relationship with a British partner

         32.  The appellant is in a relationship with a British  citizen  in
             the UK, which  the  Home  Secretary  accepts  is  genuine  and
             subsisting  but  does   not   accept   that   there   are   no
             insurmountable obstacles to them continuing their relationship
             in Nigeria.

         33.  I was told about the problems the  appellant's  partner  would
             face in adapting to a new life  in  Nigeria,  particularly  in
             finding employment when she  is  close  to  qualifying  as  an
             English lawyer.  The effort involved in this,  while  bringing
             up  three  children  to  a  high  standard,  should   not   be
             underestimated and the ending of her career prospects  in  the
             UK requires careful consideration.  Requiring her to remove to
             Nigeria represents, in my view, an interference with her right
             to private life serious enough  to  engage  the  operation  of
             article 8.

         34.  Nonetheless, I do not look at her as an individual  alone  but
             also as a Mother to three  British  children,  with  whom  she
             lives and for whom she cares.  The evidence about  her  eldest
             child is that he suffers from mental  health  problems  severe
             enough to be detained under s.2 MHA 1983, implying that he  is
             a risk to himself and/or others.  Her youngest  child  is  now
             approaching his GCSEs and I have found, above, that  it  would
             be unduly harsh to expect  him  to  remove  to  Nigeria.   The
             appellant's partner faces a choice of leaving for Nigeria with
             the appellant and leaving her children behind  or  staying  in
             the UK with her children and without the appellant, with  whom
             it is accepted she has a genuine and subsisting  relationship.
             This is the dilemma to which the Home Secretary has not turned
             her mind.

         35.  Having looked at the evidence of the appellant's  relationship
             with  his  partner  in  the  round  I   draw   the   following
             conclusions:

             a.    If  the  appellant's  partner  decides  to  follow   the
                  appellant to Nigeria she would have to leave her  children
                  behind in the UK: this dilemma does, in my view, represent
                  an insurmountable obstacle to following the  appellant  to
                  Nigeria;

             b.   If the appellant's partner decides to remain  in  the  UK
                  she would have to raise their youngest child without  him;
                  I have found, above, that this would not be unduly harsh.

             c.   The deportation of the appellant results in a 10-year bar
                  on re-entry to the UK.

         36.  Taking into account that it is accepted by the Home  Secretary
             and para.399(b) the appellant and his partner have  a  genuine
             and subsisting relationship I  find  that  the  appellant  has
             established that it would be unduly harsh for his  partner  to
             follow him to Nigeria or to remain in the UK without him.

             Exception relating to long residence

         37.  The Home Secretary accepted that the appellant  had  lived  in
             the UK for at least 20 years preceding the  deportation  order
             (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  over  20  years
             have been with indefinite leave to remain.  The Home Secretary
             did not accept that the appellant has lost his  connexions  to
             Nigeria.

         38.   Guidance  from  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  BK  (Deportation  -
             s33"exception" UKBA 2007 - public interest) Ghana [2010]  UKUT
             328  (IAC)  and  RG  (Automatic   Deportation   -   s.33(2)(a)
             exception) Nepal [2010] UKUT 273 (IAC) provides that  where  a
             person has spent a good deal or most of their life in  the  UK
             since childhood they are, in reality, home grown criminals and
             their long residence can outweigh even the most serious  kinds
             of offences including causing grievous bodily harm and dealing
             in Class A drugs.  As Sedley LJ said at  paragraph  35  of  HK
             (Turkey) [2010] EWCA Civ 583, involving automatic deportation:

                  'The number of years a potential deportee has been here is
                  always likely to be relevant but what is likely to be more
                  relevant is the age at which those  years  began  to  run.
                  Fifteen years spent here as an adult are not the  same  as
                  fifteen years spent  here  as  a  child.   The  difference
                  between the two  may  amount  to  the  difference  between
                  enforced return and exile.  Both are permissible by way of
                  deportation, but the  necessary  level  of  compulsion  is
                  likely to be very different.'

         39.  The appellant has been in the UK since  1987  and  it  is  not
             disputed that he has had  indefinite  leave  to  remain  since
             1992.  Having been here since the age of 17, been  to  school,
             worked, established relationships and fathered three  children
             here it can  be  said  that  he  is  socially  and  culturally
             integrated into the UK.   While  I  do  not  accept  that  the
             appellant has no links to Nigeria, as evidenced by his travels
             there and engagement with a criminal gang I do accept that his
             family connexions are  now  tenuous  with  the  death  of  his
             parents and the migration of his siblings to the UK.   I  also
             accept that this means of establishing employment  and  a  new
             life in Nigeria in the absence of a presence there for a  long
             time have  become  more  marginal.   The  deportation  of  the
             appellant  would  in  reality  amount  to  exile  rather  than
             enforced return, with  the  consequentially  higher  threshold
             referred to above by Sedley LJ.

         40.  An absence of nearly three  decades  from  Nigeria,  during  a
             major part of his adult life represents a serious obstacle  to
             the appellant's integration into Nigeria,  compounded  by  the
             presence of his siblings in the UK.

             Exception on Convention grounds

         41.  Having found  that  the  exception  to  automatic  deportation
             provided for under para.399(b) applies to the appellant  I  do
             not need to go on to consider outside  the  immigration  rules
             whether his deportation would breach his Convention rights: MF
             (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192."

9.   The Secretary of State's  appeal  asserted  that  the  judge  had  been
    illogical in what he had stated at paragraph 35(b) where he had stated:-
     "If the appellant's partner decides to remain in the UK she would have
    to raise their youngest child without him; I have found, above, (at 31)
    that this would not be unduly harsh", and stated that that was a  clear
    finding that it would not be unduly harsh under paragraph 399(a) or (b)
    if the appellant's partner is to remain in the UK as the sole carer for
    the youngest child  upon  the  appellant's  deportation.   However,  at
    paragraph 36 the judge had written:- "I find  that  the  appellant  has
    established that it would be unduly harsh for his partner to follow him
    to Nigeria or to remain in the UK without him".   It  was  argued  that
    that left an impermissible and unresolved  conflict  with  the  judge's
    prior finding.

10.  It was also argued that he had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    material findings in that he had found that it would be unduly harsh to
    expect the appellant's youngest child to follow  him  to  Nigeria  upon
    deportation but had then found that it was not unduly harsh for them to
    remain in Britain without him and then finding that it would be  unduly
    harsh for his partner to follow him to Nigeria.   It  was  stated  that
    this  was  unreasoned  -  the  fact  that  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship might exist was not an adequate reason  in  support  of  a
    material  finding  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect   the
    appellant's partner to remain in  Britain  without  him  should  he  be
    deported.  It was therefore stated that the judge had given  inadequate
    reasons for finding that paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules  was
    met.  Moreover it was argued that it was  not  rationally  possible  to
    conclude that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's  partner  to
    remain in Britain to care for the children as the findings at paragraph
    30 strongly indicated that that was already  the  status  quo  and  the
    appellant had little or no real parental input to his children's lives.
     It was argued that no adequate reasons had been given for the  judge's
    conclusion.

11.  A Rule 24 response was submitted by Mr Singer which  in  effect  argued
    that the determination contained merely typographical  errors  in  that
    the word "not" at the end of paragraph 31 and in paragraph  35(b)  were
    clearly typographical errors and that reading the  determination  as  a
    whole meant that it was clear that the judge had found that there would
    be an unduly harsh impact on the appellant's son and on his partner  if
    he were deported.  It was stated that the  decision  was  comprehensive
    and clear and the  suggestion  was  made  that  the  appeal  should  be
    adjourned to ask Judge Russell what  exactly  he  had  meant.   It  was
    argued that the typographical errors were not in effect errors of law.

12.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Norton relied on the  grounds
    of appeal.  He stated that it was not evident that where the judge  had
    written "not" in paragraphs 31 and 35(b) that that was a  typographical
    error.  He argued further that the  decision  was  both  illogical  and
    unreasoned.

13.  Mr Singer referred to his arguments set out in his  Rule  24  statement
    and stated that it was clear that these were typographical  errors  and
    clearly the judge had found that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's partner to have to leave the children in Britain.   It  was
    wrong, he argued, to "dress up" typographical errors as errors of  law.
    He went on to argue that it was clear that the judge  had  intended  to
    allow the appeal on the basis that the effect  of  deportation  on  the
    appellant's wife would be unduly harsh and it was on that basis that he
    had allowed the appeal - he referred to what the judge had  written  at
    paragraph 36 of the determination.

14.  With regards to the exception relating  to  long  residence  which  the
    judge had considered in paragraph 37 onwards of  the  determination  he
    argued that the judge had found that there was a  serious  obstacle  to
    the appellant's integration into Nigeria and that that, of itself,  was
    a basis on which the judge had allowed the appeal.

Discussion

15.  I note  the  findings  made  by  the  judge  in  paragraph  30  of  the
    determination bearing in mind, of course, that two of his children  are
    now at university.  The findings made  by  the  judge  clearly  do  not
    indicate a clear positive role played by the appellant in the family.

16.  At paragraph 31 the judge states that he finds that the  appellant  had
    not established that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
    remain in the UK without him.  That finding clearly follows on from the
    conclusions he had reached in the  previous  paragraph  and  I  do  not
    accept that the "not" in the last sentence  of  that  paragraph  was  a
    typographical error.  It is indeed a clear and logical finding.

17.  When the judge turns to  the  exception  relating  to  the  appellant's
    relationship with his British  partner  he  makes,  I  consider,  clear
    findings that there  would  not  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's wife following him to Nigeria, and also that it  would  not
    be unduly harsh for her to have to raise their child without him - that
    conclusion is clearly based on  his  findings  in  paragraph  30.   The
    judge's conclusion is that it is not unduly harsh for  the  appellant's
    partner to remain in Britain without him.  I consider that that  was  a
    conclusion which he was entitled to reach on the evidence and I do  not
    accept that the "not" in subparagraph 35(b) is a typographical error.

18.  When considering the appellant's long residence in  Britain  the  judge
    states that there is a serious obstacle to the appellant's  integration
    in Nigeria but he does not say that the appellant met the  requirements
    of paragraph 399A nor indeed does he give any reasons on which he could
    have based that conclusion.

19.  The judge, in paragraph 41, refers to paragraph  399(b).   That  simply
    conflicts with what he wrote in paragraph 35.  Indeed  the  judge  does
    not give reasons for his decision nor  indeed  are  there  any  factual
    findings regarding the situation of the appellant's wife.

20.  For these reasons I find that there are material errors of law  in  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge and I set  aside  his  decision.
    Moreover I consider that the terms  of  the  Senior  President  of  the
    Tribunal's Practice Directions are met and that it is appropriate  that
    this appeal proceed to a hearing de novo in the First-tier.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to a hearing  afresh  in  the  First-tier  at  Taylor
House.

Directions

Time : 3 hours. No interpreter


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

