
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02224/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 September 2014                           |On 12 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                   mr ca-o
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION PRESERVED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Messrs Lawrence & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Nigeria,  born  on  29
    November 1961 against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
    sitting at Kingston Crown Court on 2 May 2014 and  in  a  determination
    subsequently promulgated on 4 July 2014, dismissed the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant against the decision of the Respondent dated 28 October  2013
    to make a deportation order.

2.   The Appellant has persistently committed criminal offences  culminating
    in a sentence of twelve months' imprisonment for offences of dishonesty
    in October 2012.  He was therefore clearly subject to deportation as  a
    foreign criminal under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  unless
    he could show that certain exceptions applied.

3.   In that regard and in the present case, the Appellant claimed that  the
    decision to deport him from the UK would be  a  breach  of  his  rights
    under Article 8 of the ECHR, in that the Appellant was the father of  a
    13 year old British child whose best interests would not be  served  if
    the Appellant was removed from the UK.  In short, the present challenge
    to the determination of the First-tier Tribunal panel as identified  in
    the grant of permission to appeal, is that the panel failed to consider
    the best interests of the Appellant's child with reference  to  Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 that relates to
    the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  who  are  in
    the UK.

4.   The grounds upon which permission to appeal was  successfully  obtained
    contend that the panel reached  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's
    removal was proportionate "after looking at the  question  through  the
    lens of the Appellant's rights rather than treating  the  interests  of
    his  child  as  a  primary  consideration"  and  that  nowhere  in  the
    determination did the Tribunal engage with the question of  whether  it
    was in the Appellant's son's interests for the Appellant to be removed.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin in granting permission  to  appeal  had
    this to say in that regard:

         "The Appellant relies on  one  single  ground  namely  the  panel's
         failure to consider the best interests  of  the  Appellant's  child
         with reference to Section 55 of the 2009 Act".

6.   It is right to  say  that  FTJ  Levin  sought  to  identify  a  further
    arguable matter that  he  acknowledged  had  not  been  raised  in  the
    grounds.  However at the outset of the hearing before me,  Mr  Lee  for
    the Appellant explained that these further  matters  were  not  on  his
    instructions, issues that he wished to pursue as they were based  on  a
    misunderstanding of the position.  It was therefore  not  part  of  the
    Appellant's challenge that there  was  procedural  unfairness  for  the
    reasons identified by FTJ Levin in the grant of permission.

7.   By letter dated 5  August  2014  the  Respondent  served  her  Rule  24
    response in which she had this to say:

         "The Judge is criticised for failing to  consider  the  Appellant's
         son's best interests.  Arguably this is immaterial in light of  his
         findings that the Appellant's son had  family  life  but  that  the
         evidence indicated that it was very limited,  and  that  he  had  a
         carer in the UK, and would therefore not be required  to  leave  if
         his father were to be deported".


8.   Thus the appeal came before me on 9 September 2014, when my first  task
    was to decide whether the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

9.   Mr Lee opened  his  submissions  by  referring  to  the  basis  of  the
    Respondent's Rule 24 response that he contended appeared to have been a
    concession that the case was indeed not looked at through the  lens  of
    the Appellant's son's best interests.

10.  Mr Lee continued that if I looked at the Tribunal's determination as  a
    whole in particular at paragraph 57, it was apparent that  the  panel's
    reasoning was entirely from the point of view of the Appellant.

11.   He  continued  that  the  two  things  that  the  Tribunal  should  in
    particular have done, was to determine whether the Appellant's  removal
    was in the best interests of the Appellant's son and  if  not;  whether
    there were countervailing features rendering removal  proportionate  in
    the public interest.  That, contended Mr Lee, was  precisely  what  the
    panel failed to do.

12.  Mr Lee submitted that at  no  point  in  their  determination  did  the
    Tribunal consider and reason the effect on the Appellant's son  on  the
    severance, as found  by  the  Tribunal  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between himself and his father, despite the fact that they
    were bound to do so.

13.  Ms Isherwood in response maintained that there was  no  material  error
    of law.  She referred me to paragraph 6  of  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal panel that made reference to SS
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 that indeed  quoted  the  observation  of
    Laws LJ at paragraph 46:

         "Thus whilst the authorities demonstrate that there is no  rule  of
         exceptionality; they also clearly show that the more  pressing  the
         public interest in removal or deportation, the stronger must be the
         claim under Article 8 if it is to prevail.  This antithesis, in  my
         judgment, catches  in  the  present  context  the  essence  of  the
         proportionality test required by Article 8(2)".

14.  I was also referred to the recent decision of the Tribunal  in  McLarty
    (Deportation - proportionality balance) [2014] UKUT 315 (IAC) and  more
    particularly paragraphs 20 and 36 that I set out below:

         "20. In paragraph 42 the Court stated that  in  cases  of  criminal
             deportation: '...the scales are heavily weighted in favour  of
             deportation and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
             exceptional) is required to outweigh the  public  interest  in
             removal'.  In paragraph 43 the Court stated that  the  general
             rule was that  in  the  case  of  foreign  prisoners  to  whom
             paragraphs  399  and  399A  did  not  apply  'very  compelling
             reasons' would be required to outweigh the public interest  in
             deportation.


          36. In relation to the assessment exercise which is called for, it
             is  necessary  to  recall  that  the  scales  are  not  evenly
             weighted.  Parliament has tilted them strongly  in  favour  of
             deportation and  it  is  not  for  the  Tribunal  to  seek  to
             rebalance those scales.  It is clear from case  law  that  for
             the tilted scales to return to the level  and  then  swing  in
             favour of a criminal opposing deportation, that there must  be
             compelling reasons, which must be exceptional:  see  case  law
             above.  What amounts  to  compelling  reasons  or  exceptional
             circumstances is very much fact dependent and must necessarily
             be seen in the context of the articulated will  of  Parliament
             in favour of deportation".

15.  Ms Isherwood maintained that if one looked  through  the  determination
    it was clear that the Appellant had an opportunity to provide  evidence
    of his relationship with his son by way of  putting  forward  a  Social
    Services report but he failed to produce it.

16.  Ms Isherwood continued that at paragraph 45 of  the  determination,  it
    was clear that the panel were mindful of the requirements of  paragraph
    399A of the Immigration Rules and were aware of the  Appellant's  son's
    circumstances,  reminding  themselves  the  criteria  that  had  to  be
    satisfied if the parental relationship between the  Appellant  and  his
    son was considered to outweigh the public interest  in  deportation  in
    line with Article 8. Firstly,  that  there  had  to  be  established  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship between the Appellant and  his  son
    and that his son was a  British  citizen  and  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant's son to leave the UK and there  was
    no other family member who was able to care for  the  Appellant's  son.
    The panel had accepted that the Appellant's son was a  British  citizen
    and that it would not be reasonable to expect him at the age of  13  to
    leave the UK.  They had concluded however that the requirements of  the
    Rules  were  not  met  because,  as  found  at  paragraph  54  of   the
    determination, it was apparent  that  the  Appellant's  son  was  being
    looked after by his mother and that she was a family member  who  could
    care for him as required by paragraph (a) (ii) (b)  and  therefore  the
    Appellant's claim failed under paragraph 399A.

17.   At  the  conclusion  of  the  parties'  submissions  I   reserved   my
    determination.

Assessment

18.  I have concluded that the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    does indeed disclose material errors on a point  of  law  and  I  would
    agree with the contention of the Appellant that  the  Tribunal  reached
    the conclusion that the Appellant's removal was  proportionate,  solely
    after looking at the question, through  the  lens  of  the  Appellant's
    rights rather than treating the interests of his  child  as  a  primary
    consideration.

19.  This is no better exemplified than by reference to paragraph 57 of  the
    determination and the following passage:

         "The issue to determine is whether the removal of the Appellant and
         the consequent interference  with  his  right  to  family  life  is
         proportionate to the legitimate public end of  the  maintenance  of
         the wellbeing of society and  the  protection  of  the  rights  and
         freedoms of others" (underlining added).

20.  I agree with Mr Lee's submission that nowhere in the determination  did
    the Tribunal engage  with  the  question  of  whether  it  was  in  the
    Appellant's son's best interests for the Appellant to be  removed,  let
    alone consider the question of whether the  countervailing  factors  in
    the case outweighed the  Appellant's  son's  interests  in  maintaining
    family life with his father.

21.  The matter does not end there.  In the Respondent's Rule  24  response,
    it is submitted that the criticism of the panel for failing to consider
    the Appellant's son's best interests was "immaterial in  light  of  his
    finding that the Appellant's son  has  family  life  but  the  evidence
    indicated that it was very  limited....".   That  in  my  view  is  not
    correct.  In fact, the panel looked at the evidence and at paragraph 54
    of their determination they stated:

         "Taking these matters together we  find  that  the  Appellant  just
         succeeds in  showing  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with (his son)".

  22. It was Mr Lee's submission in  that  regard,  that  as  he  explained,
      without being flippant "it is a bit like saying 'just  pregnant'".   I
      would agree with him that  the  finding  ought  to  be  recognised  as
      stating  that  the  evidence  just  got  there  as  opposed  to   some
      limitations to family life itself.  If  you  are  found  to  be  in  a
      genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  by  whatever  route  then  the
      relationship is established.  However, at no point  did  the  Tribunal
      determine the effect upon the Appellant's son on the severance of that
      genuine and subsisting relationship.


  23. I would also observe that at paragraph 51 of their determination,  the
      Tribunal recorded that there was before them a handwritten  note  from
      the Appellant's son  and  a  supplementary  statement.   They  decided
      however, that because it was not clear as to how  the  two  statements
      were  prepared,  it  was  "difficult  for  significant  weight  to  be
      attributed  to  the  written  and  un-witnessed   evidence   of   (the
      Appellant's son".  This was nonetheless  evidence  that  went  to  the
      issue that the panel simply failed to decide upon, namely  the  effect
      upon the Appellant's son of the Appellant's removal.  It was of course
      open to them if there were  concerns  about  the  two  statements,  to
      adjourn the hearing so as to give the  Appellant  the  opportunity  of
      addressing the panel's concerns.

  24. I then turn to paragraph 56 of the determination the opening  sentence
      of which states as follows:

         "This appeal is not considered under Appendix  FM  and  it  is  not
         necessary to bear  in  mind  the  recent  decisions  in  Nagre  and
         Gulshan".

25.  In that regard, I share with Mr Lee  the  difficulty  in  understanding
    the Tribunal's reasoning.  The  Tribunal  proceeded  to  wrongly  apply
    Article 8 in  a  freestanding  manner  and  not  by  reference  to  the
    materially more constrained test as laid down in case law that requires
    compelling or exceptional circumstances within a  proportionality  test
    where the facts relating to the individual application are assessed  in
    their own light and then weighed against the important public  interest
    objectives that underpin the immigration regime.  In  relation  to  the
    policy objectives, that an individual's personal circumstances have  to
    be weighed against, these have been referred to in many cases.  So, for
    example in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 the Supreme Court held that  the
    interests of the children  and  in  particular  with  regard  to  their
    nationality whilst very important were not trump cards over  all  other
    policy considerations  but  nonetheless  remained  matters  of  primary
    interest.

26.  With great respect to the panel, even more difficult to  understand  is
    the second sentence of paragraph 56 in which the Tribunal said:

         "However, it is the case in this appeal that there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  the  Rules.   The
         Appellant would have to leave the UK and there is no possibility he
         will be able to maintain  family  life  with  his  son  other  than
         through electronic forms of communication".

     I would agree with Mr Lee that in that  regard  the  panel's  reasoning
    got "even worse".

27.  Ms Isherwood in her submissions had placed reliance on paragraph 58  of
    the determination where the Tribunal, whilst  acknowledging  that  they
    found the  Appellant  had  established  the  existence  of  a  parental
    relationship with his  son  "in  line  with  Article  8  family  life",
    continued that having regard to his criminal record and bearing in mind
    the Judge's sentencing remarks they  found  that  there  was  a  public
    interest  in  deportation  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  family   life
    considerations relating to the relationship between the  Appellant  and
    his son and in those circumstances it would not be disproportionate  to
    deport the Appellant.

28.  In my view  such  reasoning  supports  the  Appellant's  challenge  and
    exemplifies the way in which the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel  reasoned
    their decision solely through the lens of the Appellant,  without  also
    considering matters, through the lens of  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's son.

29.  I would also observe that given the largely adverse  reasoning  of  the
    panel over paragraphs 46 to 53 of their determination, it is  difficult
    to understand their thought processes, in the absence of the  provision
    of further reasoning, that led them  to  the  conclusion  that  "Taking
    these matters together we find the Appellant just succeeds  in  showing
    that he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with (his son)".

30.  In terms of Ms Isherwood's  reliance  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in McLarty it would be as well to also refer to  paragraph  24
    of that decision when the Tribunal had this to say:

         "24. Secondly, it is submitted that the  Tribunal  judgment  lacked
             adequate  reasoning.   Where  two   important   countervailing
             principles collide - the public interest in deportation versus
             the interests of the individual in having  an  opportunity  to
             develop a relationship with his  children,  fairness  requires
             that the Tribunal provide full and proper reasons in  relation
             to their consideration of both these factors".

31.  Mr Lee correctly observed in that  regard  that  this  "counted  double
    when one is looking at the best interests of a child".

32.  For the above reasons I have concluded that the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal panel did disclose material errors on  a  point  of
    law such that their determination should be set aside.

33.  I was informed by the parties that were I to so decide, that  this  was
    a case that ought to be heard de novo to include  findings  as  to  the
    nature and quality of the Appellant's relationship with his son  to  be
    properly weighed against the public interest.  I  further  agreed  with
    the parties, that in such circumstances the appropriate course  was  to
    direct that none of the panel's findings should be, for  this  purpose,
    preserved.

34.  In the circumstances,  I  agreed  with  the  parties'  request,  having
    regard to the errors of law found, the length of the hearing (estimated
    at three hours), and where I was told by Mr Lee that there  was  likely
    to be evidence given at  the  fresh  hearing  by  four  witnesses  that
    included the Appellant's son (now age 14) and the Appellant's  daughter
    and their respective mothers, that there were highly compelling reasons
    falling within paragraph 7.2(b)  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, as to why the decision should not be  remade  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It was clearly in the interest of justice that the appeal of
    the Appellant be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

  35. For the reasons that I have given above  and  by  agreement  with  the
      parties, I conclude therefore that the appeal should be remitted to  a
      First-tier Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judges Perry and N M K
      Lawrence to determine the appeal afresh at Taylor House Hearing Centre
      on the first available date.  For that purpose no interpreter would be
      required. For this purpose, anonymity is to be preserved, given that a
      minor is involved in the appeal, pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Decision

36.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  should  be
    set aside and none of their findings preserved.  I remit the making  of
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House before  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  the  Judges  to  whom  I  have  above
    referred.


Signed                                  Date 11 September 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
