

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/02467/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2014                                |On 20 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR AMIN SHARIF HUSSEIN
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs H Rackstraw, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr C Boyle, Halliday Reeves Law Firm


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1) This appeal is brought with  permission  by  the  Secretary  of  State
      against a determination by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher and
      Mr B D Yates allowing an appeal by Mr Amin Sharif Hussein (hereinafter
      referred to as "the Claimant").

   2) The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was brought against  a  decision
      by the Secretary of State under Section 32(5) of the  UK  Borders  Act
      2007 to the effect that the Claimant was subject to deportation  as  a
      foreign national convicted of an offence and sentenced to a period  of
      imprisonment of at least twelve months.  The appeal was allowed by the
      First-tier Tribunal on the basis that as a  national  of  Somalia  the
      Claimant qualified for humanitarian protection  in  terms  of  Article
      15(c) of the Refugee Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC.

   3) The application for  permission  to  appeal  made  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State submitted  that  the  situation  in  Mogadishu  had
      improved since the country guideline case of AMM and others (conflict;
      humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445,  on
      which the First-tier Tribunal based  its  decision.   It  was  further
      submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State in the application  that
      the test under Article 15(c) was different from the test to be applied
      under Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.   The  Tribunal
      did not apply the correct test to show that the Appellant would face a
      real risk of Article 3 harm.

   4) Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal arguably erred in law by allowing the  appeal  on  the  basis
      that the Claimant was in need of humanitarian  protection.   The  need
      for humanitarian protection was not one of the exceptions to automatic
      deportation in terms of section 3 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

Application made out of time

   5) At the start of the hearing the point was  raised  on  behalf  of  the
      Claimant as to whether the application for permission  to  appeal  was
      made in time and, if not, whether time was extended.  The  application
      was date stamped by  the  Tribunal  as  having  been  received  on  27
      February 2014.  The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      promulgated on 12 February 2014.  Mr Boyle  submitted  that  the  last
      date for receipt of the application was 21 February 2014.

   6) In terms of Rule 24(2) of the Procedure Rules the application must  be
      received no later than five days after the date  on  which  the  party
      making the application is deemed to  have  been  served  with  written
      reasons for the decision.  The provision for deemed  service  in  Rule
      55(5) states that, unless the contrary is proved, service is deemed to
      take place on the second day after a document is sent by post from and
      to  a  place  within  the  UK.   In  terms  of  these  provisions  the
      determination issued on 12 February 2014 would be deemed to have  been
      served on Friday 14 February  2014.   The  period  of  five  days  for
      submission of an application  for  permission  to  appeal  would  have
      expired on Friday 21 February 2014.

   7) For the Secretary of State Mrs Rackstraw submitted that an attempt had
      been made to submit the application by fax on Monday, 25 February  but
      this transmission was unsuccessful.  Successful  transmission  by  fax
      was made on 27 February 2014.

   8) For the Claimant Mr Boyle submitted that no grounds were given  as  to
      why the  application  was  late.   Even  the  attempt  to  submit  the
      application on 25 February 2014 was out of time.   He  submitted  that
      the Claimant had been significantly prejudiced  by  this  delay.   The
      applicant had been released on bail at the hearing before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal but re-detained five days later.

   9) It is apparent that when permission to appeal was granted by the First-
      tier Tribunal it went unnoticed that the application  was  made  late.
      As a Judge of the Upper Tribunal is ex officio also  a  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal, I was satisfied that  I  had  jurisdiction  as  a
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to consider whether  time  should  be
      extended.  Rule 24(4) allows the  Tribunal  to  extend  the  time  for
      appealing if satisfied that by  reason  of  special  circumstances  it
      would be unjust not to do so.

  10) The judge who granted permission to appeal clearly intended  that  the
      appeal should proceed to the Upper Tribunal.  Failure to  extend  time
      when granting permission was an inadvertent error, which  I  have  the
      power to remedy.  I agree with the judge  who  granted  permission  to
      appeal that the application identifies an arguable error of  law.   It
      is both in the interests of the parties and in the public interest for
      this to be considered.  The first attempt to submit the application by
      fax, although unsuccessful, was only one working day  after  the  time
      limit had expired.  The application was  successfully  transmitted  by
      fax two days later and was therefore late by only three days.  The re-
      detention of the Claimant took place, according to Mr Boyle, some five
      days after the hearing, which would have  been  not  only  before  the
      application for permission  to  appeal  was  granted  but  before  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal was  even  promulgated.   The
      appeal proceedings were continuing.  It does  not  therefore  seem  to
      have been the position that  the  re-detention  of  the  Claimant  was
      linked in  some  way  to  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.   In
      considering whether to extend time I may look not only at the reasons,
      if any, why the application was late but also at the  wider  interests
      of justice and on this basis I am satisfied that by reason of  special
      circumstances it would be unjust not to extend time.

  11) Although in terms of rule 24(4)(b) the  application  should  not  have
      been admitted without time having been extended,  I  do  not  consider
      this is fatal to the application as this can be remedied in  terms  of
      rule 59(1).

Submissions

  12) An issue arose at the start of the hearing as  to  the  scope  of  the
      appeal.  Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was
      arguably an  error  of  law  to  allow  an  appeal  against  automatic
      deportation  on  the  basis  that  the  Claimant   was   entitled   to
      humanitarian protection.   There  was  possibly  a  further  issue  in
      relation to the circumstances in which  the  Secretary  of  State  had
      revoked the grant of humanitarian protection already made  by  way  of
      the decision letter of 19 November 2013.  Mrs Rackstraw submitted that
      the revocation was justified by the commission of a serious crime  and
      she referred to the Claimant's convictions in December 2011 for sexual
      assault on a female under the age of 13 years and for  sexual  assault
      on a female.  It was pointed out, however, that  it  was  not  on  the
      basis of these offences that the deportation decision was made.    The
      deportation  decision  was  made  on  the  basis  of  a  sentence   of
      imprisonment for twelve months for burglary imposed in December  2012.
      A  decision  was  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  not  to  pursue
      deportation proceedings in respect of the earlier offences because  it
      was apprehended at that time that there would be a potential breach of
      Article 3 were the Claimant be removed.

  13) Mrs Rackstraw further submitted that since humanitarian protection was
      granted the situation in Mogadishu, in particular,  and  Somalia  more
      generally had  changed.   The  main  point  in  the  appeal  was  that
      protection under Article 15(c) of  the  Directive  was  not  a  lawful
      exception under Section  33  of  the  2007  Act.   The  revocation  of
      humanitarian protection was justified under paragraph 339G(iv) of  the
      Immigration  Rules,  which  allows  for  revocation  of   humanitarian
      protection where there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  a
      person constitutes a danger to the community or to the security of the
      United Kingdom.

  14) Turning to section 33 of the 2007 Act, Mrs Rackstraw pointed out  that
      although this included an exemption for  rights  protected  under  the
      European Treaties, the  Refugee  Qualification  Directive  was  not  a
      provision of the Treaties.

  15) For the Claimant, Mr Boyle submitted that the Tribunal had  considered
      the situation in Somalia in detail and found a risk to  the  Claimant.
      This was set out at Paragraph  21  of  the  determination,  where  the
      Tribunal followed the decision in AMM.  The Tribunal took into account
      that the Claimant had been  absent  from  Somalia  for  a  substantial
      period of time.  There were further  risk  factors,  namely  that  the
      Claimant had no links to Somalia, that he was not  familiar  with  the
      governance, and that he was alcohol dependent.  The Tribunal  did  not
      accept all these points but  was  satisfied  that  the  Claimant  came
      within Article 3.  Although paragraph 26 of the determination referred
      to humanitarian protection, the Tribunal found  effectively  that  the
      Claimant was at risk in terms of Article 3.  It  had  previously  been
      accepted in 2012  that  the  Claimant  was  entitled  to  humanitarian
      protection.  Any error made by the Tribunal was not material.

  16) It was pointed out that at paragraphs 19 and 24 of  the  determination
      the First-tier Tribunal specifically distinguished between  Article  3
      protection and Article 15(c) protection.   Mr  Boyle  questioned  this
      view of the determination.  He referred to the  skeleton  argument  he
      had prepared on the basis that the Claimant was at risk under  Article
      3.  He had not sought in his  skeleton  to  address  the  question  of
      whether the Claimant was excluded from humanitarian protection because
      of his convictions.

  17) In response  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  Mrs  Rackstraw
      submitted that there  had  been  no  cross-appeal  on  behalf  of  the
      Claimant relying upon Article 3.

Error of law

  18) The first question for me was  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      entitled to allow the appeal on the basis on which they  purported  to
      do so, namely that the Claimant was entitled  to  succeed  because  he
      fulfilled the conditions for humanitarian protection.  I note that  in
      terms of section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007,  for  the  purpose  of
      section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act  1971  the  deportation  of  a
      foreign criminal is conducive to the public good and the Secretary  of
      State must make a deportation order in respect of a foreign  criminal.
      It is not disputed that the Claimant is a foreign criminal.  He is not
      a British citizen  and  he  has  been  convicted  of  an  offence  and
      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months.

  19) There are five exceptions set out in section 33 of the 2007 Act as  to
      when the requirements  of  section  32  will  not  apply.   The  first
      exception is where the deportation  would  breach  a  person's  rights
      either  under  the  Human  Rights  Convention  or  under  the  Refugee
      Convention.  This is the only exception which  is  in  issue  in  this
      appeal.  The main argument on behalf of the Secretary of State is that
      "humanitarian protection", as  it  is  termed  under  the  Immigration
      Rules, or "subsidiary protection", as it is termed under  the  Refugee
      Qualification Directive, is not a status  afforded  either  under  the
      Human  Rights  Convention  or  under  the  Refugee  Convention.   More
      specifically, Article 15 of the Directive sets  out  a  definition  of
      "serious harm" in terms  of  three  alternatives.   The  first,  death
      penalty or execution, corresponds to Article 2  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.  The second, torture or inhuman or degrading treatment  or
      punishment, corresponds  to  Article  3.   The  third  is  defined  as
      "Serious and individual threat to  a  civilian's  life  or  person  by
      reason of indiscriminate violence in situations  of  international  or
      internal armed conflict".  It is this which gives rise to the  Article
      15(c) protection to which the Claimant was considered entitled because
      of the violent situation in Somalia.  The  subsidiary  protection  set
      out in Article 15(c), however, is not equivalent to  protection  under
      Article 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  This was  pointed  out
      in HH (Somalia) & Others [2010] EWCA Civ 426.   The  specific  finding
      made by the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal was that there  was  in
      general a real risk of Article 15(c) for those returning to  Mogadishu
      after a significant period of time abroad, as set out in AMM, and this
      was the basis on which the appeal was allowed.

  20) The First-tier Tribunal erred in law by allowing  the  appeal  against
      deportation as a foreign criminal under section 32(5) of the 2007  Act
      on the basis that the Claimant qualified for humanitarian  protection.
      I accept the argument of the Secretary of State  that  entitlement  to
      humanitarian protection does  not  give  rise  to  an  exception  from
      deportation in terms of section 33 of the 2007 Act.

  21) The First-tier Tribunal having erred in law, its decision is set aside
      in order to be re-made.

  22) Before proceeding to re-make the decision,  however,  I  will  briefly
      address the incidental issue which arose  during  the  course  of  the
      proceedings before me as to the revocation of humanitarian  protection
      by the Secretary of State.   In  the  decision  of  19  November  2013
      against which the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  brought,  it
      was stated on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  humanitarian
      protection was revoked due to the serious  nature  of  the  Claimant's
      crimes.   It  was  recorded  that  the  Claimant  had   received   ten
      convictions for twenty offences, including three sexual offences,  one
      of which was against a female  under  13  years.   He  had  also  been
      convicted of battery and of possession of an  offensive  weapon  in  a
      public place.  He had  been  given  consecutive  sentences  of  twelve
      months and sixteen weeks for the offences of burglary and breach of  a
      suspended sentence.  He had been assessed as constituting a high  risk
      of harm in the community.

  23) On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mrs Rackstraw submitted that  the
      revocation of humanitarian protection had  been  properly  made  under
      Paragraph  339G(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  allows   for
      revocation where there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  a
      person constitutes a danger to the community or to the security of the
      United Kingdom.  Clearly  security  considerations  do  not  arise  in
      relation to this particular Claimant.

  24) In addition I note that in terms of section  72  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  provision   is   made   for   the
      circumstances in which a person is to be excluded from the  protection
      of the Refugee Convention because of  conviction  for  a  particularly
      serious crime and because the  person  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
      community of the United Kingdom.  In terms of this provision, a  crime
      will only be regarded as particularly serious  if  a  sentence  of  at
      least  two  years  has  been  imposed.   Although  this  Claimant  has
      committed a number of offences he has not been sentenced to  a  period
      of at least two years.  The use of the  phrase  "particularly  serious
      crime" is taken from Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention and  this
      is arguably a more stringent test than  the  test  of  exclusion  from
      humanitarian protection  under  Paragraph  339G,  which  is  based  on
      Article 17 of the Refugee Qualification Directive.  Having  regard  to
      the terms of  Paragraph  339G(iv),  I  am  satisfied  that  given  the
      Claimant's convictions the Secretary of State was entitled  to  regard
      him as a danger to the community.  I do not think that this conclusion
      is  affected  by  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  not  to  seek
      deportation following the Claimant's convictions in  2011  for  sexual
      offences.  Although a decision was made at that time  in  relation  to
      specific offences, the Claimant has since committed a further  serious
      offence, for which he was sentenced to imprisonment for twelve months.
       I consider that following this the Secretary of State was entitled to
      look at the Claimant's offences cumulatively in deciding whether he is
      a danger to the community.

  25) Even if I  am  wrong  about  the  grounds  for  revoking  humanitarian
      protection,  as  already   observed,   entitlement   to   humanitarian
      protection under Article 15(c) will not entitle the Claimant  to  rely
      upon an exception from deportation under section 33 of the  2007  Act.
      This was the error made by the First-tier Tribunal.  If his appeal  is
      to succeed the Claimant must show that his risk of serious harm arises
      under Articles 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

Re-making the decision

  26) The re-making of the decision proceeds on the basis of the facts found
      by the First-tier Tribunal,  in  terms  of  which  the  Claimant  will
      succeed only if he can show that his removal to Somalia  would  breach
      Article 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  In assessing the  risk
      to the Claimant of return to Somalia, the First-tier Tribunal was able
      to rely on an asylum appeal by the Claimant heard  before  the  Asylum
      and Immigration Tribunal in May 2009.  In the determination in respect
      of that appeal the judge rejected the Claimant's  claim  that  he  was
      from a minority clan.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  Claimant  fled
      Somalia because he had a dispute with a "warlord" who  was  extracting
      protection money from the Claimant and other persons in the area.  The
      Claimant had refused  to  pay  and  had  been  assaulted.   The  judge
      accepted that the Claimant might have problems  in  returning  to  his
      home area but considered that the Claimant could relocate  to  another
      part of Somalia.  Although the appeal was unsuccessful, it  was  after
      this that the Claimant was given humanitarian protection.

  27) In the current proceedings the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
      Claimant would not be at risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 if he
      were to return to Mogadishu and he had failed to  show  that  fighting
      was ongoing in his home area such as to place him  at  risk  there  in
      terms of Article 15(c).  The Tribunal acknowledged  that  in  AMM  the
      Tribunal found that there was in general a real risk of Article  15(c)
      harm for  the  majority  of  those  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a
      significant period of time abroad.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal makes it clear  that  it  was  no  more  than  Article  15(c)
      protection to which the Claimant was entitled  on  the  facts  of  his
      case.

  28) In his skeleton argument Mr Boyle accepted that  in  terms  of  KAB  v
      Sweden [2013] ECHR  814  there  was  no  general  Article  3  risk  to
      returnees to Mogadishu but there were specific risk  factors  for  the
      Claimant.  These were that the Claimant had been out  of  Somalia  for
      seven years, he was unfamiliar with the current ruling parties, he had
      no family support system, and he had a serious alcohol abuse  problem.
      Although Mr Boyle identified these risk factors, he did not state  how
      these factors would give rise to a serious risk of treatment  contrary
      to Article 2 or Article 3.  It has already been  established  in  this
      appeal that the generalised  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence,  from
      which Article 15(c) is intended to provide protection,  would  not  in
      law prevent the deportation of the Claimant.  The  Claimant  may  face
      conditions in Mogadishu which are harsh and difficult  but  this  will
      not be sufficient to bring him within the protection of Article 3.

  29) Mr Boyle referred specifically to the Claimant's  history  of  alcohol
      abuse.  This was noted in the Judge's sentencing remarks from December
      2012.  A pre-sentence report from January 2012 pointed  out  that  the
      Claimant at that time had succeeded in avoiding alcohol.   Clearly  he
      was unable to maintain  this  course  as  the  subsequent  offence  of
      burglary was committed after the Claimant had been drinking.  Although
      alcohol abuse was clearly  a  significant  factor  in  the  Claimant's
      offending, the Tribunal did not appear to have  any  medical  evidence
      before it as to the  extent  of  the  Claimant's  dependency  and  the
      possibility of overcoming it.  I am  not  persuaded  that  this  is  a
      material factor in assessing the risk of treatment in Somalia contrary
      to Article 2 or 3.

  30) Mr Boyle drew  to  my  attention  that  there  is  a  pending  Country
      Guideline case before the Upper Tribunal on Article  15(c)  protection
      in Mogadishu.  Even were this decision to show, however, that there is
      still a need for Article 15(c) protection, as was found in  AMM,  this
      would not without more constitute an exception from  deportation,  for
      the reasons set out above.

  31) The circumstances of this Claimant are not wholly dissimilar from  the
      circumstances of the Claimant in KAB v Sweden.  In that  case  threats
      had been made against the applicant but it was not  shown  that  these
      had occurred at a time when the applicant  was  living  in  Mogadishu.
      The applicant did not belong to any group that was at  risk  of  being
      targeted by Al-Shabaab at a time when they  were  in  control  of  the
      city.  In the present case the Claimant has not been shown  to  be  at
      risk of serious harm  in  Mogadishu  and  he  does  not  belong  to  a
      persecuted minority clan.  On the basis of the  evidence  he  has  not
      made out his claim that he faces a real risk of treatment contrary  to
      Article 2 or 3 were he to be removed to  Somalia  or,  in  particular,
      Mogadishu.  For this reason his appeal will not succeed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity  and  I  see  no
requirement for such an order.

Fee  award                          Note:  this   is   not   part   of   the
determination

The First-tier Tribunal  recorded  that  the  appeal  was  exempt  from  the
requirement to pay a fee and so no issue of a fee award arises.




Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


