

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02036/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 9th March 2015                        |On 27th March 2015                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               AMIR ALI MOXAID
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adewoye of Prime solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. For ease of reference I shall call Mr Moxaid the claimant.


      2. On 4th August 2014 I found an error of law in the determination  of
         the First-tier  Tribunal,  set  aside  the  determination  for  the
         following reasons and made directions as set out below:


         1. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Metzer  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr
            Moxaid,  a  Somali  national,  against  the  imposition  of   a
            deportation order dated 26th September  2013  under  s32(5)  UK
            Borders Act 2007.


         Background


         2. The claimant is a Somali national date of  13  March  1977.  He
            arrived in the UK on 27th December 2001 and applied for  asylum
            on 9th January 2002. His asylum application was rejected but he
            was granted exceptional leave to remain. His appeal  on  asylum
            grounds was dismissed. On 8th April 2003 he made an application
            for further exceptional leave to remain, such application being
            refused and his subsequent appeal dismissed. He remained in the
            UK unlawfully from 25th October 2004. Following a review of his
            case, he was granted indefinite leave to remain on 9th February
            2010. An application for naturalisation  was  refused  on  28th
            August 2012.


         3. On 4th July 2013 the claimant was convicted, following  a  plea
            of guilty, of unlawful wounding  and  sentenced  to  12  months
            imprisonment.


         4. His appeal against deportation was  on  the  grounds  that  the
            situation for Midgan minority clan members  had  changed  since
            the previous determinations and he was thus at risk of  Article
            3 breach. He also pursued a claim under Article 8 private life.


         Undisputed factual findings


         5. The claimant is a member of the Midgan minority clan. He has no
            family members in Somalia and is not and would not be under the
            protection of  a  majority  clan.  Relocation  to  Puntland  or
            Somaliland was not an option.


         6. Although the claimant has established private life in the UK by
            virtue  of   his   lengthy   residence,   it   would   not   be
            disproportionate to remove him (in Article 8 terms) to  Somalia
            taking account of the seriousness  of  his  offence,  his  age,
            previous offences.


         Error of law


         7. The First-tier Tribunal found that the situation for members of
            the  Midgan  clan  had  deteriorated  since  the  two  previous
            determinations in this claimant's case. The judge  referred  to
            HY [2006] UKAIT 0002 [17] and to YS and HA [2005]  UKAIT  00088
            [73].


         8. [17] of HY reads:


                "The question  that  then  arises  is  whether  facing  this
                situation on return if he does face it  would  give  rise  a
                real risk of breach of his rights under  either  Convention.
                In this context we note the finding of the IAT in YS and  HA
                at paragraph  73(viii)  that  a  Midgan  who  has  lost  the
                protection of local patron (or local patrons)  and  who  had
                not found  alternative  protection  in  the  city  would  be
                vulnerable to persecution.   And also at  (ix)  it  is  said
                that a Midgan who has lost  protection  from  a  noble  clan
                patron or patrons in his home area  would  not  be  able  to
                relocate safely within Somalia."


         9. The headnote of HY is as  follows:


                "The finding of the IAT in YS and  HA that a Midgan who  had
                lost the protection of a local patron or  patrons,  and  who
                had not found alternative protection in the  city  would  be
                vulnerable to persecution is good law and applies  to  Yibir
                as well."


        10. [73] of YS and HA is as follows:


                "(i)   This decision should  be  seen  as  superseding  four
                   previous Country Guidance determinations:


                      -MA (Risk - Jaaji Clan -Benadiri) Somalia  CG  [2002]
                      UKIAT 04084 (previously known as Amin   [2002]  UKIAT
                      04084);
                      -IJ (Risk - Midgan) Somalia  CG  [2002]  UKIAT  06314
                      (previously known as  Ibrahim Abdi Jama [2002]  UKIAT
                      06314); and
                      -FB (Risk - Class - Midgan) Somalia CG  [2002]  UKIAT
                      06753 (previously known as Beldeq [2002] UKIAT 06753)
                      -AH  (Midgan  -  Disabled  Woman   -   Relocation   -
                      Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT 07343  (previously
                      known as Hirsi [2002] UKIAT 07343).

                (ii)   Each appeal must be decided on its own facts but  the
                   following should be treated as authoritative guidance  on
                   cases concerning the  Midgan  (also  called  the  Migden,
                   Midgaan and Madhiban and Madiban) in Somalia. One version
                   of their name translates as "harmless".

                (iii)  This decision is also authoritative guidance for  the
                   consideration of cases of members of  other  small  caste
                   groups identified in paragraph 42 above.

                (iv)   Midgan are expected to perform  low  status  jobs  in
                   Somali society and are usually poor.  However,  they  are
                   not slaves.

                (v)    Midgan living  in  rural  communities  can  generally
                   expect to receive patronage and therefore protection from
                   noble clans.

                (vi)   Midgan who have left rural communities to  settle  in
                   cities will  sometimes  have  gained  the  patronage  and
                   protection of noble clans.

                (vii)  Midgan who enjoyed the patronage and protection of  a
                   noble  clan  when  they  left  Somalia  can  normally  be
                   expected to regain such patronage and protection  in  the
                   event of their  return.  The  protection  afforded  would
                   extend to provision being  made  upon  return  for  their
                   internal safe travel back to rural areas.

                (viii) A Midgan who has  lost  the  protection  of  a  local
                   patron  (or  local  patrons)  and  who  had   not   found
                   alternative protection in a city would be  vulnerable  to
                   persecution.

                (ix)   A Midgan who has lost protection from  a  noble  clan
                   patron or patrons in his or her home area  would  not  be
                   able to relocate safely within Somalia.

                (x)    Being a female Midgan increases the level of risk  on
                   return but does not on its own increase it to  the  level
                   of real risk under the Refugee Convention and the ECHR."


        11. The SSHD  in  the  decision  that  s32(5)  applies  dated  26th
            September 2013 sets out the legislation in force  and  relevant
            at that date and considers  the  position  in  accordance  with
            paragraphs 398, 399(a), 399(b), 399Aof  the  Immigration  Rules
            HC395 as amended. She then considers the  position  as  regards
            Mogadishu. She makes  specific  reference  to  AMM  and  others
            [2011] UKUT 00445 and asserts that the situation  in  Mogadishu
            has changed since that determination in November 2011 She makes
            specific reference to  the  COI  Report  Somalia,  August  2012
            paragraph 3.01, 4.15, Country  Bulletin  Brief  February  2013,
            Somalia Bulletin  14  August  2012  paragraph  3.16  and  3.17,
            Country of Origin Report 5 August 2013 and concludes  that  the
            situation "has improved to such an extent in Mogadishu that the
            judgment in AMM and others that there remains a general risk of
            Article 15(c) harm for the majority of those returning  to  the
            city is no longer true".


        12. On 25th June 2014 I granted permission to appeal to the SSHD on
            the grounds that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
            judge had failed to have adequate  regard  to  evidence  as  to
            Article 3 risks as set out in the decision by the SSHD.


        13.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in  reaching  his   decision
            considered paragraphs 3.2.21 and 3.2.22 of  the  COI.  Although
            concluding [21] that there had been


                "a material change in the lack of  protection  available  to
                the Midgan clan since the previous  determinations  in  2002
                and 2004. We find the  [claimant]  has  established  to  the
                relevant standard on the basis of his evidence, that of  his
                witnesses and the objective evidence as  summarised  in  the
                Country Information and Guidance that he would be at risk of
                ill treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR were  he  to
                be returned to Somalia given his minority ethnicity and  the
                lack of protection that he would be afforded by not having a
                connection with the majority clan nor would he  receive  the
                protection of the police and other authorities."


            the First-tier Tribunal has not addressed the matters  referred
            to  in  the  reasons  for  decision  which  point   towards   a
            significant change economically, improved  access  to  markets,
            greater humanitarian access, the withdrawal of  Al  Shabaab  in
            August 2011, indications  of  political  stability,  the  large
            numbers of people returning to Mogadishu,  security  gains  and
            that people move freely about the city. There was no  reference
            in the decision to the most recent country guidance case of AMM
            and others [2011] UKUT 00445. Looking specifically at return to
            Mogadishu the Upper Tribunal, in the  headnote  in  that  case,
            said:


                The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not,  however,  pose  a
                real risk of Article 3 harm in respect of any person in that
                city, regardless of circumstances. The  humanitarian  crisis
                in southern and central Somalia has led to a declaration  of
                famine in IDP camps in Mogadishu; but a  returnee  from  the
                United Kingdom who is fit for work or has family connections
                may be able to avoid having  to  live  in  such  a  camp.  A
                returnee may, nevertheless, face a real risk  of  Article  3
                harm, by reason of his or her vulnerability.


        14. As referred to in [74] of AMM and others,  the  Tribunal  heard
            evidence  in  relation  to  the  economic  situation  and   its
            potential effects on the Midgan and power arrangements. One  of
            the AMM appellants was Midgan and  his  case  was  specifically
            considered. There was a specific finding by the  tribunal  that
            he would not, on the  basis  of  the  current  evidence  be  at
            Article 3 risk of serious harm  although  he  was  entitled  to
            15(c) protection:


                "[664] ..... Finally, there is on the evidence no real  risk
                of appellant AF suffering Article 3 harm in Mogadishu at the
                present time."


        15.  Although the claimant's evidence was that he


                "...could be killed  as  an  unarmed  civilian  roaming  the
                streets of Mogadishu....[on return] from the United  Kingdom
                he would be considered a spy or presumed to have  money  and
                relatives abroad and could be subject to being kidnapped  or
                forcibly recruited"


             the First-tier Tribunal judge made no findings on these claims
             and  there  is  no  reference  to  any  background  evidential
             material that supports these blanket assertions or  that  they
             played any part in the conclusions reached by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal which are based purely upon the factual  matrix  that
             the claimant is from the Midgan minority clan, has no majority
             clan  links  and  has  no  family  in  Somalia.  There  is  no
             background material referred to which supports these claims in
             any event.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  not  provided  any
             reasoning for in essence coming to a different  conclusion  to
             that reached by the Tribunal in  AMM  and  others  as  regards
             Article 3 risk. There is no finding that the claimant has  any
             particular vulnerability or was not fit for work.


        16. The COI that had been placed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
            was, according to Mr Avery, an unpublished version. He did  not
            seek to assert that it should not have been relied upon by  the
            First-tier Tribunal but drew specific attention to the  content
            of the decision letter which refers to the  changing  situation
            in Mogadishu since  2011.  Mr  Adewoye  referred  to  the  fast
            changing nature of Somalia and reiterated that HY and YS and HA
            remained pertinent despite their age. He did not seek to  argue
            that the claimant was entitled to 15(c) protection  but  rather
            because of his personal circumstances namely Midgan, no  family
            and length of time away from Somalia, he was at Article 3  risk
            and this  was  eminently  shown  not  only  by  virtue  of  the
            paragraphs of the COI referred to by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
            but that there were other paragraphs in the COI which supported
            those conclusions.


        17. The First-tier Tribunal judge does make a generalised statement
            that he has considered the "objective" evidence in the  Country
            information and Guidance ([21]).  That  is  not  sufficient  to
            indicate that the judge has had regard to the  various  matters
            raised. There is  conflicting  information  in  the  background
            material before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  some  of  which  is
            sourced from eg the UNHCR and some of  which  is  sourced  from
            unidentified single NGOs. The matters relied upon by  the  SSHD
            have not been considered and weighed  in  comparison  with  the
            other  evidence  before  the  judge  and  there  has  been   no
            consideration of the Upper Tribunal's conclusion that a  Midgan
            clan member was not at Article 3 risk on return to Mogadishu in
            2011. The First-tier Tribunal judge gave no indication  why  he
            preferred some evidence over other evidence or what information
            he considered changed that situation other than the quotes from
            the COI which are,  as  I  have  said,  contradicted  in  other
            respects.


        18. It was incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal to  consider  the
            matters that were before it, not only those put forward by  the
            claimant but also  those  put  forward  by  the  SSHD.  It  was
            incumbent upon the Tribunal to consider caselaw relevant to the
            appeal before it. The failure to do so, particularly given  the
            previous dismissal of asylum/Article 3 claims of  the  claimant
            by the Tribunal, amounts to an  error  of  law  such  that  the
            decision is set aside to be remade.


         Remaking of the decision


        19. The Upper  Tribunal  is  due  to  produce  a  Country  Guidance
            reported case within the next few weeks. On that  basis  it  is
            not appropriate for this decision to be remade at this time.


         Conclusions:


         The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law.


         I set aside the decision


         Directions


        20. I make the following directions:


             a. This appeal to be relisted for hearing for 2 hours on a date
                two or more weeks after the  reporting  of  the  forthcoming
                country guidance case on Somalia.


             b. No oral evidence; submissions only  on  Article  3  risk  on
                return to Mogadishu.


             c. Factual findings as set out in [5,6] to  stand.  Finding  on
                Article 8 (not disproportionate to remove the  claimant)  to
                stand. Although no finding made, it was acknowledged by  the
                claimant through his solicitors that  he  did  not  face  an
                Article 15(c) Qualification  Directive  risk  on  return  to
                Mogadishu.


             d. Claimant and SSHD to file and serve a  skeleton  argument  3
                days before the resumed hearing, such skeleton arguments  to
                specifically address Article 3 risk on return  to  Mogadishu
                for a minority clan member with no remaining family members.




    Resumed hearing on 9th March 2015


      3. Ms Isherwood apologised for failing to file a skeleton argument; Mr
         Adewoye had complied with  directions  and  filed  a  skeleton.  No
         application was made for me to hear oral evidence or to  amend  the
         directions I had made pursuant to the "error of law" finding.


      4. At the commencement of the resumed hearing the following facts were
         agreed:


          a) The appellant is a minority Midgan clan member
          b) The appellant has no immediate family in Somalia
          c) There was no option of relocation to Puntland or Somaliland
          d) There was nothing to suggest that the  appellant  had  a  link
             with a dominant clan as a member of the minority Midgan clan
          e) The appellant has been out of Somalia since 2001 and in the UK
             for the last 14 years
          f) The appellant's father is in America  and  his  mother  is  in
             Sweden; he is no longer in touch with his wife; evidence f his
             mother's passport was produced
          g) The appellant's immediate family members include his  brother,
             cousin and sister are all in the UK  and  all  previously  had
             refugee status
          h) The findings on Article 8  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             stand namely it will not be disproportionate to remove him  to
             Somalia.


      5. Mr Adewoye submitted that, in essence the appellant has no  friends
         or family in Somalia; he belongs  to  a  minority  clan  and  fears
         return because he will be ill treated. He distinguishes the current
         most recent CG case of MOJ & others (Return to  Mogadishu)  Somalia
         CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) and  seeks  to  rely  on  AMM  &  others
         (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia  CG  [2011]
         UKUT 445 (IAC) where guidance was given in  AAM  and  those  issues
         were not addressed in MOJ. The country guidance given in MOJ is  as
         follows:


               i)  The   country   guidance   issues   addressed   in   this
                  determination are not identical to those engaged  with  by
                  the Tribunal in AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian
                  crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445  (IAC).
                  Therefore, where country guidance has been  given  by  the
                  Tribunal in AMM in respect of issues not addressed in this
                  determination then the  guidance  provided  by  AMM  shall
                  continue to have effect.


              ii) Generally, a person who is "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.
                  not associated with the security  forces;  any  aspect  of
                  government  or  official  administration  or  any  NGO  or
                  international  organisation)  on  returning  to  Mogadishu
                  after a period of  absence  will  face  no  real  risk  of
                  persecution or risk of harm such as to require  protection
                  under Article 3 of  the  ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the
                  Qualification Directive. In particular, he will not be  at
                  real risk simply on account of having lived in a  European
                  location for  a  period  of  time  of  being  viewed  with
                  suspicion  either  by  the  authorities  as   a   possible
                  supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as an apostate or
                  someone whose Islamic integrity has  been  compromised  by
                  living in a Western country.


             iii) There has been durable change in the  sense  that  the  Al
                  Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is
                  no real prospect of a re-established presence  within  the
                  city. That was not the case at the  time  of  the  country
                  guidance given by the Tribunal in AMM.


              iv) The level of civilian casualties,  excluding  non-military
                  casualties that clearly  fall  within  Al  Shabaab  target
                  groups such as politicians,  police  officers,  government
                  officials and those associated with NGOs and international
                  organisations, cannot  be  precisely  established  by  the
                  statistical evidence which is incomplete  and  unreliable.
                  However, it is established by the evidence considered as a
                  whole that there has been a  reduction  in  the  level  of
                  civilian  casualties  since  2011,  largely  due  to   the
                  cessation of confrontational warfare within the  city  and
                  Al Shabaab's resort to asymmetrical warfare  on  carefully
                  selected targets.  The present level  of  casualties  does
                  not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians such
                  as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.


               v) It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu  to  reduce
                  further  still  his  personal  exposure  to  the  risk  of
                  "collateral damage" in being caught up in  an  Al  Shabaab
                  attack that was not targeted at him by avoiding areas  and
                  establishments that are clearly identifiable as likely  Al
                  Shabaab targets, and it is not unreasonable for him to  do
                  so.


              vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to Al  Shabaab
                  for civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including  for  recent
                  returnees from the West.


             vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence
                  will look to his nuclear family, if he has one  living  in
                  the city, for assistance in  re-establishing  himself  and
                  securing a livelihood. Although a returnee may  also  seek
                  assistance  from  his  clan  members  who  are  not  close
                  relatives, such help is only likely to be forthcoming  for
                  majority clan members, as minority clans may  have  little
                  to offer.


            viii) The significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
                  changed. Clans now provide,  potentially,  social  support
                  mechanisms  and  assist  with   access   to   livelihoods,
                  performing less of a protection function than  previously.
                  There are no clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,
                  and no  clan  based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
                  minority clan members.


              ix)  If it is accepted  that  a  person  facing  a  return  to
                  Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear  family
                  or close relatives in  the  city  to  assist  him  in  re-
                  establishing himself on return, there will need  to  be  a
                  careful assessment of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These
                  considerations will include, but are not limited to:


                    . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
                    . length of absence from Mogadishu;
                    .  family  or  clan  associations  to  call   upon   in
                      Mogadishu;
                    . access to financial resources;
                    . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether  that  be
                      employment or self employment;
                    . availability of remittances from abroad;
                    . means of support during the time spent in the  United
                      Kingdom;
                    . why his ability to fund the journey to  the  West  no
                      longer  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial
                      support on return.


               x) Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return
                  to explain why he would not be able to access the economic
                  opportunities that have  been  produced  by  the  economic
                  boom, especially as there is evidence to the  effect  that
                  returnees are taking jobs at the expense of those who have
                  never been away.


              xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan  or  family
                  support who will not be in  receipt  of  remittances  from
                  abroad and who have no real prospect of securing access to
                  a livelihood on return  who  will  face  the  prospect  of
                  living  in  circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is
                  acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.


             xii)  The evidence indicates clearly  that  it  is  not  simply
                  those who originate from Mogadishu that may now  generally
                  return to live in the city without being subjected  to  an
                  Article 15(c) risk or facing a real risk  of  destitution.
                  On the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for a person of
                  a minority clan  with no former  links  to  the  city,  no
                  access to funds and no  other  form  of  clan,  family  or
                  social support is unlikely to  be  realistic  as,  in  the
                  absence of means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of
                  ongoing financial support there will be  a  real  risk  of
                  having  no  alternative   but   to   live   in   makeshift
                  accommodation within an IDP camp where  there  is  a  real
                  possibility of having to live  in  conditions   that  will
                  fall below acceptable humanitarian standards.


      6. Mr Adewoye relies in particular upon  paragraphs  (vii),  (xi)  and
         (xii). My attention was drawn to particular paragraphs in  MOJ.  Mr
         Adewoye said that the appellant was


             "...not relying on his minority clan membership to say  he  is
             at risk or that he will be targeted or forcefully recruited by
             Al Shabaab but he is saying that the minority clan  membership
             would make his livelihood fall below  acceptable  humanitarian
             standards. That was accepted in MOJ. It has been said  by  the
             UNHCR and that is where the obligations of the UK are engaged.
             He will end up in an IDP camp."


         Mr Adewoye submitted that the likely destination  of  the  claimant
         was an IDP camp - he had never  worked  in  the  UK  but  had  been
         reliant upon benefits; his family in the UK had not  supported  him
         in the past and would not support him in the future  and  this  was
         evidenced by their refusal to meet even his travel  costs  for  the
         hearing and that he was living in a bail hostel  rather  than  with
         his family; as a minority clan member without access to a  dominant
         clan member or familial support  he  would  not  be  able  to  find
         employment because it would be given to someone else in  preference
         to him; the presence of a  nuclear  family  is  a  requirement  for
         livelihood support; as a Midgan clan member he would be treated  as
         a slave; he has spent at least 14 years  away  from  Mogadishu;  he
         falls within the category or person described in paragraph  408  of
         MOJ namely


             It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.


      7. Mr Adewoye submitted that the claimant  would  be  unable  to  take
         advantage of the economic boom as described in MOJ:


             The "Economic Boom"


             344. The economic revival of Mogadishu can be described only as
                  remarkable, considering what is known about conditions  in
                  the city since the civil war began in 1991.  Each  of  the
                  expert witnesses has addressed this in their evidence that
                  we have considered above. It is perhaps well described  by
                  a report of the New York Times of April 2012:


                      "But people here are sensing the moment  and  seizing
                      it. More than 300,000 residents have come back to the
                      city in the last six months..... The  economic  boom,
                      fuelled  by  an  infusion  of  tens  of  millions  of
                      dollars, much of it from Somalis flocking  home  from
                      overseas, is spawning  thousands  of  jobs  that  are
                      beginning to absorb young militiamen eager to get out
                      of the killing business..."


                  An international agency referred to in Dr Mullen's  report
                  is recorded as saying:


                      "Mogadishu is now a 'buzz', people are  going  around
                      minding their own business and there is an increasing
                      freedom of movement for everyone."


             345. It is  beyond  doubt  that  there  has  been  huge  inward
                  investment, large-scale construction projects and  vibrant
                  business activity. Land values are said to be  "rocketing"
                  and entrepreneurial members of the Diaspora with access to
                  funding  are  returning  in  significant  numbers  in  the
                  confident expectation  of  launching  successful  business
                  projects. The question to be addressed is  what,  if  any,
                  benefit  does  this  deliver  for  so   called   "ordinary
                  returnees" who are not themselves wealthy  businessmen  or
                  highly skilled professionals employed by such people.


             346.  According  to  the  respondent,  a  striking  feature  of
                  developments in Mogadishu since AMM is the  evidence  that
                  "huge numbers" of people have returned to Mogadishu,  that
                  is said to be indicative of a  considerable  reduction  in
                  levels of violence  and  improvements  in  security.  Some
                  local NGO  sources  have  said  that  there  were  300,000
                  returning residents to Mogadishu in the six months between
                  November 2011 and April 2012 alone. By August 2012 it  had
                  been estimated that more than  500,000  people  had  moved
                  back to the capital including the vast  majority  who  had
                  fled since 2007.


             347. Dr Hoehne's view was that very few people  indeed  benefit
                  from this. He said when asked who benefited:


                      "A tiny proportion. 89% are poor. The  remaining  20%
                      will be a bit better than being poor. A little better
                      than "barely surviving". Possibly 1%  or  2%  of  the
                      population benefit from the last two  years  economic
                      development."


                  As we have observed,  the  arithmetic  disclosed  by  that
                  answer is problematic but we have more difficulty with the
                  view expressed.


             348. Pressed further to  explain  who  does  benefit  from  the
                  economic development in Mogadishu, Dr Hoehne said:


                      "A very tiny fraction of the elite. The vast majority
                      of people are struggling to survive..."


             349. This is a view that is not altogether easy  to  understand
                  and we are unable to agree with it.  The  evidence  is  of
                  substantial inward investment in construction projects and
                  of entrepreneurs  returning  to  Mogadishu  to  invest  in
                  business activity. In particular we heard  evidence  about
                  hotels and restaurants and a resurgence of the hospitality
                  industry  as  well  as  taxi  businesses,  bus   services,
                  drycleaners, electronics stores and so  on.  The  evidence
                  speaks of construction projects and  improvements  in  the
                  city's infrastructure such as  the  installation  of  some
                  solar powered street lighting. It does not, perhaps,  need
                  much in the way of direct evidence to conclude  that  jobs
                  such as working as building labourers, waiters or  drivers
                  or assistants in retail outlets are unlikely to be  filled
                  by the tiny minority that represents "the elite".  Indeed,
                  Dr Hoehne suggested that SSM, on whose behalf he was being
                  asked questions:


                      "... could probably get a job as a waiter..."


                  although  he  said  that  there  would  probably  be  much
                  competition.


             350. The respondent submits that, given the  inward  investment
                  that has been received into Mogadishu, said to be tens  of
                  millions of dollars, it  is  impossible  to  see  how  the
                  benefits could be restricted to such a tiny minority.  The
                  respondent refers to  evidence  from  the  Department  for
                  International  Development  in  Somalia  report  -  Autumn
                  Update 2013 in which it is asserted that 56,900 jobs  have
                  been created since May  2011  and  a  further  45,000  new
                  private sector jobs will be created.


             351. Further, there is evidence before the Tribunal, identified
                  by Dr Mullen, to the effect that returnees from  the  West
                  may have an advantage in seeking employment  in  Mogadishu
                  over citizens who have remained in  the  city  throughout.
                  This is said to be because such returnees are likely to be
                  better  educated  and  considered  more  resourceful   and
                  therefore  more   attractive   as   potential   employees,
                  especially where  the  employer  himself  or  herself  has
                  returned from the diaspora to invest in a new business.


             352. For those reasons we do not accept  Dr  Hoehne's  evidence
                  that it is only a tiny elite that derives any benefit from
                  the "economic boom". Inevitably, jobs  have  been  created
                  and the evidence discloses no reason why a returnee  would
                  face  discriminatory  obstacles  to  competing  for   such
                  employment. It  may  be  that,  like  other  residents  of
                  Mogadishu, he would be more likely to succeed in accessing
                  a livelihood with the support of a clan or nuclear family.




         He referred in submissions to the Midgan being  scattered  and  not
         concentrated in one area and thus unable to provide any support. He
         referred to them doing menial jobs and that  the  claimant  has  no
         financial resources available to  him  and  that  there  as  a  low
         ethical obligation to assist individuals  from  weak  groups  which
         stands in stark contrast to the obligation  of  Somalis  to  assist
         their own lineage.


      8. The Secretary of State  referred  to  the  applicant's  failure  to
         attend his appeal hearing in  2002  and  his  numerous  convictions
         pointing  to  an  overall  lack  of  credibility.  There  had,  she
         submitted, been no evidence called as to the siblings' inability or
         unwillingness to assist financially and there was no evidence  that
         his mother and father would not assist. She referred to  the  first
         bail application made by the claimant in which a brother and cousin
         stood as sureties for  �500  and  �800.  The  claimant  had  passed
         English language qualifications and  has  volunteered  at  a  local
         Somali community organisation; it was found that he  was  close  to
         the Somali community  in  previous  adjudications.  He  has  gained
         skills since he came to the UK and would be returning to a  country
         where jobs were available. There was no explanation how or why  the
         applicant had not obtained employment or sought employment whilst n
         the UK and although he may well not have  the  business  acumen  to
         take on a high paying job or open a business there was no  evidence
         why he, as a healthy young man with language skills and contacts in
         the Somali community would not be  able  to  find  employment.  The
         reference by Mr Adewoye to the need for familial  or  clan  support
         was a reference in MOJ to such contacts assisting not being a  pre-
         requisite. It had not been established that individuals were barred
         from working because of their clan membership, rather MOJ had found
         that there were extensive job opportunities.


      9. This claimant has not shown to the lower standard that he would not
         be able to obtain some economic activity that would enable  him  to
         live in Mogadishu. He has not shown to the lower standard that  his
         family would not provide at least some  support,  given  especially
         that in the past they were prepared to stand as sureties  but  even
         without that support, the claimant is a fit and healthy  young  man
         for whom there is no impediment to finding work - as referred to in
         paragraphs 349, 351, 352 and 408 of MOJ. There is no evidence  from
         his mother and father that they would not assist him. There was  no
         evidence that he could not work. I am satisfied that  there  is  no
         Article 3 risk to this claimant.


     10. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.




    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision


    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the SSHD's appeal; the
    claimant's appeal against his deportation is dismissed.



         Date 27th March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
