
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02368/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 September 2014                        |On 17 September 2014       |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                                    MR SI
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr T Okunowu a
           solicitor from Toltops Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 6 October  1981.
      He has been given permission to appeal the determination  of  a  panel
      consisting of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell ("the FTTJ") and non-
      legal member Ms C St Clair ("together "the panel") who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the respondent's decision of 8 November 2013 to make  a
      deportation order against him under section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration
      Act 1971 on the basis that his deportation was conducive to the public
      good and to remove him to Nigeria.


   2. The appellant has a lengthy immigration history which is  set  out  in
      the determination. On 22 April 2013, at Southwark Crown Court, he  was
      convicted of the offence of possession and control of a false identity
      document with intent. This was a false  passport  used  in  connection
      with a sham marriage. He was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment.


   3. The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  and  his
      appeal came before the panel on  3  June  2014.  Neither  he  nor  his
      partner were present at the hearing. Mr Okunowu attended  and  applied
      for an adjournment. The reasons for the application, the  evidence  in
      support, the  assessment  of  this  and  the  decision  to  refuse  an
      adjournment are set out in paragraphs 1 to 10 of the determination.


   4. The appellant had been  suffering  from  schizophrenia  and  receiving
      appropriate medication since at least August 2013. In an email sent to
      his solicitors just after 4pm on  2nd  June  the  appellant's  partner
      said; "Good day Sir. Tried calling but unable to reach you. Just  want
      to inform you that Mr SI is very unwell and is unlikely to make it  to
      the court hearing tomorrow, 3rd June. He has been very ill  this  past
      week since his medication was changed (reduced)  and  by  the  weekend
      became very unsettled. This morning I had to call in for emergency and
      took him to his GP and he has been seen to. I would keep  you  updated
      of his progress. Please find attached a copy of the  sick  note  (sick
      certificate) from his doctor if ok.  I  would  try  to  drop  off  the
      original copy at your Woolwich office later today if I am able to find
      somebody to look after him temporarily. Please  bear  with  me.  Thank
      you". The sick note from the appellant's GP dated 2 June 2014 was on a
      standard form of "statement of fitness for work for social security or
      statutory sick pay". After various alternatives had  been  deleted  it
      stated that he was  assessed  on  2  June  2014  and  because  he  was
      suffering from schizophrenia he was "not fit for work" which would  be
      the case for three months.


   5. Having refused an adjournment  the  FTTJ  set  out  the  issues  under
      appeal, the burden and standard of  proof,  the  appellant's  and  the
      respondent's cases and the findings of  credibility  and  fact  before
      dismissing both the appeal  against  the  deportation  order  and  the
      appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.


   6. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal arguing
      that the panel had erred in law; firstly, by failing to deal with  the
      question  of  the  revocation  of  the  appellant's  Residence   card.
      Secondly, by denying the appellant  a  fair  hearing  because  of  the
      refusal of an adjournment. Thirdly,  by  failing  properly  to  assess
      whether the appellant would be  able  to  access  appropriate  medical
      treatment in Nigeria. Fourthly and finally,  by  failing  properly  to
      assess the appellant's exceptional circumstances.


   7. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Okunowu produced the original of  a
      marriage certificate  showing  that  the  appellant  had  married  his
      partner on 30 August 2014. He submitted that it was an  error  of  law
      for the panel not to grant an adjournment. The appellant's health  had
      deteriorated only very shortly before the hearing. He said that  after
      the adjournment was refused he remained in the hearing  room  to  hear
      what was said but did  not  make  any  submissions.  In  reply  to  my
      question, he said that no medical or  psychiatric  evidence  had  been
      applied for or obtained since the hearing before the panel. There  was
      no such evidence to show the appellant's state of health at  the  time
      of the hearing or at any time since then. He also confirmed  that  the
      appellant's bundle before the panel had been submitted with  a  letter
      from his firm dated 28 May 2014 and consisted of an index,  chronology
      and witness statements from the appellant  and  his  partner.  In  the
      course of searching through his file of papers in  order  to  tell  me
      what had been before the panel Mr  Okunowu  discovered  a  psychiatric
      report dated  17  April  2014  from  the  South  London  and  Maudsley
      Hospital. However, he could find no evidence that this had  ever  been
      sent to the Tribunal or that it had been before the panel. He accepted
      that it had not. He said that there  was  other  evidence  before  the
      panel which demonstrated that the appellant suffered from mental  ill-
      health. I was asked to find that the panel erred in law, to set  aside
      the decision and to order a fresh hearing in the First-Tier Tribunal.


   8. Mr Okunowu informed me that the appellant no longer pursued the ground
      of appeal which alleged that the appellant still had a Residence  Card
      which had not been revoked.


   9. Mr Jarvis submitted that the main point in the appeal was the  refusal
      of an adjournment. The appellant had not shown that  this  would  have
      made any difference. The email from the appellant's  partner  did  not
      show that she could not have attended the hearing. There was  no  post
      decision medical evidence to show the state of the appellant's  health
      at the time of the hearing. The GP said no more than that he  was  not
      fit for work, which had been the case probably for the  preceding  two
      years. There had been no application for a short adjournment in  order
      to obtain further evidence as to the appellant's state of health.  The
      marriage certificate showed that  the  appellant's  partner,  now  his
      wife, was a State Registered Nurse. There was no evidence from her  as
      to the appellant's mental health.


  10. There was clear evidence that the Residence Card had been revoked  and
      no evidence that it was  still  in  force.  The  panel  could  not  be
      criticised if the appellant's  representative  declined  to  take  any
      further part in the  proceedings.  The  panel  did  consider  all  the
      evidence including the witness statements from the appellant  and  his
      partner. The appellant could not rely on a  psychiatric  report  which
      had never been before the panel. There was no evidence from  the  sham
      "wife" in relation to  the  marriage  which  led  to  the  appellant's
      conviction. The appellant and his  partner  relied  on  their  witness
      statements which were before  the  panel  and  there  was  nothing  to
      indicate that they would have given any further evidence had they been
      present at the hearing before the panel. I  was  asked  to  find  that
      there were no errors of law and to dismiss the appeal.


  11. In his reply Mr Okunowu argued that there was no proper assessment  as
      to whether the appellant could have access to the medical treatment he
      required in Nigeria.


  12. I reserved my determination.


  13. As appears from paragraph 8 of the determination  the  panel  accepted
      that the  appellant  suffered  from  mental  ill-health,  having  been
      diagnosed with schizophrenia. This had been known for  a  considerable
      time and he appeared to have  been  receiving  appropriate  medication
      since about August 2013. I note that the respondent's bundle  includes
      a lengthy report from the Mental Health  Inreach  Team  at  Wandsworth
      prison covering events and observations for a period which appears  to
      end in July 2013 together with a note of medication and an  assessment
      of risk factors. Whilst at paragraph 77 the FTTJ refers to this  as  a
      report dated 6 September 2013 it is not clear whether this is the date
      of the report or the date on which it was sent to the respondent.

  14.  Whilst  it  is  alleged  that  the  appellant's  mental  health   had
      deteriorated only shortly prior to the hearing before  the  panel,  it
      was said because of a change in  his  medication,  the  panel  had  no
      evidence of the state of his mental health  prior  to  that  since  at
      least about July/August/September  2013.  The  only  evidence  of  the
      claimed deterioration was in  the  email  from  his  partner  and  the
      medical certificate from his GP. As the panel pointed out the standard
      form certificate from the GP was uninformative and  unhelpful.  Whilst
      it revealed what was known already, that the appellant  was  suffering
      from schizophrenia, it said nothing about any change in his medication
      or deterioration in his condition. It would be  reasonable  to  expect
      that the appellant's GP would have been aware of any variations in the
      appellant's mental health and his medication either from his visits to
      the surgery or reports from other medical sources.


  15. The panel make the valid point that the appellant was well  enough  to
      sign his witness statement on 27 May 2014. Whilst I  accept  that  the
      appellant's partner said in her email that she needed to find somebody
      to look after the appellant temporarily there was  no  clear  evidence
      either that she had not been able to do so or that she could not  have
      left him whilst she attended the hearing.


  16. It is in my judgement significant that since the  hearing  before  the
      panel the appellant has produced no medical evidence to show the state
      of his mental health either at the date of the hearing or since. I  do
      not accept that  the  appellant  "dismissed"  his  representative,  Mr
      Okunowu, as is alleged in the grounds of appeal. I  accept  that  both
      representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed,  as  stated
      in paragraph 16 but that  oral  submissions  were  made  only  by  the
      respondent's representatives. The record of proceedings states that Mr
      Okunowu did not want to make any representations.


  17. The first  ground  of  appeal,  relating  to  the  revocation  of  the
      appellant's Residence card has fallen away. The  appellant  no  longer
      relies on it. I find no merit in the  third  ground,  that  the  panel
      erred in law by failing properly to assess whether the appellant would
      be able  to  access  appropriate  medical  treatment  in  Nigeria.  In
      paragraph 113 the FTTJ said that there appeared to be adequate medical
      facilities and medication available to the appellant in Nigeria.  This
      was a conclusion open to the  panel  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
      referred to by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  as  to  the
      availability of medical and psychiatric treatment  in  Nigeria.  There
      has been no evidence from the appellant which might  point  towards  a
      different conclusion. Similarly, I can find no  merit  in  the  fourth
      ground that the  panel  failed  properly  to  assess  the  appellant's
      exceptional circumstances. The ground alleges that he has no family to
      look after him, presumably in Nigeria, which flies in the face of  the
      conclusion in paragraph 124 that he has all his family in Nigeria. The
      whole tenor of the findings and reasoning in paragraphs 67 to 142 lead
      inexorably to the conclusion that the appellant  has  not  shown  that
      there are exceptional circumstances.


  18. I find that the appellant has failed to show  that  the  grant  of  an
      adjournment would  have  resulted  in  any  different  outcome.  Those
      representing the appellant had submitted all the evidence on which  he
      intended to  rely  including  witness  statements  from  him  and  his
      partner, which the panel took into account. It has not been  suggested
      that there was any further evidence, including  oral  evidence,  which
      would have made any difference.


  19. The panel made an anonymity direction which I continue in force.


  20. I find that there is no error of law and I uphold the determination
















      ....................................
      Signed                                 Date 5 September 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

