
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02008/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 27 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This appeal is brought against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kirvan and Mrs S Hewitt JP promulgated on  15  April  2015  which
    allowed the appeal of JAA against deportation.

 3. For the purposes of this decision we refer to the Secretary of State as
    the respondent and to JAA as the appellant, reflecting their  positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant is a national of Sierra Leone and was born in 1973.

 5. The background to this matter is that he came to the UK in 2003 and has
    remained here illegally ever since after an asylum claim was refused in
    2004.

 6. The appellant is married to a Jamaican national. She has three children
    of Jamaican nationality  from  a  previous  relationship  who  are  the
    appellant's stepchildren.  It was found by the First-tier Tribunal that
    he has a family life with those stepchildren and that finding  was  not
    challenged before us.  The appellant  and  his  wife  also  have  three
    children  of  their  own  and  those  children  have   Sierra   Leonean
    nationality.

 7. On 17 May 2012 the appellant was convicted of wounding with  intent  to
    do grievous bodily harm and sentenced to twelve  months'  imprisonment.
    The offence occurred when the appellant was about to  hit  one  of  his
    stepsons and his wife intervened, taking the  blow  herself.  Following
    this conviction, on 17 October 2014 the respondent made  a  deportation
    order against the appellant under section 32  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.

 8. By the time of the deportation order, the two oldest  stepchildren  had
    been living in the UK continuously for at least seven years.  The First-
    tier Tribunal therefore had  to  assess  whether  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399a(ii)(b) of the Immigration Rules were met. The test to be
    applied was whether "it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain
    in the UK without the person who is to be deported".

 9. The First-tier Tribunal found that it was  unduly  harsh  for  the  two
    oldest children to remain in the  UK  without  the  appellant  and  the
    respondent's main challenge at  the  hearing  before  us  was  to  that
    conclusion.

10. The Tribunal found at  [21]  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  were
    credible and reliable witnesses.

11. At [15], the First-tier  Tribunal   recorded  this  evidence  from  the
    appellant's wife:

         "The witness also states that if the children were to remain in the
         United Kingdom without the appellant  the  children  would  suffer.
         Social Services were concerned about the behaviour of the  children
         whilst the appellant was detained and that was why he was  returned
         to live with them on release."

12. The evidence of the wife went on at [16] to [19]:

         "16. The eldest [R] had problems at school but  his  behaviour  has
             improved over the last two years when the appellant  has  been
             with them.  She states she no longer receives calls  from  the
             school nor is she always being asked to attend meetings  about
             his behaviour.  He will be taking his GCSEs soon and  she  did
             not want him to be put through the stress of  being  separated
             again from the appellant as she thought this would affect  his
             education.  [R]'s own father died in Jamaica and  R  can  only
             just remember him but has now built a  relationship  with  the
             appellant; he is a second father to [R].

         17.  She also gave evidence  that  her  son  [J]  also  had  health
             problems whilst the appellant was in custody.   His  condition
             improved when he heard the appellant's voice on the phone  and
             improvement has been seen  in  him  since  the  appellant  was
             released.  He is attending secondary school and doing well  in
             his  studies.   The  witness'  statement  includes  what   she
             describes as the concern of the children if they are separated
             from the appellant even now.  If he goes to church or the shop
             they will ask where is and if (sic) helps at the church in the
             evenings the children will be upset if they go to bed  and  he
             has not returned home.

         19.  The evidence of the appellant was in accord with that  of  his
             wife.  The appellant confirmed his strong involvement with the
             children.  He will stay at home and take care of the  children
             while his wife does voluntary work.  He also takes them to and
             from school and put them to bed.  They have a strong bond with
             him.  He considers himself father to all of the children, both
             is biological children and his stepchildren.  Only the  eldest
             has a slight memory of his father.  He also confirmed that the
             children went through considerable  trauma  while  he  was  in
             detention.  He states he had to speak to  them  every  morning
             and night to help them cope with the pain of  separation.   He
             also confirmed [R]'s behaviour had deteriorated and  [J]  fell
             ill.   He  also  confirmed  that  Birmingham  Social  Services
             assessed that it was in the best interests of the children for
             him to return home as soon as he was released  from  detention
             due to the detrimental affect his detention  had  had  on  the
             children.  He also took the view that his wife  would  not  be
             able to cope with raising six children on her own."

13. At [36] to [40] the  Tribunal  made  the  unduly  harsh  assessment  as
    follows:

         "36.     We have also considered whether the children could  remain
             in the United Kingdom with their mother and the  appellant  be
             deported to Sierra Leone.  In favour  of  his  deportation  as
             stated above  is  of  course  the  public  interest.   He  has
             committed a serious  offence  and  been  sentenced  to  twelve
             months for it.  The fact that the offence was against his  own
             wife does not detract from the seriousness of that matter.  It
             is not in  the  public  interest  to  have  foreign  criminals
             continuing to reside in the  United  Kingdom  when  they  have
             committed a gross act of domestic violence and in fact in this
             case the offence was committed against his  wife  because  she
             was protecting one of the children.

         37.  However it appears  that  following  carefully  assessment  by
             Social Services a decision was made to allow the appellant  to
             rejoin his family.  Indeed the support that he  has  from  his
             wife was demonstrated by her evidence at this hearing and  she
             feels she would  find  it  very  difficult  to  cope  mentally
             without his support and that  was  accepted  in  the  previous
             determination and is also accepted by the panel.  We also bear
             in mind that the appellant has formed his private life  whilst
             his immigration status was precarious and similarly his family
             life was formed when he had no settled status  in  the  United
             Kingdom.

         38.  Turning to the public interest, which must  include  also  the
             prevention of crime, as stated above, there is also  a  public
             interest in the law being used to deter  and  punish  acts  of
             domestic violence.  However, it is also the case that any risk
             would not be to members of the public but to  the  appellant's
             family.  His wife,  who,  we  find,  takes  into  account  the
             welfare of her children, is strongly supporting his  claim  to
             remain with them in the United Kingdom.  Social Services  have
             supported him being reunited  with  the  family.   Almost  two
             years have passed since he was  released  from  detention  and
             there has been no recurrence.  Overall, bearing  in  mind  the
             best interests of the  children,  it  seems  to  us  that  the
             interests of these children are primary, but not an overriding
             consideration in this case.  In the  particular  circumstances
             of  this  case,  even  given  the  somewhat  chequered  family
             history,  we  do  find  that  there  is  a   strong   parental
             relationship with his children which has  been  sustained  and
             these children desperately need their father as  their  mother
             needs his support.

         39.   Bearing  in  mind  also  that  three  of  the  children  have
             applications currently in process which are likely to lead  to
             them having settled status in the United Kingdom, it seems  to
             us that it would be premature  if  a  decision  was  taken  to
             separate the appellant from his children.

         40.  Overall, having balanced the interest of the public in the  UK
             and the  prevention  of  crime  and  disorder  in  particular,
             against the interest of  the  family  and  in  particular  the
             children, we have reached  the  decision  that  currently  the
             circumstances  are  such  that  whilst  balancing  the  public
             interest against the interest of the family, and  particularly
             the six children involved, we find that  paragraph  399(a)(ii)
             does apply to the appellant.  It would (sic) unduly harsh  for
             the children to live in the country to which the person is  to
             be deported for the reasons given above and it would  also  be
             unduly harsh for the children to remain in the United  Kingdom
             without the appellant.  We have reached this  conclusion  even
             whilst  weighing  in  the  strong  public  interest  and   the
             prevention of  crime  and  disorder  and  the  deportation  of
             foreign criminals."

14. The respondent's challenge before us was that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in the "unduly harsh" assessment.  The test was a high  one,  the
    Tribunal finding in the case of  MAB  (para  399  "unduly  harsh")  USA
    [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC) at paragraph 3 of the headnotes that:

         "The consequences for an individual will be  'harsh'  if  they  are
         'severe' or 'bleak' and they  will  be  'unduly'  so  if  they  are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account  all  of
         the circumstances of the individual."

15. It was submitted by the respondent that the situation here could not be
    sufficient to  meet  the  unduly  harsh  test.  Family  life  would  be
    disrupted but this was not unduly harsh. There was a limited assessment
    of what the impact on the children would be. The decision  appeared  to
    have been made at [37] on the basis that it would be unduly  harsh  for
    the children because the mother would struggle.

16. It was our view that it was unarguable that the First-tier Tribunal had
    the correct test  in  mind  and  applied  it  in  substance.  Paragraph
    399a(ii)(b) is set out at [26]. That is clearly the test being  applied
    at [36] to [40].

17. It was also our judgement that the extracts from the determination  set
    out above show that the Tribunal had sufficient evidence before  it  to
    reach the conclusion it did as to the children's situation being unduly
    harsh were the appellant to be deported, even where that is a high test
    requiring "severe",  "bleak",  "inordinately"  or  "excessively"  harsh
    circumstances.

18. It was not merely that the wife would  struggle  as  suggested  in  the
    respondent's submissions but that there was credible evidence as to the
    very significant degree of  suffering  the  children  here  experienced
    whilst the appellant had been in detention. The Tribunal  was  entitled
    to take into account that even though the appellant's criminal  offence
    was against his wife and involved mistreatment of the children, it  was
    notable that Social Services supported  his  immediate  return  to  the
    family on release from detention because of the serious situation  that
    had arisen in his  absence.  The  repercussions  from  that  period  of
    separation had continued with the children  still  becoming  distressed
    when he was absent from the home even for short periods.

19. In essence, the respondent's argument is that the decision  on  whether
    deportation would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  was  not  one
    reasonably open to a rational decision-maker.  It is our view, for  the
    reasons set out above, that this ground is not made out.

20. Where the provisions of paragraph 399a(ii)(b) were met, the appeal fell
    to be allowed. The remaining arguments contained in the written grounds
    go only to  what  would  be  a  second  stage  consideration  of  "very
    compelling circumstances" following paragraph 398 and not to the unduly
    harsh assessment.

21. For all these reasons we did not find that the grounds showed that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not show  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]         Date 9 November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

