
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02009/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th April 2016                   |On 18th May 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             Mr Justice M Turner
                                     and
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR DERRICK OKAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, a Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Loughran, of counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  which  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Okai   ('the
    claimant') against a decision, taken on 14  October  2014,  to  make  a
    Deportation Order under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  ('the
    2007 Act').

  Background Facts

    2. The claimant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 14 June 1979.   He
       entered the United Kingdom on 12 June 1983 two days before his fourth
       birthday with his parents and his elder sister (Harriet).  He  has  a
       younger sister (Alice) who was born in the UK. On 11 March  1998  the
       claimant and his family were granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in
       the UK. He was 18 at that time and has been in the UK  lawfully  ever
       since.

    3. The claimant has  a  number  of  criminal  convictions  for  offences
       committed in the UK whilst he  was  an  adult.  These  include  three
       convictions which resulted in sentences of imprisonment.  On  31  May
       2002 he was sentenced to  2  years'  imprisonment  for  theft  by  an
       employee and obtaining property by deception. On 5  January  2005  he
       was sentenced to 12  months  268  days'  imprisonment  for  obtaining
       property by deception. On 4 May 2005 the Secretary of State wrote  to
       the claimant warning him that continued criminality would  result  in
       consideration of his deportation. On 13 July 2011  the  claimant  was
       sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment for conspiracy to steal/theft of
       motor vehicles.

    4. The claimant has six children in the United  Kingdom  aged  under  18
       years and a son who is now aged over 18 years.  The children are from
       three separate partners and the claimant does not reside with any  of
       the children. The children live with  and  are  cared  for  by  their
       mothers.

    5. On 7 November 2011 the Secretary of State notified the claimant  that
       section 32(5) of the 2007 Act required that a  deportation  order  be
       made against him unless he could demonstrate that he fell within  any
       of the specified exceptions set out in section 33  of  the  Act.  The
       Secretary of State took into account the  claimant's  representations
       but concluded that the claimant's children would  remain  with  their
       mothers,  who  are  their  primary  carers,  and   that   there   was
       insufficient evidence in relation to  them  to  outweigh  the  public
       interest in deporting the claimant as a foreign criminal. In a notice
       dated 14 October 2014 the Secretary of State made a deportation order
       against the claimant under section 32(5) of the 2007 Act.

  The First Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    6.  The  claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
       Secretary of State's decision to deport him from the  United  Kingdom
       and to refuse his human rights claim. On 13 May 2015  the  First-tier
       Tribunal heard his appeal and in a decision promulgated  on  17  June
       2015 his appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Scott.  The
       First-tier Tribunal found that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
       claimant's children to remain in the United Kingdom if  their  father
       were deported to Ghana.

    7. The Secretary of State appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal.  She  argued
       that insufficient weight has been given  to  the  claimant's  lengthy
       criminal history before the index offence, that  the  possibility  of
       the children maintaining contact with the claimant by modern means of
       communication had not been considered, and that no consideration  had
       been given to the claimant's ability to support himself in the United
       Kingdom and not revert to crime for financial reasons. Permission  to
       appeal was granted on the basis that the assessment of what might  be
       'unduly harsh' was flawed in light of the guidance given by the Court
       of Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [ 2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at paragraph 43.

    8. On 27 October 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Gleeson,  having  heard  the
       submissions of the parties, decided that the decision of  the  first-
       tier tribunal contained an error of law.  The  Upper  Tribunal  found
       that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  engage  in  part  5A  and  in
       particular  the  provisions  of  section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'). The Upper  Tribunal
       found that  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  did  consider
       whether the effect of the  claimant's  deportation  on  the  children
       would be unduly harsh he failed to direct himself by reference to two
       recent decision of the Upper Tribunal on the meaning of unduly harsh,
       namely KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT (IAC) 543 and MAB
       (para 399; "unduly harsh") [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC). The Upper  Tribunal
       was not satisfied that the judge had applied the very  high  standard
       required.  According  to  both  MAB  and  KMO  unduly   harsh   means
       inordinately  or  excessively  harsh.  The  Upper  Tribunal  was  not
       satisfied that the judge took proper account of  all  the  claimant's
       offending history and the public interest in deportation as  required
       by sections 117A and 117C of the 2002 Act.  The  Upper  Tribunal  set
       aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and remitted the  matter  to
       be heard afresh. Tribunal.

  The Second Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    9. On 24 February 2016 the First-tier Tribunal  reheard  the  claimant's
       appeal. In a determination promulgated on 11  March  2016  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Coll allowed the  claimant's  appeal.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal found that the claimant's deportation would be unduly  harsh
       on his children thereby outweighing the  strong  public  interest  in
       deportation.

  The Second Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   10. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal. The grounds of appeal in essence were that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal failed to appreciate the great weight to  be  attributed  to
       the public interest in deportation and that the assessment of whether
       deportation would be unduly harsh was conducted through the prism  of
       the best interests of the child. On 4 April 2016 First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Grimmett granted the Secretary of State permission  to  appeal.
       The grant of permission sets out that it is arguable that the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge erred in concluding that the consequences of  the
       claimant's children being separated from  him  would  be  excessively
       harsh as  the  reasons  suggest  only  that  the  children  would  be
       extremely upset by his removal which may not reach the  threshold  of
       'unduly harsh'. Thus, the appeal came before us.

   11. At the commencement of the hearing a preliminary issue was raised. Ms
       Loughran argued that the grant of permission was restricted to ground
       2, namely the incorrect  approach  and  application  of  the  law  in
       respect of the 'unduly 'harsh' test. Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  confirmed
       that both grounds were being pursued.

   12. The grant of permission consists of two paragraphs as follows:

        1. The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  the
           decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge Coll promulgated on 11
           March 2016 to allow the appellant's appeal grounds (sic) against
           the decision of the respondent on 14  October  2014  to  make  a
           deportation order against him.

        2. It is arguable that the  Judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
           consequences of the appellant's children  being  separated  from
           him would be excessively harsh as the reasons suggest only  that
           the children would be extremely upset by his removal  which  may
           not reach the threshold of unduly harsh.

   13. The issue that arises is whether the grant extends to both grounds or
       only to ground two. In  the  absence  of  any  express  exclusion  we
       consider that the grant of permission should  be  read  as  including
       both grounds of appeal.

   14. For a second time the issue on appeal to the Upper Tribunal  in  this
       case is essentially whether or not the First-tier Tribunal has  erred
       in law by failing to  interpret  and  apply  the  relevant  statutory
       provisions  and  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended)  ('the
       Immigration Rules') correctly by failing to take  into  consideration
       appropriately the great weight that  Parliament  has  placed  on  the
       public interest in deportation and  to  apply  the  test  of  'unduly
       harsh', as set out in s117C of the 2002 Act and Paragraph  399(a)  of
       the Immigration Rules, correctly in light of decided case-law on this
       issue. The claimant does not rely on s117C(4)  of  the  2002  Act  or
       paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules.

  Summary of the Submissions of the Secretary of State

   15. There are two grounds of appeal. Firstly, it  is  asserted  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal judge failed to appreciate the great weight to be
       afforded to the public interest in  deportation  where  a  person  is
       given a term of imprisonment in excess of 12 months. The Secretary of
       State refers to the case of SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  550
       at paragraphs 53 and 54. It is asserted that the judge's reference to
       the claimant's offending as not being at the more significant end  of
       the scale failed to appreciate that  his  conduct  is  sufficient  to
       satisfy the Parliamentary benchmark  set  by  the  2007  Act.  It  is
       submitted that the judge erred in affording weight  to  matters  that
       are irrelevant, such as a low risk of reoffending, the fact that  the
       sentence was at the lower end of the  scale  etc.  in  assessing  the
       public interest in this case. The Secretary of State  relies  on  the
       case of Gurung v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 62, where the court  held  that
       an absence of reoffending does not represent the ultimate aim of  the
       deportation regime. It is asserted that the judge has diminished  the
       public interest having emphasised a low risk of reoffending  and  the
       fact that the claimant's offence did not attract a  more  significant
       sentence.

   16. With regard to the second ground of appeal  the  Secretary  of  State
       asserts that the assessment of  unduly  harsh  was  conducted  solely
       through the prism of the best interests of the child. It is  asserted
       that whilst such interests are a primary consideration there are  not
       the only relevant factor and as such do not holistically  answer  the
       proportionality assessment contained within the unduly harsh  rubric.
       It is necessary to contemplate that deportation expressly engages the
       possibility of separation even  where  it  would  be  contrary  to  a
       child's best interests. The Secretary of State relies on the case  of
       AR (Pakistan) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 816 where the Court  noted  that
       it would be contrary to principle for children's interests always  to
       take precedence over the wider public interest where the two  are  in
       conflict. The Secretary of State asserts that it is not clear on what
       basis the judge found that it is highly likely that the children will
       suffer emotional harm or possibly serious harm. The  judge  does  not
       refer to any objective evidence to support that contention  and  that
       it is not clear why the claimant's deportation  would  cause  serious
       emotional harm when the children are primarily  cared  for  by  their
       mothers. Reliance is placed on the case of PF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015]
       EWCA Civ 51 in which  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  even  where
       deportation will cause a real and damaging  impact  to  a  deportee's
       children the public interest will normally prevail.

   17. Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on the grounds of appeal. She referred to
       paragraph 67 of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  She  submitted
       that the judge made findings that deportation would be  unduly  harsh
       by looking solely at the interests of  the  children.  She  submitted
       that the  judge  already  made  primary  findings  regarding  whether
       removal would be severe and  bleak  without  considering  the  public
       interest  in  deportation.  She  referred  to  paragraph  73  of  the
       tribunal's decision where the judge considered the public interest in
       deportation submitting that this was, however, after his finding that
       deportation was unduly harsh. She submitted that there was no express
       consideration, or that there was  an  inadequate  consideration,  and
       weighing in the balance the public interest in deportation.

   18. Ms Brocklesby-Weller referred to  paragraph  67(xii),  and  submitted
       that there was no objective evidence to  support  the  judge's  final
       conclusion that the children will suffer emotional harm  or  possibly
       serious emotional harm at the loss of face to face contact  with  the
       claimant. When pressed she accepted that she  could  not  take  issue
       with the judge's findings in paragraph 67 (i) - (xi).  She  submitted
       that the children would continue to be looked after by their mothers,
       that although they would suffer distress this is  not  sufficient  to
       meet the test as set out in KMO and as approved in MM.  There has  to
       be something more than the normal reaction that the loss of a  parent
       involves. She submitted that in KMO a similar situation arose but  in
       that case the father was actually the primary care giver  whereas  in
       this  case  the  claimant  doesn't  even  live  with  the   children.
       Notwithstanding a finding that it would be in the best  interests  of
       the children to be with both parents the Upper Tribunal in KMO  found
       that there was insufficient evidence to amount to a finding that  the
       deportation would be excessively harsh. She referred  to  PF  Nigeria
       and the citation of the case of AD Lee therein where it was held that
       there are going to  be  repercussions  but  that  is  the  effect  of
       deportation. She submitted that there was nothing in this  case  that
       was  different  to  the  effect  on  any   genuine   and   subsisting
       relationship with children that arose  from  forced  separation.  The
       judge had focused on the solidity of the relationship (para  83)  but
       this was required before paragraph 399(b) applied. She submitted that
       notwithstanding the identification of the correct legal test  as  set
       out in KMO the judge has not applied the  test  when  conducting  the
       balancing exercise.

   19. Ms Loughran relied on the Rule 24 (of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008) response. She submitted that the  Secretary  of
       State was merely attempting to re-argue the case because  she  didn't
       like the outcome. She submitted that the judge didn't simply refer to
       KMO the judge followed  KMO  as  set  out  in  paragraph  68  of  the
       decision. She submitted that the judge has to refer to matters  in  a
       certain order and the fact that the judge had set out in paragraph 67
       the conclusions that he reached with regard  to  the  effect  on  the
       children of the deportation of the  claimant,  this  was  simply  the
       structure of the decision.  She  referred  to  paragraph  77  of  the
       decision which was headed 'Determination'.  It  is  clear  from  this
       paragraph that the judge is at this point  setting  out  the  correct
       test. The judge recognised the strong public interest in deportation,
       considered the history of the claimant's offences and  made  findings
       regarding the children. In paragraph 80 the judge set  out  that  the
       public  interest  was  a  weighty  factor  and  recognised  that  the
       appellant's offence was serious. The judge was entitled  to  conclude
       that as the sentence was 12 months that this was the lower end of the
       spectrum which is for  offences  between  one  and  four  years.  She
       submitted that the judge's findings at  paragraph  67(xii)  were  the
       only findings that  the  Secretary  of  State  took  issue  with.  In
       response to the tribunal's questions she  did  not  accept  that  the
       findings in this paragraph are conclusions based  on  the  cumulative
       facts in the preceding sub-paragraphs. She submitted that there is no
       requirement for corroborative evidence in any event so that the  fact
       that the judge did  not  refer  to  the  objective  evidence  is  not
       relevant.

   20. She submitted that in this  case  the  family  life  is  particularly
       important because there are two separate families.  If  the  claimant
       was deported there  was  no  longer  have  contact  with  each  other
       siblings. Further she submitted that there would be no contact at all
       between the claimant and the  children  because  the  young  children
       would not have access to social media and the children's mothers  had
       refused to cooperate with the claimant's attempts to  keep  in  touch
       via mobile phone.

Legislative Framework

   21. Sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders Act  2007  provide,  so  far  as
       material:

       "32.   Automatic deportation

             (1)  In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
                  and

                  (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

             (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to  a  period
             of imprisonment of at least 12 months.

             (3)  Condition 2 is that-

                  (a)  the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of
                  State  under  section   72(4)(a)   of   the   Nationality,
                  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (serious criminal), and

                  (b)  the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

             (4)  For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
             1971 (c.  77),  the  deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is
             conducive to the public good.

             (5)  The Secretary of State must make a deportation  order  in
             respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33). ...'

       33.    Exceptions

             (1)  Section 32(4) and (5)-

                  (a)  do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
                  applies (subject to subsection (7) below), and

           ...

             (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign  criminal  in
             pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

                  (a)  a person's Convention rights, or

                  (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee
                  Convention."

   23. Para 396 of the immigration rules provides the following presumption:

       "396.  Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall
       be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the public
       interest  to  deport  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
       deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK Borders Act
       2007."

   24. And paras 397 and A398 make clear that the  rules  aim  to  encompass
       rights protected by the ECHR:

       "397.  A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal
       pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations under
       the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   Where
       deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it will only
       be  in   exceptional   circumstances   that   the   public   interest
       in deportation is outweighed.

       A398.  These rules apply where:

             (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked."

   25. That is reinforced by the heading that follows  of  "Deportation  and
       Article 8" under which the framework of the rules is set out:

       "398.  Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
       to  the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of the  Human  Rights
       Convention, and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law,

       the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider  whether
       paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
       interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other  factors
       where there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those
       described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

       399.   This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
       if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported or
                      ..."

   22. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new  Part  5A  of  the
       2002 Act (inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) requires,  in
       legislative form for the first time, the  Tribunal  to  take  certain
       factors into account when determining whether a decision  made  under
       the Immigration Acts breaches respect for private  and  family  life.
       The decision in the  instant  case  is  a  decision  made  under  the
       Immigration Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

   23. Section 117A sets out the scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article  8
       of the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations" as follows:

       "117A Application of this Part

           (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
           to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                117B, and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
           the question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2)."

   24. The considerations listed in s.117B are applicable to all  cases  and
       are:

       "117B Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
       cases

           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
           the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

           that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
           established by a person at a time when the person's  immigration
           status is precarious.

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the United Kingdom."

   25. The considerations applicable specifically  in  the  context  of  the
       deportation of foreign criminals are set out in s.117C as follows:

       "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
       criminals

        1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

        2) The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign  criminal,
           the greater  is  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
           criminal.

        3) In the case of  a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or
           Exception 2 applies.

        4) Exception 1 applies where-

             a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most
                of C's life,

             b) C is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                Kingdom, and

             c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
                into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

        5) Exception 2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh.

        6) ...

        7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be  taken
           into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision
           to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the  reason
           for the decision was the  offence  or  offences  for  which  the
           criminal has been convicted."

   26. Section 117D provides the definition of a number  of  terms  used  in
       Part 5A. A "qualifying child" means a person under the age of 18  who
       is either a British citizen  or  who  has  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
       continuous period of seven years or  more.   In  addition,  s.117D(2)
       defines "foreign criminal" as person who is not  a  British  citizen,
       has been convicted of an offence in the United Kingdom  and  who  has
       been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve  months
       or has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious  harm  or
       is a persistent offender.

Discussion

   27. The framework set out above provides a  structured  approach  to  the
       case advanced by a person facing deportation who claims that if he is
       removed there will be an infringement  of  his  rights  protected  by
       Article 8 of the ECHR. Section 32 of the 2007 Act provides  that  the
       deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the public good and
       that the Secretary of State must make a deportation order unless  one
       of the exceptions contained  in  s33  applies.  In  order  to  assess
       whether a person's Convention rights would be breached the First-tier
       Tribunal had  to  consider  whether  paragraph  399  applies.  It  is
       important to recognise, therefore, that the assessment as to  whether
       para 399 applies is an assessment of whether deportation would result
       in an infringement of Article 8 rights.  Paragraph  399(a)  does  not
       require deportation of a foreign criminal if it would be unduly harsh
       for the deportee's child(ren) to remain in the UK without the  person
       who is to be deported or it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
       live in the country to which the person is to be deported.

   28. The immigration rules, in the context  of  deportation,  represent  a
       complete code so far as Article 8 of the ECHR is  concerned:  see  MF
       (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192.  Thus,  the  concept  of
       proportionality, involving a striking of a balance between the public
       interest matters in play and rights protected by  article  8  of  the
       ECHR, is to be conducted through the lens of  the  Immigration  Rules
       (see SSHD v LW (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 369, paragraph 14).

   29. S117C of the 2002 Act opens with two statements of principle.  First,
       the deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public  interest.
       Secondly, the more serious  the  offence  committed  by  the  foreign
       criminal, the greater is the public interest in his  or  deportation.
       In SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 550 at paragraphs 47 and 54 the Court of Appeal held:

           "47.   ... (2) In a  child  case  the  right  in  question  (the
           child's best interests) is always a consideration of substantial
           importance. (3) Article 8 contains no rule of  "exceptionality",
           but  the  more  pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or
           deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article  8  if
           it is to prevail ...

           ...

           54.    I  would  draw  particular  attention  to  the  provision
           contained  in  s.33(7):  "section  32(4)  applies  despite   the
           application of Exception  1...",  that  is  to  say,  a  foreign
           criminal's deportation remains  conducive  to  the  public  good
           notwithstanding his successful reliance on Article 8. I said  at
           paragraph 46 that while the authorities demonstrate  that  there
           is no rule of exceptionality for Article 8,  they  also  clearly
           show that the more pressing the public interest  in  removal  or
           deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article  8  if
           it is to prevail. The pressing nature  of  the  public  interest
           here is vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by  Parliament's
           express declaration  the  public  interest  is  injured  if  the
           criminal's deportation is not effected. Such a result  could  in
           my judgment only be justified by a very strong claim indeed."

   30. The wording in section 117C(5) 'unduly harsh' echoes the  wording  of
       paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules.

   31. In the case of KMO at paragraph 24 the Upper Tribunal held:

           "... Therefore, the word "unduly" in the phrase  "unduly  harsh"
           requires  consideration  of  whether,  in  the  light   of   the
           seriousness of the offences committed by  the  foreign  criminal
           and the public interest considerations that come into play,  the
           impact on the child, children or partner of the foreign criminal
           being deported is inordinately or excessively harsh."

   32. In delivering its extempore judgment in MM (UGANDA) v SSHD (2016) the
       Court of Appeal confirmed the correctness of the  approach  taken  in
       KMO to the 'unduly harsh' test and held that in  determining  whether
       deportation was unduly harsh a court or tribunal had to  have  regard
       to all  the  circumstances  including  the  deportee's  criminal  and
       immigration history.

   33. In PF (Nigeria) v The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2015] EWCA Civ 251  (a  case  involving  deportation  of  a  foreign
       criminal sentenced to a prison sentence in excess  of  4  years)  the
       Court of appeal held:

           "43.   ...  I  fully  recognise  that  if  the  Judge's  factual
           findings are well founded, there will be  a  real  and  damaging
           impact on his partner and the children; but  that  is  a  common
           consequence of the deportation of a person who has  children  in
           this country. Deportation will normally be appropriate in  cases
           such as the present, even though the children will  be  affected
           and the interests of the children are  a  primary  consideration
           ..."

   34. Having set out the structured approach and relevant case-law we  turn
       to the first ground of appeal, namely that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       judge 'diminished' the great weight to  be  afforded  to  the  public
       interest in deportation by emphasising the low risk  of  re-offending
       and the fact that the claimant's  offence  did  not  attract  a  more
       significant sentence.

   35. The First-tier Tribunal judge recorded,  at  paragraph  68,  that  he
       followed the case of KMO which requires  a  balancing  exercise  when
       considering the public interest. The judge noted  also  that  he  was
       required to engage with Part 5A of the 2002 Act. At paragraph 70  the
       judge set out the provisions of section 117C.  He  then  set  out  at
       paragraphs 71- 76 the following:

           "71.    With  regard  to  the  index  offence,  I  accept   that
           substantial sums  were  involved  and  that  in  the  sentencing
           judge's view,  he  committed  the  crime  to  offload  financial
           difficulties on to someone else.  Nevertheless,  the  sentencing
           judge accepted that he was a part player, his plea of guilty was
           at the  earliest  opportunity  and  his  expression  of  remorse
           genuine. In terms of the nature and  seriousness  of  the  index
           offence and past offences, I find in reliance on the  sentencing
           remarks that the appellant's offence is not at the higher end of
           the scale of  seriousness  nor  is  his  overall  past  criminal
           conduct.

           72.    I note that  the  pre-sentencing  report  identified  the
           appellant as a medium risk of re-offending. In that context I am
           aware that his last conviction was over four years ago (in 2011)
           and that he has not reoffended since. In addition,  he  has  set
           about gaining qualifications in order to provide himself a  more
           secure and reliable basis upon which to earn  his  living.  This
           has led to the establishment of his  business  with  Ms  Douglas
           (and another director). I find that in this way, he  has  sought
           to protect himself from  future  financial  difficulties,  which
           were the root cause of some  of  his  offending,  including  the
           index offence and the previous  offence  in  2005.  A  judicious
           selection  of  his  degree  course  (which  is  at   Westminster
           University) and his business partner, (Ms Douglas)  and  through
           the identification of a business which suits  their  skills  and
           experience and for which  there  is  a  recognised  market,  the
           appellant has maximised the likelihood that  he  will  not  fall
           into financial difficulties again.

           73.    I am aware that the public interest in deporting a person
           who has committed a serious crime includes a public interest  in
           'deterring  and  preventing  serious  crime  generally  and   to
           upholding public abhorrence of such offending' (see DS (India) v
           SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 554). I am however also aware of the  clear
           guidance  that  these  elements  of  public  interest  (and   in
           particular the weight to be given to them) are not a fixity (see
           JO (Uganda) and UT (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10.

           74.    I bear in mind in  this  context  the  Government  Report
           which states at paragraph. 173:

                "Lives can often go off course and when they do we  want  to
                ensure that the responses are as effective as possible,  and
                people always have a second chance in life.

           75.    I find that the government report is  supportive  of  the
           proposition in AA v  UK  [2010]  ECHR  656  that  the  need  for
           deterrence  and  expressions  of  repugnance  is  lowered   when
           balanced against full rehabilitation.

           76.    Given the appellant's age at arrival in the  UK  and  has
           length of time here, I  am  aware  of  and  must  add  into  the
           balancing exercise, Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR  546  (23  June
           2008). In Maslov the European court  of  human  rights  held  at
           paragraph. 75 that "for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent
           all of the major part of his or her childhood and youth  in  the
           host country  very  serious  reasons  are  required  to  justify
           expulsion." Mr Maslov was an adolescent when  he  committed  his
           crimes. I am however also aware of MJ Angola v SSHD [2010]  EWCA
           Civ 557 where the Court of Appeal applied the Maslov criteria to
           a man whose most recent offences were committed whilst he was an
           adult."

   36. At paragraph 77 under the heading 'Determination' the judge set:

           "77.   So the question  is  whether,  viewed  in  light  of  the
           guidance and the appellant's family life with his six  children,
           his deportation would be unduly harsh on the children so  as  to
           outweigh the strong public interest in deportation."

   37. Considering these passages in the context of the decision as a  whole
       it is clear that the judge has recognised the strong public  interest
       in deportation - this is identified in paragraph 77.  The  judge  was
       entitled, and indeed required to arrive at  a  conclusion  about  the
       seriousness of the offence.  Section  117C  requires  that  the  more
       serious  the  offence  the  greater  the  public   interest   is   in
       deportation. The category that the  judge  was  considering  was  for
       foreign criminals sentenced to a period of imprisonment of between 12
       months and 4 years. This range of length of sentences will  encompass
       offences of varying degrees of gravity. Of course the seriousness  of
       the offence will be (at least to some extent) reflected in the length
       of prison sentence. We accept that Parliament has set  12  months  as
       the benchmark for automatic deportation. That is, however, subject to
       the exceptions  which  import  a  balancing  exercise  that  in  turn
       requires consideration of the  seriousness  of  the  offence(s).  The
       judge took into consideration his past  criminality  (see  paragraphs
       21, 72), the nature of the offences and the  sentencing  remarks  for
       the index offence when arriving at his conclusion. We  consider  that
       the judge was entitled to arrive at the conclusion that  the  neither
       the appellant's index offence nor his overall past  criminal  conduct
       was at the higher end of the scale of seriousness.

   38. The risk of reoffending is a relevant consideration in a  deportation
       case (see PF  (Nigeria)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2015] EWCA Civ 251). The judge recognised that the public
       interest in deportation extends beyond the risk of re-offending - see
       paragraph 73 (as set out above). At first blush the judge appears  to
       have, to some extent, placed emphasis on  factors  that  have  little
       relevance, namely,  the  efforts  made  towards  rehabilitation  (see
       paragraphs 74 and 75 of the decision, as set out above). In Velasquez
       Taylor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ
       845 ('Taylor') the Court of Appeal held:

           "20.   Mr. Husain submitted that the Upper Tribunal  had  itself
           erred in law  in  reaching  its  conclusion,  in  particular  in
           failing  to  give   sufficient   weight   to   the   degree   of
           rehabilitation  that  the  appellant  had  achieved.   In   that
           connection he reminded us that in Danso v Secretary of State for
           the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 596 the court had recognised
           that rehabilitation was a factor to be taken  into  account  and
           could in some cases be an important factor.

           21.    I would certainly not wish to diminish the importance  of
           rehabilitation in itself, but the cases in which it can  make  a
           significant contribution to establishing the compelling  reasons
           sufficient to outweigh the public interest  in  deportation  are
           likely to be rare. The fact that rehabilitation has begun but is
           as yet incomplete has been held in general not to be a  relevant
           factor: see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256 and PF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
           State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 596. Moreover,  as
           was recognised in SU (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State  for  the
           Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 427, rehabilitation is  relevant
           primarily to the reduction in the risk of  re-offending.  It  is
           less relevant to the  other  factors  which  contribute  to  the
           public interest in deportation. In any event,  the  tribunal  in
           this case was clearly aware of the extent to which the appellant
           had rehabilitated herself. It was for the tribunal to decide how
           much weight should be attached to that. [emphasis added]."

   39. As set out in Taylor rehabilitation is less relevant but  it  is  not
       irrelevant. When considered in the context of the decision as a whole
       we do not consider that weighing  rehabilitation  in  favour  of  the
       claimant has tainted the judge's appreciation  of  the  great  weight
       that  must  be  afforded  to  the  different   purposes   served   by
       deportation, namely, to reflect public revulsion at serious crime, to
       protect the public from further offending and  to  deter  others  who
       might be tempted to act in a similar way.  At  paragraph  80  in  his
       decision  the  judge,  subsequent  to  considering  the   effect   of
       rehabilitation, reiterated that:

           "... the public interest is, as stated, weighty. The appellant's
           index  offence  was  rather  serious,  involving   as   it   did
           significant sums of money ..."

   40. We do not find any material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's
       decision in respect of the appreciation of, and great  weight  to  be
       afforded to, the public interest in deportation.

   41. With regard to the second ground of appeal (which  overlaps  to  some
       extent with the first ground) the Secretary of State focused  on  the
       judge's findings in relation to the claimant's  children  and  argues
       that the judge's assessment of whether it would be 'unduly harsh' for
       the claimant's children to remain in the UK if he were  deported  was
       conducted solely through the prism  of  the  best  interests  of  the
       child. In particular,  the  Secretary  of  State  drew  attention  to
       paragraph 67(xii) where the judge made a finding that it is:

           "... highly likely that some or all of  the  six  children  will
           suffer emotional harm and possibly serious emotional harm at the
           loss of face to face contact with the appellant (and with  their
           half siblings, which will be a consequence)."

   42. As set out above Ms Brocklesby-Weller  accepted  that  there  was  no
       issue that could be taken with the judge's findings in respect of sub-
       paragraphs (i)-(xi) of paragraph 67. It  is  clear  to  us  that  the
       finding  in  sub-paragraph  (xii)  is  a  conclusion  based  on   the
       cumulative facts in the preceding sub-paragraphs. We do not accept Ms
       Loughran's submission that there is objective evidence to support the
       concluding finding. The CAFCASS evidence  was  that  it  was  in  the
       children's best interests to have a relationship  with  the  claimant
       and that it was the wish of the twins to see him every day. There was
       no evidence that the children would suffer severe emotional  harm  if
       that were not the case. The judge's concluding finding  is  one  that
       was not necessary. It is not a 'common sense' finding  that  requires
       no expertise and, in our view, was not one that the  judge  ought  to
       have engaged in the absence of some expert evidence.

   43. However, this is only one element of the judge's findings in  respect
       of the effect of deportation on the claimant's children. It does  not
       form the basis of the final conclusion when the judge  undertook  the
       balancing exercise. We do not consider that this erroneous finding is
       sufficient to taint the judge's  assessment  of  whether  deportation
       would be unduly harsh.

   44. The Secretary of State asserts that there is nothing over  and  above
       the normal consequences of deportation in this case. It is clear from
       the case law that unduly harsh is a high threshold and that  for  the
       consequences to be harsh they must be severe  or  bleak,  and  to  be
       unduly so they must be  inordinately  and/or  excessively  harsh.  At
       paragraph 63 and 64 the judge identifies correctly the high threshold
       of the test to be applied.

   45. If one looks at the decision disjunctively there  is  the  appearance
       that the judge might have considered the 'unduly harsh'  test  solely
       through the prism of the  children's  best  interests.  Paragraph  66
       concerned the consequences if the children  relocated  to  Ghana  and
       opens with:

           "Taking each matter in turn, I find the consequences  ...  would
           be "severe" and "bleak"  and  "inordinately"  and  "excessively"
           harsh ..."

   46. Paragraph 67 opens with:

           "Furthermore, I find that the consequences for the  children  of
           being separated from the appellant,  should  he  be  removed  to
           Ghana would be  "severe"  and  "bleak"  and  "inordinately"  and
           "excessively" harsh because:

           ..."

   47. The judge then sets out  11  factual  findings  with  regard  to  the
       children. In these 2 paragraphs the  judge  does  not  refer  to  the
       balancing exercise or the public interest. We  accept  Ms  Loughran's
       submission that a decision must have a structure and  the  fact  that
       these  paragraphs  are  set  out  prior  to   the   public   interest
       considerations does not lead to the conclusion  that  the  judge  had
       considered  the  unduly  harsh  test  solely  by  reference  to   the
       children's interest.

   48. We have considered very carefully the decision as a whole. The  judge
       recorded in paragraph 64 that in the case of KMO it was held that the
       assessment of whether deportation would be  unduly  harsh  imports  a
       balancing  exercise  and  requires  consideration  of  the  statutory
       presumptions in the 2002 Act. He noted the conflict between the Upper
       Tribunal's decision  in  MAB  and  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AB
       (paragraph 399(a)) (Algeria) [2015] UKUT 00657 (IAC)  preferred  KMO.
       As set out above the approach in KMO has been approved by  the  Court
       of Appeal in MM (Uganda). At paragraph 68 under the  heading  "Public
       Interest Considerations" the judge set out:

           "I follow KMO which requires a balancing exercise. This in  turn
           requires  and  includes  an  engagement  with  part  5A  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act 2002 (as amended by  s19
           of the Immigration Act 2014 and which came into force on 28 July
           2014). I am aware of the provisions in part 5A of Section  117A,
           117B and 117C of the 2002 Act  and  the  statutory  presumptions
           therein. I have taken  into  account  than  in  considering  the
           public interest question as regards  to  the  appellant's  claim
           under article 8 of the 1950 Convention and the weight should  be
           given as regards to the appellant's private or  family  life  in
           accordance with section 117B (4) and (5) and  Section  117C  (1)
           (2) (3) (4) and (7) thereof, and also the general principles  of
           immigration policy set out in section  117B  (1),  (2)  and  (3)
           thereof.

           I accept  that  the  maintenance  of  an  effective  immigration
           control is in the public interest (section 117B (one)).  I  find
           however  that  the  appellant  is  able  to  speak  English  and
           therefore would be less of a burden on taxpayers and better able
           to integrate into society (section 117B(2)). I further find that
           he receives a regular income from his  business  (together  with
           the student maintenance grant) and is therefore not a burden  on
           the taxpayer and  is  better  able  to  integrate  into  society
           (section 117B(3)).  I  am  aware  nevertheless  that  these  two
           factors cannot count as positive elements to be weighed  in  the
           balancing exercise. I note also that he has establish  extensive
           family life in relation to 6 children during lawful residence in
           the UK (section 117B(5)).  Section  117B(6)  cannot  be  applied
           because the appellant is a person liable to deportation."

   49. At paragraph 70 the judge sets out in full section 117C of  the  2002
       Act.

   50. The judge then considered the claimant's convictions and  the  public
       interest in deportation in paragraphs 71-76 (some of  which  we  have
       set out above in relation to the first ground of appeal).

   51. The crucial paragraph is paragraph 77. The heading immediately  above
       this paragraph is "Determination". We have set out this paragraph  in
       full above but as it is crucial to this issue we set it out again:

           "77.   So the question  is  whether,  viewed  in  light  of  the
           guidance and the appellant's family life with his six  children,
           his deportation would be unduly harsh on the children so  as  to
           outweigh the strong public interest in deportation."

   52. There then follows in paragraphs 78 -83 the balancing  exercise  that
       the judge was required to undertake.  The judge took into account all
       the relevant factors and weighed  those  both  against  and  for  the
       claimant. The  judge  recognised  that  the  best  interests  of  the
       children  were  a  starting  point  but  not   necessarily   decisive
       (paragraph 78). He had identified a number of significant factors  in
       paragraph 67 and weighed those in the balance as set out in paragraph
       82 of the decision. We acknowledge that in paragraph 83  the  judge's
       reference to the relationships as being solid is irrelevant as  there
       must be a substantial and subsisting  relationship  before  paragraph
       399(a) is engaged.

   53. The judge had the benefit of hearing the evidence at first  hand.  He
       was able to assess the credibility of the claimant and the  witnesses
       when they gave evidence about the consequences for  the  children  if
       the claimant were to be deported. He considered the  CAFCASS  reports
       and the lack of co-operation of the children's mothers in maintaining
       contact with the claimant and  contact  between  the  siblings  which
       would effectively cease if the claimant were deported.

   54. The First-tier Tribunal was required  to  carry  out  an  evaluation.
       There is  a  range  of  possible  conclusions  which  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  might  have  reached,  upon  carrying  out  the   balancing
       exercise, without committing any error of law. The judge in this case
       considered that the Article 8 claim was very strong indeed.

   55. We consider that this case is very finely balanced and  that  we  may
       well  have  reached  a   different   conclusion.   Looking   at   the
       determination as a whole, however, we are satisfied that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal directed itself correctly and had proper regard to  the
       relevant criteria in  reaching  its  overall  conclusion  as  to  the
       proportionality of deportation, and that  the  deficiencies  we  have
       noted do not justify a finding of a material error of law. It  cannot
       be said that the decision reached by the First-tier Tribunal was  not
       one that was open to it.

   56. We have considered whether any parties require the protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  we  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

There was no error of law such that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 15 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

