
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02031/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 03 November 2015                  |On 10 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce


                                   Between

                               GERRALD GOUALIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr R Amarasinha, of Counsel, instructed by Mordi & Company
                    Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The origins of this appeal are traceable to a decision made  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State for the Home Department  (the  "Secretary  of
    State"), dated 17 October 2013, whereby it was determined to deport the
    Appellant, a French national aged 26 years, under regulations  19(3)(b)
    and 24(c) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    (the "EEA Regulations").  The impetus for the impugned decision was the
    conviction of the Appellant of rape of a female aged 16 years or  over,
    made on 16 December  2011,  giving  rise  to  a  sentence  of  7  years
    imprisonment.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal.
    In his omnibus conclusion, the Judge stated:

         "... I find that there are very serious reasons in this  case  that
         justify the expulsion of this Appellant.  Whilst the Appellant  has
         been resident in the UK since the age of 11 and he is social  [sic]
         and culturally integrated here, there are no significant  obstacles
         to his integration in  France.   The  decision  to  deport  him  is
         proportionate."

    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted in the following
    terms:

         "The grounds submit that ... the Appellant was entitled to rely  on
         regulation 21(4)(a) of [the EEA] Regulations, so that he could only
         be  removed  on  imperative  grounds   of   public   safety;   that
         insufficient consideration was given to the guidance in Essa [2012]
         EWCA Civ 1718; and that  the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  invite
         submissions on the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  ECHR  if  she
         thought the EEA Regulations did not apply ...

         All grounds may be argued ..."

    The permission Judge added the rider that the focus of the  appeal  may
    prove to be confined to the first ground, the substance  whereof  is  a
    contention that the FtT  erred  in  law  in  concluding  that  the  EEA
    Regulations did not apply to the Appellant's case.

Factual Matrix

 3. The material  facts  are  brief  and  uncontroversial.   The  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom in 1996, aged 11 years, accompanied  by  his
    mother and has resided here ever since.  Between 2003 and 2008  he  was
    convicted of possessing a Class  B  drug,  handling  stolen  goods  and
    battery.  None of these convictions  attracted  a  custodial  sentence.
    The next significant event was the conviction described in  [1]  above.
    He was convicted by the verdict of a jury following a contested  trial.
    In brief compass,  this  was  a  single  count  of  rape  committed  in
    circumstances in which the Appellant  had assaulted a woman who, in the
    words of the Trial Judge, had "passed out" due to consumption of  drink
    and drugs.

FtT Decision

 4. As noted above, the Secretary of State's decision was  made  under  the
    EEA Regulations.  In its decision the FtT posed the question of whether
    the Appellant had established a right of permanent residence under  the
    Regulations.  The Judge continued:

         "The Respondent accepts that the Appellant is an EEU [sic] national
         and that he has been in the UK since October 1996.   Continuity  of
         residence is accepted.  I need to determine whether  his  residence
         from  1996  until  2015  has  been  in  accordance  with  the   EEA
         Regulations."

    The Judge then reviewed in some detail the  evidence  relating  to  the
    Appellant's  undergraduate  education,   postgraduate   education   and
    employment, all spanning the period 1996 to  2011.    The  key  finding
    made is the following:

         "The Appellant has not established that he was working or  actively
         seeking work in the period between completing his A  Levels  [circa
         2003] and starting his job ...  on 01 November 2010."

    This was the impetus for the following conclusion in law:

         "The Appellant's case does not fall to be assessed within the terms
         of the EEA Regulations  as  he  has  not  established  a  right  to
         permanent residence."

 5. Accordingly, the  FtT  disagreed  with  the  whole  foundation  of  the
    impugned deportation order, namely that the  EEA  Regulations  applied.
    Furthermore, the decision does not engage with two of  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the FtT.  One of these  enshrined  the  contention  that  the
    Appellant had acquired permanent residence in  the  United  Kingdom  by
    virtue of continuous residence of more than five years,  in  accordance
    with regulation 15(1)(a).  A separate ground  embodied  the  contention
    that the Appellant could only be removed on serious grounds  of  public
    policy or public security, followed with the alternative contention:

         "Further, or in the alternative, as a person who has  acquired  the
         right of residence for over ten years pursuant to Regulation 21  of
         the [EEA Regulations],  the  Appellant  may  only  be  deported  on
         imperative grounds of public security."

    Finally, the grounds contended that the deportation  of  the  Appellant
    would contravene the principle of proportionality.

Conclusion

 6. The Secretary of State's Rule 24  Notice  contains  a  somewhat  opaque
    concession.  When we probed this, it was  confirmed  that  the  Judge's
    conclusion that the EEA Regulations were of no application is  conceded
    as erroneous in law.  Mr Avery described the decision  of  the  FtT  as
    "fundamentally flawed".  The effect of this failure  is  that  the  FtT
    failed to consider, and make necessary findings in respect of, a series
    of  essential  matters,  including  in  particular,   the   Appellant's
    integration in the United Kingdom and the issue of rehabilitation.   We
    note the clear concession that the Appellant has been residing  in  the
    United Kingdom since 1996.

 7. We concur with the aforementioned characterisation of the  decision  of
    the FtT.  It is unsustainable in law and must be set aside accordingly.



Decision

 8. We decide and direct:

      a) The decision of the FtT is set aside.

      b) Having regard to the nature of the flaws  identified,  remittal  is
         appropriate.

      c) The appeal will be reheard by a differently  constituted  FtT.   In
         this context we record  our  understanding  that  appeals  of  this
         nature, by  established  convention,  are  heard  by  a  full  time
         salaried Judge.




                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Dated: 04 November 2015


