
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02417/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2017                   |On 2 February 2017                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     kk
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan of Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett
    promulgated on 6 October 2016  whereby  his  appeal  was  dismissed  on
    international protection grounds under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds.  The appellant is a Sri Lankan national  born  on
    25 March 1979.  On 24 November 2013 the Respondent signed a deportation
    order deciding that Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.  The
    appellant appealed under Section 82(3A) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appellant's asylum claim was  based  upon  his  fears  that  if  he
    returned he would face mistreatment  owing  to  his  imputed  political
    opinion.  He entered the United Kingdom in July 1999 and made  a  claim
    for asylum which was refused on 11 October 2000.  He was appeal  rights
    exhausted on 21 October 2003.  The applicant married a British  citizen
    on 28 May 2008 and at the date of decision they had one daughter but  a
    further child has now been born.  In 2005 the  appellant  made  further
    representations on the basis that the  UK  would  be  in  violation  of
    Article 3 and 8 of the ECHR should he be returned to Sri Lanka.

 3. In the decision letter of 25 November 2013 the  applicant's  claim  for
    asylum was rejected in the light of  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and he was excluded from  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention by virtue  of  Article  33(3)  and
    excluded from protection in relation to humanitarian  protection  owing
    to his former activity in Sri Lanka.

 4. It was also concluded that the applicant would not be at real  risk  of
    Article 3 inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment.  It was  noted
    that he experienced a mental health problem but no evidence of that had
    been submitted and further there were medical facilities in Sri Lanka.

 5. In relation to Article  8,  paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    applied and it was noted that  the  applicant  had  been  convicted  of
    criminal  damage  and  sentenced  to  a  period  of   fifteen   months'
    imprisonment.  Paragraph 399 and 399A were considered  but  nonetheless
    his removal from the United Kingdom was deemed proportionate.   It  was
    accepted he had a relationship with a British citizen but this decision
    imposed no expectation on the appellant's wife to leave.   Further  the
    relationship was entered into at a time when he had no basis to stay in
    the UK and there was no evidence that she relied on him for the day-to-
    day welfare and wellbeing.  It was concluded he had only been in the UK
    for fourteen years, had entered the UK illegally and that  he  retained
    ties with Sri Lanka.

 6. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett who  dismissed
    the appeal.   The  applicant's  representatives  sought  permission  to
    appeal which was granted on all grounds by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Holmes.  At the core of the  challenge  was  the  treatment  of  a  new
    scarring report from a medical professional Mr Mason.  The  application
    was made on four grounds:

    (i)  The judge erred  in  the  approach  to  the  expert  evidence  and
         credibility.  It was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         materially erred in his treatment of Dr  Mason's  scarring  report.
         The judge found briefly at paragraph  69  that  Dr  Mason's  expert
         report was "unsatisfactory and the explanations inadequate for  the
         conclusions reached" and was "not prepared to give  any  weight  to
         the scarring report in my assessment".  It was  submitted  that  it
         was trite law that if an uncontradicted expert report was not to be
         accepted, clear reasons must be given.

    (ii)     there was a flawed approach to credibility - the judge  failed
         to address the appellant's explanation of the discrepancies

    iii) the judge failed to address properly Dr Alyas report in relation to
         the  'very  high'  suicide  risk.   The  fact  that  his  claim  is
         disbelieved does not of itself discount that  he  has  a  genuinely
         held fear of return.

     iv) The judge failed to address all the circumstances  in  relation  to
         'unduly  harsh'  effect  on  his  wife  and  child  including   his
         alcoholism and his rehabilitation.

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Chelvan submitted that the key and  binding
    guidance of the reported decision in KV  (scarring:  medical  evidence)
    Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 230 was the most recent guidance  in  respect  of
    scarring and protection claims and that the respondent's silence in the
    Rule 24 report implied either a lack of challenge so the error  of  law
    appeal should be  allowed  or  an  omission  arising  from  a  lack  of
    engagement with the decision to grant permission to  appeal.   He  also
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal approached the assessment on the
    basis of the earlier guidance  in  JL  (medical  reports:  credibility)
    China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) and this was in error.

 8. Mr Chelvan made a further reference to the consideration by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge of a previous decision by an Adjudicator, Mr Eames,
    who  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum   appeal   previously   having
    considered a medical report by a Psychiatrist Dr Coleman.  Mr Eames  in
    a decision promulgated on 9 June 2002 found as follows:

         "The photographs of his scars, and particularly that of the fingers
         of his right hand are graphic, all leave me with doubts as to their
         cause.  Dr Coleman reported that:

             "The scars  on  his  legs  were  consistent  with  scars  from
             beatings" but, as he  does  not  specify  beatings  with  what
             instrument, and provided no information as to  his  experience
             in dealing with traumatic injuries,  I  find  his  conclusions
             unconvincing.  I note that all the scars (bar one  faint  one)
             are below the knees, and that male lower legs are exposed when
             dressed in the normal garb worn in Sri Lanka."

 9. Adjudicator Eames' decision was subject to  challenge  specifically  in
    relation to the psychiatric report prepared by Dr Coleman and which the
    Adjudicator found unconvincing.   His treatment and assessment of  that
    report, however, was upheld on the basis that the Adjudicator  had  the
    opportunity to be able to compare the appellant's various  inconsistent
    accounts and rejected them.  In the  circumstances  His  Honour,  Judge
    ....  was  not  persuaded  that  the  Adjudicator's  assessment  of  Dr
    Coleman's evidence was wrong or unsustainable nor that the  Adjudicator
    erred in his conclusions regarding the physical  evidence  of  scarring
    which was also the subject of complaint.

10. At paragraph 61  Judge  Burnett  recorded  that  in  the  Adjudicator's
    decision of June 2002 states, "all the scars on his  body  are  on  his
    legs".  That is not a direct quote and it is clear that the Adjudicator
    rejected his claims of his injuries, not least because of his differing
    accounts and that he would not have been in a fit state  to  travel  if
    any of his claimed injuries had been  caused  during  the  final  month
    before leaving (see paragraph 55) as  claimed.   That  is  recorded  by
    Judge Burnett.

11. The grounds of challenge asserted  that  the  2002  examination  by  Dr
    Coleman was a psychiatric report  based  on  single  meeting  with  the
    appellant in HMP Belmarsh and did not involve a full  body  examination
    and therefore would not reveal the  scarring  attributed  to  cigarette
    burns on the appellant's shoulder.

12. Nonetheless the report of Mr Mason was evidence which should have  been
    given weight.  The report of  Dr  Coleman  had  been  assessed  by  the
    Adjudicator  Eames  closer  to  the  time  but  it  was  a  psychiatric
    assessment. Although the photographs which were  clearly  available  to
    that Tribunal then were not before Judge Burnett and  they  would  have
    settled the issue in relation to the cigarette burns  but  it  was  the
    appellant's account of his own injuries, not only the assessment by  Dr
    Coleman which was relevant.  Dr Coleman was a psychiatrist and did  not
    produce a report specific to scarring but he  nonetheless  referred  to
    it.

13. The judge rejected  Mr  Mason's  report  on  the  basis  that  it  made
    additional references to cigarette burns and there was nothing to  that
    effect cited by the many statements provided by the appellant  for  his
    previous appeal well before the current statement in 2016.  However  to
    refuse to give any weight to the scarring report at  all  when  it  was
    specifically prepared for the Tribunal on the basis of scarring and  KV
    (scarring:  medical  evidence)  at  paragraph   283   identifies   that
    evaluation should be based on the physician's  clinical  expertise  and
    professional expertise.  In other words the previous report on scarring
    was prepared by a psychiatrist, the photographs are not  available  and
    the examination of the  scars  by  the  psychiatrist,  Dr  Coleman,  is
    confined to three and a half line.

14. The submission of Mr Chelvan was that the appellant did  not  take  off
    his clothes during the psychiatric assessment and to  draw  conclusions
    in relation to  the  cigarette  burns  would  have  depended  upon  the
    appellant removing his clothing which was not evident from  the  report
    of the psychiatrist.

15. Mr Norton submitted that there was a very detailed determination  which
    was well-written and no material error.  Judge Burnett  had  considered
    the matter in the light of the further evidence coming to light only in
    2016.   There  was  no  error  in  failing  to  consider  all  of   the
    discrepancies and both JL and KV were still good law albeit that JL did
    not deal with self inflicted wounds.

16. It is clear at paragraph 69 that Judge Burnett gave no  weight  to  the
    scarring reports  in  his  assessment  at  all,  identifying  that  the
    additional  references  to  cigarette  burns  which  should  have  been
    referred to in the many statements provided by the  appellant  for  his
    previous appeal and well before the current statement in 2016.  Even if
    a cigarette burn were considered to be self inflicted and subsequent to
    the Coleman report it was incumbent upon  the  judge  to  consider  the
    remaining report which included the leg markings and indeed I note  the
    judge's comments at paragraph 62:

         "62. I note that Appendix 2 of Mr Mason's report was not originally
             included in the bundle of documents but it was sent during the
             hearing.  Photographs 4 and 5 on Appendix 2, are stated to  be
             the scars resulting  from  being  hung  upside  down  and  are
             'typical' of the scars that would result from wounds caused by
             prolonged suspension upside down with metal clasps around  the
             appellant's ankles.  These scars were originally attributed to
             have been caused by being beaten across the legs.  (See page 9
             of Dr Coleman's report).  The photographs (Appendix 2) are not
             very detailed and it is difficult to see clearly the length of
             the scar and whether the scars run  around  the  leg  or  just
             across the front.  However, from  the  photograph  it  appears
             that the scar runs across the front  of  the  legs  only.   Mr
             Mason does not provide explanation as to why he is of the view
             that the scars are 'typical' of the injury inflicted.  He does
             not explain the lack of any scar to the back of the leg or the
             lack of any scar running around the appellant's  leg  to  show
             the circular nature of the clasp he describes as  causing  the
             injury.  He does not state he  has  taken  any  of  this  into
             account in forming his opinions  as  to  its  cause.   I  will
             return to this report below."

17. The judge however would appear almost  to  ignore  the  report  of  the
    doctor  Mr  Andrew  Mason,  a  specialist  in  accident  and  emergency
    medicine,  which  specifically  refers  to  the  leg  injury  as  being
    circumferential, in preference to his own assessment from a  photograph
    in which, as he states, "it is difficult to see clearly the  length  of
    the scar and whether the scars run around the leg or  just  across  the
    front".

18. I am not persuaded that the judge's reliance on  JL  (medical  reports:
    credibility) China [2913] UKUT 00145 (IAC) was an error; that authority
    confirms that judges should be aware that whilst the overall assessment
    of  credibility  is  for  them,  medical  reports  may   well   involve
    assessments of  the  compatibility  of  the  appellant's  account  with
    physical marks or symptoms or mental condition SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA
    Civ 1302, but the judge made no reference to KV.

19. The headnote of KV states

         'Where there is a presenting feature of the case that raises  self-
         infliction by proxy (SIBP) as a more than fanciful  possibility  of
         the explanation for scarring:-

      i) a medical report adduced on behalf of a claimant will  be  expected
         to engage  with  that  issue;  it  cannot  eliminate  a  priori  or
         routinely the possibility of SIBP; and

         (ii)  a judicial  fact-finder  will  be  expected  to  address  the
         matter, compatibly with procedural fairness, in  deciding  whether,
         on all the evidence, the claimant  has  discharged  the  burden  of
         proving that he or she was reasonably likely to have  been  scarred
         by torturers against his or her  will'.

20. I do have regard to the case of MN (Sri Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1601 but I find that it was not open to  the  judge  to
    give no weight to the report for the reasons and  the  limited  reasons
    that he did bearing in mind my observations.  I  consider  the  medical
    evidence assessment is critical in this  matter  and  for  the  reasons
    given I set  aside  the  decision  of  Judge  Burnett.   Owing  to  the
    fundamental nature of the approach to the medical evidence, I have  not
    sought to consider the remaining grounds.  Nonetheless the matter  will
    be  set  aside  and   referred   to   the   First-tier   Tribunal   for
    reconsideration.

Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the  reasons  identified.  I  set  aside  the
decision  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and  extent  of
the findings to be made the matter should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2  (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed            Helen Rimington            Date 1st February 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

