
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02364/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            GREGORY DWAYNE WHILBY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Khan of Counsel instructed by Edward Marshall
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, born on 4 September 1978,  as
    the appellant herein.

2.   The appellant arrived in this country as a visitor in 2002, he  applied
    without success to settle as a dependent relative of his mother in that
    year.

3.   The appellant made various  applications  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse.  He was granted three years' discretionary  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules following an application made in 2007 and in 2011  he
    was granted further discretionary leave until 12 December 2014.

4.   The appellant  was  convicted  of  possession  with  intent  to  supply
    cannabis on 23 May 2013 at Harrow Crown Court and was sentenced  to  51
    weeks' imprisonment.  A decision was made to deport him on 14  November
    2013.

5.   The appellant's appeal came  before  First-tier  Judge  O'Garro  on  30
    September 2014.  The judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and
    his partner, Mrs Sokoni.  She is British.  The couple have a child born
    on 2 November 2011 who  is  autistic.   The  appellant  has  two  elder
    children by a former partner who is also British.

6.   The judge found that paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules  applied
    in the circumstances of this case, the appellant's sentence being under
    twelve months.

7.   Having set out paragraph 399 and 399A  the  judge  noted  that  it  was
    accepted that the appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his three minor children who were all under  the  age
    of 18 years and who were in the UK and who were British.

8.   The  judge  considered  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's children to move with the appellant to Jamaica if  he  were
    deported or whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in  the
    United Kingdom when he was deported.  She referred to the Secretary  of
    State's guidance on the meaning of "unduly  harsh"  which  stated  that
    when considering the public interest statements  words  must  be  given
    their ordinary meanings and that the Oxford English Dictionary  defined
    "unduly" as "excessively" and "harsh" as "severe, cruel".

9.   The judge accepted that the  impact  of  deportation  on  the  children
    would be harsh and also reminded herself  of  the  need  to  take  into
    account the best interests of the children.

10.  In relation to the older children, the judge noted that  there  was  no
    evidence that they were  not  healthy  children  and  that  their  best
    interests would be in some measure impaired by loss of the  company  of
    their father and  although  this  was  a  consideration  of  the  first
    importance it was not the only consideration.  The judge made reference
    to Lee v Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 348 which she said made  it
    plain that separation  may  be  the  consequence  of  serious  criminal
    conduct such as that engaged in by  the  appellant.   I  note  that  at
    paragraph 27 of Lee v Secretary of State Sedley LJ stated as follows:

         "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it  has
         been, will be broken up for ever because  of  the  appellant's  bad
         behaviour.  That is what deportation does.  Sometimes  the  balance
         between its justification and its consequences falls the other way,
         but whether it does so is a  question  for  an  Immigration  Judge.
         Unless he has made a mistake of law in reaching  his  conclusion  -
         and we readily accept that this may include an error of approach  -
         his decision is final.  In our judgment the  Immigration  Judge  in
         the present case reached a permissible conclusion  by  means  of  a
         properly structured  appraisal  of  the  evidence,  informed  by  a
         correct understanding of the legal importance  of  a  child's  best
         interests.  It follows that this appeal has to be dismissed".

11.  In respect of the elder children, the judge found that  they  would  be
    able to visit the appellant in Jamaica and in the meantime  communicate
    with him by telephone or on the internet so that all contact would  not
    be lost.  In the circumstances it would not be unduly harsh for them to
    remain in the United Kingdom if the appellant were to be deported.

12.  The judge then turned her attention to  the  youngest  child  (M.)  and
    concluded her determination as follows:

         "58. I find the case of M., the appellant's youngest child who will
             be three in a few weeks  time  and  with  whom  the  appellant
             lives,  requires  different  considerations.   M.   has   been
             diagnosed  as  suffering  from   autism   spectrum   disorder.
             According  to  the  medical  evidence  before  me  this  is  a
             condition with no cure and can only be  managed  by  behaviour
             support.  The information I have read said that  children  and
             young people affected by this disorder are  also  affected  by
             other mental  health  conditions  such  as  attention  deficit
             hyperactive disorder (ADHD) anxiety or depression.

         59.  In M.'s case, I note the report from Brent  Child  Development
             Service dated 20 January 2014 said  that  M.  has  significant
             difficulties with communication and interaction and  that  his
             communication  had  in  fact  worsened.   It  said  that   his
             receptive skill  was  well  below  average,  that  he  is  not
             responding to toilet training and he does  not  indicate  when
             his nappies are wet and dry.  The  report  concluded  that  M.
             will benefit from ongoing speech and language Therapy input.

         60.  In a more recent report dated 21 July 2014, prepared by Ealing
             hospital Community Child Health, it would seem that  not  much
             has changed with M.'s condition.   M.  is  observed  as  being
             overative and has not responded well to  toilet  training  nor
             does he indicate when his nappies  are  wet  or  soiled.   His
             nursery staff thinks that they cannot meet his need adequately
             and reported to the parents that he has  no  sense  of  danger
             that leaves him with his high level of motor activity to climb
             and jump without thinking of the consequences.

         61.  In light of M.'s medical condition I find that  he  will  need
             all the help he can get to live as normal a life  as  possible
             and having both parents around to give  him  that  extra  help
             will assist in the treatment of his autism spectrum disorder.

         62.  Presently M. receives support from the Community Child  Health
             and Development Service,  which  support  he  is  entitled  to
             receive as a British child.  M.'s mother said  that  she  will
             not move to Jamaica with the appellant because she  wants  her
             child to continue to receive the health care and support he is
             receiving in the United Kingdom and he is unlikely to  receive
             the same sort of medical care and support in Jamaica.

         63.  I do believe a child who has been diagnosed  with  the  autism
             spectrum disorder should have the benefit of both  parents  in
             order to maximise the support he needs.  I have  not  overlook
             the fact that both the appellant  and  Ms  Sokoni  has  family
             members around, such as their parents  and  siblings  who  may
             also be able to offer support but I also appreciate  that  any
             support family members can offer to a child like  M.  will  be
             limited due to their own personal commitments and the bulk  of
             the responsibility to keep up with  a  child  who  requires  a
             great deal of one to one attention will be left to  Ms  Sokoni
             if the appellant is deported.

         64.  For this reason I find that it would be in M.'s best  interest
             for the appellant to remain in the United Kingdom to assist in
             his care and support Ms Sokoni, who is at the  moment  heavily
             pregnant and will need continuous on hand support when she has
             another child to care for, along with M., who is a child  with
             special needs.  I find, looking overall at  what  is  in  M.'s
             best  interest,  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  deport  the
             appellant, leaving M. without the additional care  support  he
             clearly needs to manage his condition.

         65.  In relation  to  Paragraph  399(b),  the  appellant  had  been
             granted Indefinite Leave to Remain since 2011 and there is  no
             dispute that he is  in  a  subsisting  relationship  with  his
             present partner, Ms Sokoni who is a British citizen.

         66.  Ms Sokoni said that she will not  go  with  the  appellant  to
             Jamaica because M. will need to remain in the  United  Kingdom
             to access the medical care  he  needs  to  manage  his  autism
             spectrum condition.  I find Ms Sokoni's position to  be  quite
             reasonable.  I find that it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
             her to move to Jamaica with the appellant  in  light  of  M.'s
             condition and his care needs.

         67.   Further  as  I  have  already  stated  Ms  Sokoni  needs  the
             appellant's support in caring for M.  and  I  find  that  this
             family's circumstances are compelling and exceptional  and  it
             would be unduly harsh to deport him leaving both  M.  and  his
             mother without the support they clearly need.

         68.  As I have already stated above, in light of the seriousness of
             the appellant's offence,  I  have  given  due  weight  to  the
             respondent's decision to deport the appellant and accept  that
             the decision made to deport the  appellant  is  in  accordance
             with the law.

         69.  The appellant committed a very serious crime.  Dealing in  the
             sale of drugs is very serious as  it  has  an  impact  on  the
             health of the community.  There is no doubt about that but  in
             the balance is the length of time the appellant  had  been  in
             the United Kingdom, the strength  of  his  ties  here  in  the
             United Kingdom, the fact that he has not re-offended and there
             is no evidence that he is a persistent offender thus  being  a
             risk to the community.  I have borne all this in mind  in  the
             balancing exercise I am required to undertake.

         70.  In  addition  I  have  paid  regard  to  the  public  interest
             considerations which I am now required to consider  by  virtue
             of Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 which  inserts  Part
             5A into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         71.  I have noted that Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) states  that  deportation  of
             foreign criminals is in the public  interest,  that  the  more
             serious the offence the greater  is  the  public  interest  in
             deportation of a criminal.  The section also  states  that  in
             the case of a foreign criminal who has not been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
             interest  requires  C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
             Exception 2 applies.  Here are the Exceptions:-

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

         72.  This appellant has not lived in the United Kingdom for most of
             his life.  He came to the United Kingdom AA [sic] an adult  at
             the age of 22, which means that he should  still  be  familiar
             with the culture and mores of Jamaica if he is deported there.
              However even though I find that Exception 1 do not  apply  to
             this appellant, I have no hesitation in finding that Exception
             2 does assist him, as he has not been sentenced to a period of
             imprisonment of four years and based on my findings  that  the
             appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
             partner Ms Sokoni and his children and that the effect of  his
             deportation will be unduly harsh on both his partner  and  his
             child M..

         73.  I believe, having considered all the evidence which  has  been
             carefully weighed into the scales, that I have struck  a  fair
             balance and in all the circumstances of this case,  I  do  not
             find that it would be proportionate for the  appellant  to  be
             deported".

13.  The judge allowed the appeal.  The respondent  applied  for  permission
    to appeal.  Permission was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    permission was granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  18  February  2015.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun found it was arguable that the findings were
    inadequately reasoned.

14.  Mr Kandola relied on the original grounds and submitted that the  judge
    should have considered the public interest in the appellant's  removal.
    He accepted that the Rules indicated a sliding  scale  of  criminality.
    He referred to MAB (USA) [2015] UKUT  00435  (IAC)  and  KMO  (Nigeria)
    [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC).  He  accepted  that  the  judge  had  directed
    herself at paragraph 49 about the meaning of the words "unduly  harsh".
    Unduly harsh should not be equated with reasonableness.   The  children
    were not a trump card.

15.  Mr Khan submitted that the grounds amounted  to  a  reasons  challenge.
    The judge had correctly directed herself about the legal position.  The
    Rules did indicate a sliding scale as Mr Kandola  had  submitted.   The
    appellant's sentence of imprisonment had been 51 weeks.  The judge  had
    referred to reports about the youngest child in paragraphs 59 and 60 of
    the determination.  The child was a  British  citizen,  the  judge  was
    entitled to find the circumstances were compelling and exceptional  and
    accordingly unduly harsh.  It had been open to conclude as she had done
    in paragraph 67.  She had clearly had regard to  Section  117C  of  the
    2002 Act.  There was no error of law and the decision should stand.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions, I reserved my  decision.   I  can
    of course only interfere with the judge's decision if it was materially
    flawed in law.

17.  One of the points taken is that the judge did not give proper  emphasis
    to the appellant's criminality.  The judge referred in paragraph 41  to
    the respondent's criminality guidance about the meaning  of  the  words
    "serious harm".  She states she had full regard  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy.  She refers in paragraph 42 to the  respondent's  legal
    responsibility to prevent crime and disorder and that  the  deportation
    order should have come as no surprise to the appellant.  She  correctly
    addressed herself to the meaning of  the  words  "unduly  harsh".   The
    grounds refer to the English Oxford  Dictionary  definition  of  unduly
    harsh as did the judge.

18.  I do not find that the reference to reasonableness in paragraph  55  of
    the determination indicates an error of approach by the judge  in  this
    case.  The paragraph has to be read in context.  It is quite clear that
    she found in respect of the older children that it would not be  unduly
    harsh for them to remain in the United Kingdom if  the  appellant  were
    deported.  She refers as I have said to the decision in Lee v Secretary
    of State.

19.  She explains fully why she  drew  a  distinction  between  the  younger
    child and had full regard to the medical material before her.  There is
    no arguable inadequacy of reasons in her decision.

20.  The judge has set out the Rules correctly as well as the statute.   She
    refers in paragraph 69 to the fact that the appellant committed a  very
    serious crime and states that she had borne all this  in  mind  in  the
    balancing exercise she was required to  undertake.   It  appears  quite
    clear that whether one adopts the approach  in  KMO  (Nigeria)  or  MAB
    (USA), the judge did not materially misdirect herself in concluding  as
    she did.

21.  It is clear that the young child has special difficulties reflected  in
    paragraph 60 of the determination and elsewhere.  In addition the judge
    noted that the appellant's partner  was  expecting  another  child  and
    indeed since the decision their child has been born.

22.  The respondent argued in the original grounds that the judge had  erred
    in concluding that British nationality alone satisfied the requirements
    of the Rules but I see no evidence that the judge so erred.  The  judge
    had all relevant considerations in mind.

23.  It is true that the judge did not make a comparative  analysis  of  the
    availability of treatment in Jamaica but I  am  not  satisfied  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case that the judge erred  in  finding
    that removal to Jamaica would be unduly harsh or in appearing to accept
    what the appellant's partner said as recorded in paragraph 62.

24.  I am not satisfied that either set of grounds raises any material  flaw
    in the judge's decision.  What was said by Sedley LJ in Lee v Secretary
    of State at paragraph 27 which I have reproduced above is  apposite  in
    the circumstances of this case.  In that case  the  appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed and of course in this case the appeal was  allowed.   The
    question in every case is a question for  the  First-tier  Judge.   The
    judge in this  case  reached  a  permissible  conclusion  and  directed
    herself by reference to the correct statutory framework.

25.  For the reasons I have given the appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Judge stands.

26.  The judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.   No  fee  award
    was paid or payable.


Signed   Date 16 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr

