
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02320/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th July 2015                    |On 18th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                 james jones
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Akther, Counsel instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  23rd  December  1983.
    His appeal against deportation was dismissed on  all  grounds  on  14th
    July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Harris and  a  non-legal  member
    [the panel].

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  27th  December  2000  and
    claimed asylum on arrival. His claim was refused on 30th March 2001 and
    he was granted exceptional leave to remain until 17th  June  2005.   On
    22nd  October  2006,  at  Isleworth  Crown  Court,  the  Appellant  was
    convicted of wounding  with  intent  to  cause  grievous  bodily  harm,
    kidnapping and violent disorder. He was sentenced on 19th January  2007
    to an indeterminate sentence and a minimum of four years'  imprisonment
    to  run  concurrently.  That  sentence  brought  into   operation   the
    provisions of  Section  32  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  concerning
    automatic deportation.

3.   The Appellant made submissions in writing that his removal from the  UK
    would result in a breach of Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights as he feared persecution in Sri Lanka. On 3rd September
    2011 the Appellant was invited to rebut the presumption that Section 72
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied to his case
    and that he had been convicted of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and
    constituted a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.

4.   Representations were made and the Appellant was interviewed on 8th  May
    2012 and 22nd May 2012.  In a decision dated  6th  November  2013,  the
    Secretary of State decided to deport the Appellant under Section  32(5)
    of the UK  Borders  Act  2007.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision and the appeal came before the panel on 13th March 2014.

5.   At that hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant  adopted
    his witness statement and gave evidence. He relied on a bundle  of  214
    pages, a case law bundle, a bundle of papers before the  Parole  Board,
    witness statements and a supplementary bundle containing a report  from
    the Lancashire Probation Trust and  a  medical  report  from  Ms  Tanya
    Longman.

6.   The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal in summary argue  that  the
    panel:

    (i)  failed to properly apply Section 72 of the 2002 Act;

    (ii) failed to properly assess the Appellant's risk of serious harm  on
         return to Sri Lanka under Article 3;

    (iii)    failed to assess the risk of persecution in Sri Lanka;

    (iv) failed to have proper regard to the medical evidence supplied; and

    (v)  erred in law by delaying promulgation  of  the  determination  for
         over three months.

7.   Permission to appeal was initially  refused  by  Designated  First-tier
    Judge McCarthy for the reasons given in a  decision  dated  1st  August
    2014. The application was renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission on 8th December 2014  on  the
    following grounds:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing  to
         adequately explain why they rejected the expert report of Dr  Smith
         and the contention that  the  Appellant  is  at  risk  due  to  his
         conviction as a convicted criminal who had formed part of  a  Tamil
         gang in the UK.  It is also arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
         erred in their assessment of Dr Longman's report.  While  there  is
         less merit in the other grounds permission is granted in respect of
         all the grounds pleaded."

8.   Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  directed  that  the  parties  would  be
    expected to address in detail why Dr Longman is entitled to be  treated
    as an expert and to what extent there had been compliance with relevant
    guidance published by the GMC (Pool v GMC [2014] EWHC 3791 (Admin)). In
    accordance with those directions  the  Appellant's  representative,  Ms
    Akther, produced a skeleton  argument  at  the  hearing  in  which  she
    addressed Dr Longman's qualifications.  Ms  Akther  also  relied  on  a
    report from Dr Arnold, submitted with the grounds of appeal,  in  which
    he gave his opinion on Dr Longman's expertise. It was accepted that  Dr
    Arnold's report was not before the panel.

Submissions

9.   Ms Akther relied on each ground in turn.  She submitted that the  panel
    had erred in law in finding that the Appellant had failed to rebut  the
    presumption that  he  constituted  a  danger  to  the  community.   The
    Appellant was released in 2013 and had committed no  further  offences.
    The  panel's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  not  rebutted  the
    presumption was perverse given the information in the probation  report
    of Lancashire Probation Trust dated 3rd March 2015.  The  panel  relied
    only on the assessment that he posed a  medium  risk  of  harm  to  the
    public and failed to take into account other detailed matters  in  that
    report.  Had they done so they would have concluded that the  Appellant
    had  successfully  rebutted   the   presumption.    Accordingly   their
    conclusion at paragraph 37 that he had failed to do so was not open  to
    them on the evidence before them.

10.  In relation to ground 2, Ms Akther submitted that there were no  proper
    findings in relation to the Appellant's Article 3 claim. There were  no
    clear credibility findings and the panel failed to state which parts of
    the claim had been accepted and which parts had  been  rejected.  There
    was evidence before the panel that the Appellant's father was  a  well-
    known businessman and that the Appellant had been detained and released
    on bail. The panel failed to make clear findings on these aspects.  The
    findings at paragraph 40 were unclear and did not indicate which  parts
    of the claim the Appellant had accepted and which they had rejected.

11.  The Appellant would be interviewed on return to Sri Lanka  because  the
    Sri Lankan High Commission would inform the security authorities on his
    application for a travel document.  His family links with the LTTE  and
    his previous detention and release on bail would put  him  at  risk  on
    return. The panel had failed to make a finding on those aspects of  the
    Appellant's claim.

12.  In relation to ground 3, Ms Akther submitted that at  paragraph  59  of
    Dr Smith's report it stated:

         "However on the basis  of  my  work  for  the  Metropolitan  Police
         Service on precisely this issue,  I  can  confirm  that  the  links
         between the  LTTE  and  Tamil  credit  card  fraud  in  the  UK  is
         ambiguous.  Nevertheless,  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  tend   to
         automatically associate criminal activity in the UK with the  LTTE.
         As such, the Sri Lankan authorities are likely to be aware  of  the
         Appellant's conviction as they have been with others."

13.  Ms Akther submitted that the Appellant's criminal activity as  part  of
    a Tamil gang in the UK would put him at risk on return and it was clear
    from the Tribunal decision in GJ & Others (post  civil  war  returnees:
    Sri Lanka country guidance) [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)  at  paragraph  306
    that the authorities would be informed of this fact. The Appellant  had
    left Sri Lanka on bail.  His family members had worked  with  the  LTTE
    and his criminal activity in  the  UK  would  be  of  interest  to  the
    authorities on return.  There was no reference in the decision  of  the
    panel to the Appellant's membership of a criminal  gang.   Accordingly,
    their finding that the Appellant would not be at  risk  on  return  was
    perverse given the expert evidence of Dr Smith.

14.  In relation to ground 4, Ms Akther submitted that on the basis  of  her
    skeleton  argument  the  panel  were  not  entitled  to  come  to   the
    conclusions they did at paragraph 43. A medical report of Dr  Longman's
    had been accepted by the Upper Tribunal in another case  and  therefore
    Dr Longman's medical expertise could not be impugned by  the  panel  in
    the way that was set out at paragraph 43.

15.  In the case of Pool v GMC it was found that the  doctor  did  not  have
    relevant experience.  However, in this case Dr  Longman  had  extensive
    experience in assessing detainees and asylum seekers. She had  complied
    with GMC guidance and was acting within her professional  expertise  in
    providing the medico-legal report to the panel.

16.  In support of the grounds of appeal there was a report from  Dr  Arnold
    dated 11th August  2014.  It  was  in  response  to  instructions  from
    solicitors requesting him to comment  on  the  Tribunal's  decision  in
    relation to the medical report of  Dr  Longman.   At  paragraph  S2  Dr
    Arnold states:

         "I have carefully reviewed Dr Longman's  medico-legal  report.  She
         identified 45 scars, and has described and assessed each  of  these
         with precision, giving attributions of each, using the  methodology
         of the Istanbul Protocol.  Further  in  full  compliance  with  the
         determination  in  RT  (scarring,  Sri  Lanka  2008)  and  relevant
         Practice Directions she has painstakingly  given  reasons  for  her
         attributions when the alternative possible causes are  "few",  e.g.
         for those she found to be highly  consistent  with  or  typical  of
         torture.

         I also note from the CV that Dr Longman has attached to her  report
         that she makes regular visits  to  medically  assess  detainees  in
         Immigration Removal Centres and prepared  medico-legal  reports  on
         behalf of the Medical Justice Network ('MJN"). As I was  a  founder
         of and the first clinical lead for that  organisation,  I  am  well
         aware that all doctors  who  work  with  them  undergo  substantial
         training in the recognition and documentation of  medical  evidence
         of torture.  Indeed the MJN is one of only three  organisations  in
         the UK which provides such training.

         I am therefore  perplexed  that  the  Judge  should  find  that  Dr
         Longman's opinion  about  scarring  should  not  be  given  serious
         weight. I would add that it would be very unusual in my  experience
         for a man to display such a large number of scars of the kind found
         on her examination for any reason other than torture"

17.  At paragraph S3 Dr Arnold states:

         "As regards Dr Longman's ability to assess this man's mental  state
         it is surprising that the Judge should  reject  her  qualifications
         for doing so on the grounds that she is a general practitioner. GPs
         must, perforce, manage the vast majority of mental illness  in  the
         UK. Indeed this makes up a very significant fraction,  perhaps  the
         majority of their workload. If they  did  not,  the  country  would
         require many thousands more psychiatrists. For this reason, general
         practitioners are required by the National Institute of Health  and
         Clinical Excellence to be able to  diagnose  Post-Traumatic  Stress
         Disorder and depression, the conditions Dr Longman identified."

18.  Dr Arnold went on to deal with the panel's comments about the  duration
    of Dr Longman's examination and concluded that it was  concerning  that
    they dismissed such an excellently grounded report on the grounds  that
    the author of it was a GP.

19.  Ms Akther also  relied  on  a  letter  form  Dr  Longman  submitted  in
    response to the panel's comments on her expertise stating that one  and
    a half hours was ample time to assess the  Appellant's  scars  and  his
    mental health and in reaching her psychological opinion,  although  she
    was not a psychiatrist she had  considerable  experience  in  examining
    patients who claimed to have been tortured in their own countries.  Her
    opinions were based on experience in the assessment  of  more  than  60
    people who claimed to have survived torture, the psychological training
    available to all GP trainees, experience working  in  psychiatry  in  a
    hospital setting and ongoing undertaking of on call  shifts,  including
    use of the Mental Health Act and the acute assessment of patients being
    admitted  to  psychiatric  hospital,  the  specific  training  and  the
    diagnosis of mental illness related to torture provided by the  Medical
    Justice  Network,  and  all  doctors  were  required  by  the  National
    Institute for Clinical Excellence to be able to diagnose if  not  treat
    post traumatic stress disorder and depression.

20.  Accordingly the panel's reasons for  finding  that  the  report  of  Dr
    Longman was not persuasive because she lacked expertise was not open to
    them on  the  evidence  and  was  perverse.   Had  the  panel  properly
    considered Dr Longman's report  they  would  have  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was at risk of Article 3 treatment on return.

21.  In relation to  ground  5,  Ms  Akther  submitted  that  the  delay  in
    preparing and  promulgating  the  decision  had  affected  the  panel's
    credibility  findings  or,  in  this  case,  the  lack  of  credibility
    findings.  There was no assessment of  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence
    apparent on the face  of  the  decision  and  the  panel  prepared  the
    decision over three months after the hearing.   This  in  itself  could
    render the decision unsafe.

22.  For the Respondent, Mr Avery  submitted  that  ground  1  disclosed  no
    arguable error of law. The panel had taken into account  the  probation
    report and the matters referred to therein. There was nothing  to  show
    that the findings made at paragraph 34 were perverse.  The  only  issue
    before the  panel  on  the  Section  72  certificate  was  whether  the
    Appellant had rebutted the presumption that he  was  a  danger  to  the
    community.  It was clear from paragraph 34 that  the  panel  had  taken
    into account the probation reports and the information relating to  the
    Appellant's completion of a number of programmes  in  prison  including
    anger management, enhanced thinking skills and victim  awareness.   The
    panel had assessed  the  current  situation  and  their  conclusion  at
    paragraph 37 that the Appellant had failed to  rebut  that  presumption
    was open to them on the evidence.

23.  In relation to ground 2 Mr Avery submitted that  the  panel's  findings
    on Article 3 were sufficient. Taking the case at its highest the  panel
    found that the Appellant ran errands for the LTTE as a  young  teenager
    during the war. There was no evidence before them that he  was  on  the
    'wanted list' and they rejected his claim that he was at  risk  because
    of his father since there was no evidence to  support  the  Appellant's
    assertion.  Nothing in the Appellant's activities in Sri Lanka  or  the
    UK were sufficient to bring the Appellant within the risk  factors  set
    out in GJ.  The Appellant was not a high profile LTTE member.  None  of
    the Appellant's family, with whom he had been living  in  the  UK,  had
    given evidence to support what the Appellant had to say.

24.  There was a clear adverse finding on the Appellant's claim that he  had
    absconded whilst on bail at paragraph 40.  The  panel's  findings  were
    sufficient to support their conclusion that the Appellant  was  not  at
    risk on return and the grounds disclosed no error of law.

25.  Mr Avery then dealt with ground 4, the medical  report,  and  submitted
    that the panel were entitled to find that the report of Dr Longman  was
    not persuasive. It was prepared over one and a half hours and  in  that
    time Dr Longman assessed over 40  scars  and  conducted  a  psychiatric
    assessment. Mr Avery submitted that it was unlikely she would have been
    able to carry out such an assessment in that timescale.  He referred to
    Dr Longman's CV and biographical details which did not reflect that  Dr
    Longman held other qualifications.

26.  Mr Avery relied on the case of Pool v GMC at paragraphs 31, 32 and  36.
    At paragraph 36 the High Court preferred the evidence of Dr Bagley  who
    stated that he considered an expert to be  a  person  who  provided  an
    expert opinion based on knowledge or skills and that could be  acquired
    by clinical practice. He did not consider that a person who was not  on
    the relevant specialist register and lacked other  higher  professional
    training could be regarded as an expert. He did not consider  that  the
    Appellant in the case could be said to be an expert in  relation  to  a
    particular type of patient when he did not in fact have  experience  in
    dealing or assessing or  treating  that  type  of  patient.   Mr  Avery
    submitted that there was nothing in Dr Longman's CV to suggest that she
    had  the  necessary  qualifications  or  professional  training  as   a
    psychiatrist and therefore she could not  put  herself  forward  as  an
    expert in this case. Although she had done some local work, it was  not
    immediately apparent how that was  applicable  in  this  situation.  Dr
    Longman had done work with Dr Arnold's organisation.  Accordingly,  the
    panel did not make an error of law in  the  assessment  of  the  expert
    evidence before them. The decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  another
    case and the report  of  Dr  Arnold  were  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and were irrelevant in any event.

27.  In relation to ground 3, Mr Avery submitted that  at  paragraph  44  of
    the decision the panel had considered the evidence  of  Dr  Smith.   Dr
    Smith in fact gave evidence in the country guidance case of  GJ  and  a
    summary of his evidence appeared in Appendix J and  paragraphs  264  to
    272 of the decision.  Most of the risk factors put forward by Dr  Smith
    were rejected by the Tribunal and a member of a criminal gang  was  not
    one that he raised in that  case.  Given  the  general  nature  of  the
    comments in the expert report of Dr Smith which was  before  the  panel
    and the fact that he did not say where he gained his  information,  the
    report was extremely vague as to where the risk to the Appellant  would
    arise. The example given, at page 67 of Dr Smith's  report,  of  credit
    card fraud, thereby linking the criminal activity to funding issues  in
    relation to the LTTE, was understandable.  It was not  clear  from  the
    report how this applied to the facts in the Appellant's case.

28.  At paragraph 8 of Dr Smith's report he  stated  that  in  May  2004  he
    assisted the Metropolitan Police in a study.   The  circumstances  were
    entirely different now. More explanation was required by him to come to
    the conclusion that he did at paragraph 59.  If there  was  a  risk  on
    return because of association with Tamil gangs in the UK  then  it  was
    questionable why Dr Smith had not raised this in the case  of  GJ.   Mr
    Avery submitted that nothing in the report of Dr Smith would have  made
    a difference to the panel's findings and they were entitled to come  to
    the conclusions that they did in paragraph 44. The  panel  had  applied
    the expert report  to  the  Appellant's  profile,  which  was  a  young
    teenager running errands.   The  panel  did  not  accept  his  previous
    detention, torture or absconding on bail. Dr  Smith's  report  did  not
    apply to the Appellant's circumstances and what was said  at  paragraph
    44 was justified. There was nothing in  the  report  which  would  have
    enabled the panel to come to another conclusion  given  that  they  had
    made clear findings that the Appellant's profile was not sufficient  to
    put him at risk, notwithstanding the fact that the authorities would be
    aware of his return. In relation to delay, Mr Avery submitted that this
    ground in itself was not sufficient to amount to an error of law.

29.  In response, Ms Akther submitted that it was not apparent on  the  face
    of the determination that the panel had considered the Appellant's case
    in its entirety and there was no mention of risk of return on the basis
    that the Appellant was part of a Tamil gang in the UK. The  Appellant's
    past activities taken together with the criminal activity would put him
    at risk.  If the panel had  properly  taken  into  account  Dr  Smith's
    report then they would have come to a different conclusion.

30.  In relation to the medical evidence, Ms Akther submitted that  had  the
    panel accepted  the  report  of  Dr  Longman  then  the  Appellant  had
    established an Article 8 risk in relation to suicide.  Dr  Longman  had
    specific niche experience unlike the doctor in the case of Pool v  GMC.



Discussion and Conclusion

Ground 1

31.   There  was  no  dispute  that  Section  72(2)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  applied.  The  Appellant  had  been
    convicted in the UK  of  an  offence  and  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least two years. The  issue  before  the  panel  was
    whether the Appellant had rebutted the presumption that he  constituted
    a danger to the community. There was no issue in relation to  rebutting
    the presumption that the Appellant  had  committed  a  serious  offence
    because it was quite clear that he had.

32.  In  consideration  of  whether  the  Appellant  was  a  danger  to  the
    community, the panel considered the reports from the Parole  Board  and
    Lancashire Probation Trust.  At paragraph 33  the  panel  concluded  as
    follows:

         "There is no doubt that the Appellant has been  convicted  of  very
         serious offences and that he was found by the  trial  judge  to  be
         someone upon whom it was necessary to impose a sentence for  public
         protection."

33.  At paragraph 34, the panel stated:

         "Of course things have moved  on  since  then.   The  Appellant  is
         older. He has matured and he has the benefit of  reports  from  the
         Parole Board and Lancashire  Probation  Trust.   He  has  presented
         before us and advised of his contrition and regret for the incident
         that took place back in 2006. Mr  Brown  [his  representative]  has
         taken us in some detail through the positive aspects  to  be  found
         within both reports, and it is clear that the  Appellant  has  made
         some progress.  Further, we acknowledge that it  is  difficult  for
         any person released on parole to live up to the expectations  of  a
         Parole Board report until they are given the opportunity to do  so.
         Having said that, Mr Brown's comment had to be tempered against the
         severity of the offence, the judge's  sentencing  remarks  and  the
         fact that as recently as November 2013, the London Probation  Trust
         having taken into account all the work undertaken  in  prison,  and
         continued reflection on his behaviour  and  evidence  that  he  was
         applying skills taught, concluded that he still posed a medium risk
         of harm to the public. That is a conclusion that we cannot  ignore.
         On these facts, the Appellant is, and was a foreign criminal within
         the meaning of the United Kingdom Borders Act 2007.  Accordingly by
         force of Section 32(5) the Secretary of State was bound to  make  a
         Deportation Order against him unless, under Section 33, his removal
         pursuant to such  an  Order  would  breach  his  rights  under  the
         European Convention of Human Rights or the United  Nations  Refugee
         Convention."

34.  At paragraph 37 the panel concluded:

         "Mr Brown argues that  the  Appellant's  progress  in  prison,  his
         attendance on anger management course  and  reference  to  being  a
         model prisoner is sufficient to rebut the certificate under Section
         72 of the 2002 Act. Certainly  there  is  a  requirement  upon  the
         Tribunal to consider these factors  and  we  have  given  them  due
         consideration and weight, but bearing in mind both  the  policy  of
         the Secretary of State and now  the  judgment  of  Parliament,  the
         seriousness of the offence in this  issue  and  the  strong  public
         interest in supporting foreign criminals, we are not satisfied that
         the circumstances in this case are such that the certificate should
         be rebutted."

35.  Accordingly, the panel found that taking into account the  evidence  of
    the Appellant's  current  situation  and  his  contrition  and  regret,
    looking at all that evidence and the reports that were before them, the
    Appellant had failed to rebut the presumption that he was a  danger  to
    the public. I find that this conclusion was open to the  panel  on  the
    evidence before them and they  properly  directed  themselves  in  law.
    There was no error of law in relation to ground 1.





Ground 2

36.  It is argued that the panel's approach to the evidence was  flawed  and
    Ms Akther submitted that it was unclear whether  the  panel  found  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness and what parts  of  the  Appellant's
    claim they accepted and/or rejected.

37.  The panel's findings in relation to the Appellant's asylum and  Article
    8 claim are set out at paragraphs 39 and 40:

         "39. This is an Appellant, who to put the case at its very highest,
             ran errands for the LTTE as a young teenager during  the  war.
             There is no evidence whatsoever before  us  to  show  that  he
             would be at risk on return. There is no evidence to show  that
             he is on a wanted list as someone who would be arrested at the
             airport, and his contention that he  would  be  known  to  the
             authorities on return because  of  his  father  is  completely
             unsupported and substantiated by any evidence.

         40.  It is of course the Appellant's claim that he is a person  who
             will be suspected of having links with the LTTE and  is  of  a
             category  of  individual  whose  profile  considers  merit  or
             particular examination of risk.  Those risk factors have  been
             considered by the Secretary of State in paragraph  40  of  the
             Notice of Refusal and considered as identified in the  leading
             case of GJ & Others.  That  authority  replaces  all  existing
             country guidance and sets out current categories of persons at
             real risk of persecution or serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri
             Lanka. Those factors are accumulative and they may lead  to  a
             successful Article 3 claim.  The Judge's authority for stating
             that it is apparent that the present regime's principal  focus
             is  directed  towards  those  whose  activities  violate   the
             territorial integrity of present day Sri  Lanka  because  they
             are, or are perceived to have, a  significant  role  to  post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the Diaspora and/or a renewal
             of hostilities within  Sri  Lanka.   The  Secretary  of  State
             concluded  that  there  was  nothing  within  the  Appellant's
             account of his activities in Sri Lanka or the  United  Kingdom
             which raised the risk factors identified in GJ  &  Others.  We
             agree with that analysis. Even on the Appellant's own  account
             he did not engage in any high profile activities of  the  LTTE
             such as public speaking and whilst he claims to have absconded
             whilst on bail there is no  evidence  to  support  that  claim
             other than the Appellant's own word and that evidence is self-
             serving. We endorse the view expressed  by  the  Secretary  of
             State that had the Appellant been of genuine adverse  interest
             to the Sri Lankan authorities, due to  his  claimed  political
             activities, they would have adopted stricter measures to  have
             stopped him from absconding."

38.  From these paragraphs it  is  clear  that  the  panel  found  that  the
    Appellant ran errands for the LTTE as a young teenager during  the  war
    but he was not a high profile member of the LTTE and he  did  not  come
    within the risk factors set out in the country guidance. I am persuaded
    by Mr Avery's submissions that the panel rejected the Appellant's claim
    that he had come to the adverse interest  of  the  authorities  in  Sri
    Lanka and that they did not accept that he had absconded from bail  nor
    did they accept that he would be known to the  authorities  because  of
    his father. These conclusions were open to them on the basis  that  the
    Appellant had family in the UK who had failed to provide  any  evidence
    to substantiate his claim. This is not a case of  the  panel  requiring
    corroboration, but of the panel taking into account a lack of  evidence
    that the Appellant ought to have been able to produce  if  his  account
    was true.

39.  Accordingly, the panel had made clear findings for  why  they  rejected
    certain parts of the Appellant's claim. They had applied  the  relevant
    country guidance and their finding that the Appellant's  activities  in
    Sri Lanka did not bring him within the risk factors  identified  in  GJ
    was open to them on the evidence.

Ground 3

40.  In considering Article 3, in addition to their findings  at  paragraphs
    39 and 40 the panel also considered the expert report of Dr  Smith  and
    at paragraph 44 they concluded that:

         "Whilst Dr Smith had  provided  a  detailed  academic  analysis  in
         support of the asylum claim and we have given due consideration  to
         this, for all the reasons given above we are not persuaded that the
         Appellant's claim for both asylum and under Article 2 and 3 of  the
         European Convention of Human Rights can succeed."

41.  The grounds argue that the panel have not engaged with the  Appellant's
    risk on return on the basis of his conviction in the UK in which he was
    part of a Tamil gang that would become known to the authorities.

42.  The report of Dr Smith is 51 pages long and  contains  199  paragraphs.
    It was not  apparent  which  paragraphs  the  Appellant  relied  on  in
    particular and which were brought to the attention  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In submissions before me, I was referred to pages  67  to  75
    which specifically dealt with

    (a)  the likelihood that the Sri Lankan authorities would be  aware  of
         the Appellant's conviction in  the  light  of  publication  of  the
         details and reports accessible on the internet, and

    (b)  the risk of detention and ill treatment that might arise, if  any,
         as a result  of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  knowledge  of  the
         conviction for such an offence as a member of a Tamil gang.

43.  In summary what is contained in those paragraphs is that it  is  likely
    that the Sri Lankan authorities  would  be  aware  of  the  Appellant's
    conviction because they  monitor  criminal  activities  in  the  UK  in
    relation to suspected LTTE connections.  Their security  forces  remain
    in doubt as to whether there is  a  threat  that  LTTE  remnants  might
    combine to provide a national security threat once again. The Appellant
    would have to apply  for  travel  documents  at  the  Sri  Lankan  High
    Commission in London.  He may be of sufficient adverse  interest  as  a
    result of his criminal activities to have his details included  on  the
    electronic database which  is  available  to  the  authorities  at  the
    airport, for example previous detention of  suspected  LTTE  supporters
    after the war. Consular officials at the Sri Lankan High Commission  in
    London were under instruction to pass on details of  all  deportees  to
    the security forces in Colombo. Accordingly, the authorities will  know
    about the Appellant's criminal conviction in the UK  and  the  security
    forces will be informed if he is to be deported.  They  will  have  the
    ability to check to see if he has been detained in the past.

44.  The issue before the panel was whether the Appellant would be  at  risk
    because of his previous association with the LTTE and  because  of  his
    suspected association with the LTTE as a result  of  criminal  activity
    with a Tamil gang in the UK.  The  panel  found  that  the  Appellant's
    involvement with the LTTE in Sri Lanka was limited to  running  errands
    as a young teenager during the war.   They  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was at risk of persecution or serious harm prior  to  leaving
    Sri Lanka.  They did not accept the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    return because his  claim  that  his  father  was  well  known  to  the
    authorities  and  that   he   absconded   on   bail   was   vague   and
    unsubstantiated.  The panel had applied the risk factors in the country
    guidance, at paragraph 40, and concluded that  the  Appellant  was  not
    high profile.

45.  In relation to his activities in Sri Lanka and in the  UK  the  offence
    committed by the Appellant could not  be  viewed  as  related  to  LTTE
    funding  and  his  criminal  activity  was  not  directed  towards  the
    financing of any LTTE activities.

46.  The report of Dr Smith, although dated January 2014, mainly  relies  on
    information before  2010.   There  were  some  references  to  specific
    incidents in 2012 although these do not appear to be  relevant  to  the
    Appellant and there was an Appendix  of  an  updated  situation  report
    dated 2013. These again were in general terms and not specific  to  the
    Appellant.  Accordingly, the report of Dr Smith did  not  take  matters
    any further.

47.  The panel found that the Appellant was of no  adverse  interest  before
    he left Sri Lanka, his criminal activity in the UK judged  against  the
    expert report of Dr Smith was not connected in any way to the LTTE  and
    there was no reason to  suspect  he  would  be  a  threat  to  national
    security given that he was convicted of a single violent  offence  with
    four other Tamil young men.   Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  panel's
    conclusion that the Appellant would not be at risk on return  was  open
    to them on the evidence before them and the report of Dr Smith, applied
    to the facts as the panel found them, did not lead  to  an  alternative
    conclusion.

48.  In conclusion, I find that reading the determination  as  a  whole  the
    panel were entitled to conclude that Section 72 of the 2002 Act applied
    and the Appellant had failed to rebut the presumption  that  he  was  a
    danger to the public.  Accordingly, the Appellant could not rely on his
    asylum claim to prevent his  deportation.  Notwithstanding,  the  panel
    went on to consider his claim and his treatment in relation to  Article
    3. This was challenged in ground 4 of the grounds of appeal.

Ground 4

49.  In relation to the medical evidence the panel  concluded  at  paragraph
    43:

         "It is the Appellant's contention that he has been tortured and  he
         relies on Dr Longman's medical report. It is appropriate to look at
         that report. With the greatest of respect to Dr Longman, we do  not
         find it persuasive. Firstly, the report was prepared over a  period
         of an hour and a half on 27th February 2014.  From that we take  it
         that the Appellant only met Dr Longman for  that  length  of  time.
         Further, Dr Longman's CV  is  as  a  GP.  Whilst  her  biographical
         details  set  out  other  interests  they  do  not  reflect   other
         qualifications. Despite this, Dr Longman seeks to conclude that the
         Appellant could be a suicide risk on return, has  made  conclusions
         on the evaluation of lesions  suffered  by  the  Appellant  and  at
         paragraph 6.4.2 has made  conclusions  on  the  Appellant's  mental
         state as to his ability to seek appropriate psychological  help  in
         Sri Lanka. To reach these conclusions after such a short period  of
         time and whilst  taking  into  account  the  lack  of  professional
         qualification held by the expert, when  balanced  against  all  the
         other factors  found  in  this  matter,  do  not  lead  us  to  the
         conclusion that the Appellant would be at risk on return or that he
         would be subject to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  pursuant  to
         Article 3."

50.  At paragraphs 31 and 32 of Pool v GMC in the High Court stated:

         "31. Thirdly, in my judgment,  the  Panel  was  not  wrong  in  the
             conclusions that they reached. The Appellant was  not  on  the
             Specialist Register in the category of general psychiatry.  He
             had not completed any higher professional training. They  were
             right to conclude that his qualifications and training did not
             equip him to be  an  expert.   In  terms  of  experience,  the
             Appellant's clinical practice was in the care of offenders and
             others with similar  needs  in  secure  units  and  the  Panel
             accepted that would  involve  liaison  with  others  including
             mental health teams in the community. The Panel accepted  that
             the Appellant had considerable experience in the treatment  of
             women with personality disorders. The question  was,  however,
             whether that experience equipped  him  to  act  as  an  expert
             witness in assessing the fitness to practise of an  individual
             working in the community.

          1. The Panel were right to say that the experience the  Appellant
             had was not in treating patients in  community  settings  (his
             experience of working in community setting was when he  was  a
             senior houseman and was some time ago). It was  right  to  say
             his  experience  was  not   focussed   on   the   occupational
             functioning of patients which was the subject  matter  of  the
             case with which he was dealing with. In that regard, the Panel
             was entitled to conclude that he was  not  an  expert  in  the
             field of general adult psychiatry."

51.  In this case, Dr Longman's CV does not disclose  that  she  is  on  the
    Specialist  Register  in  relation  to  psychiatry,  although  she  has
    experience of assessing asylum seekers in the community and in  writing
    medico-legal reports.

52.  Accordingly, I am not persuaded  by  Ms  Akther's  submission  that  Dr
    Longman's opinion, that the Appellant would be at risk  of  suicide  if
    returned and therefore he would be at  risk  of  Article  3  treatment,
    meant that the panel were not entitled to reach the findings set out in
    paragraph 43

53.  Even taking into account the experience Dr Longman  relies  on  in  her
    letter of 23rd July 2013, she has had psychological training  available
    to all GPs and she has worked in psychiatry in a hospital setting.  Her
    CV discloses that she worked as a locum from August  2012  to  February
    2013 in various posts in psychiatry, medicine and surgery and that from
    August 2011 to August 2012 she was a Foundation Doctor  in  year  2  at
    University Hospital  in  Bristol  where  she  underwent  a  four  month
    foundation programme in psychiatry.  I am of  the  view  that  risk  of
    Article 3 ill treatment on the  basis  of  suicide  was  not  made  out
    because the panel were entitled to find that  Dr  Longman  was  not  an
    expert in this regard.

54.  In relation to the  numerous  scars  that  the  Appellant  has  and  Dr
    Longman's assessment of those scars,  again  she  has  no  professional
    qualification nor is she present on the Specialist Register.   However,
    she has  experience  of  visiting  detainees  and  asylum  seekers  and
    preparing medical reports in relation to torture.  It is clear from her
    report that she is well aware of the Istanbul Protocol. She found  that
    the overall pattern of lesions was highly consistent with  the  history
    given by the Appellant. Notwithstanding that  experience,  the  panel's
    findings at paragraph 43, in my view, cannot be said  to  be  perverse.
    They have given substantial reasons  for  why  they  do  not  find  her
    opinion  as  to  the  Appellant's  physical  and  mental  state  to  be
    persuasive and those findings were open to  them  on  the  evidence.  I
    appreciate that Dr Arnold has come  to  a  different  opinion,  but  it
    cannot be said that the panel's findings were not within the reasonable
    range of responses open to them.

55.  The Upper Tribunal decision relied on by Ms Akther, where Dr  Longman's
    report had been put before the Tribunal, was not before the  panel  and
    in fact post-dated the panel's decision. Ms Akther relied  on  in  this
    decision to show that the Upper  Tribunal  had  accepted  Dr  Longman's
    report and, therefore, the panel's comments were in fact inappropriate.
     On reading the decision that was not in fact the case.  The  judge  in
    that case concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  in
    his assessment of the Appellant's credibility  and  directed  that  the
    matter be re-heard.  The judge had also failed to properly  assess  the
    medical evidence, a medical report from Dr Longman, and the matter  was
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the case  to  be  reconsidered.
    The fact that Dr Longman's report is referred to in another decision of
    the  Upper  Tribunal  is  irrelevant  to  the  Tribunal's  findings  at
    paragraph 43.

Ground 5

56.  In relation to the delay although the determination was  prepared  just
    over three months after the appeal was heard it was not possible to say
    that the panel misdirected itself in any way because of that  delay  or
    that their findings were not sustainable as a result.

Conclusion

57.  Accordingly, I find that reading  the  determination  as  a  whole  the
    panel was entitled to make the findings that the Appellant  had  failed
    to rebut the presumption that he had failed to show he would be at risk
    of persecution and that he would not be at risk of Article 3  treatment
    on return.  The panel were entitled to  attach  little  weight  to  the
    opinion of Dr Longman and of Dr Smith for the reasons  that  they  have
    given.  The report of Dr Smith did  not  in  fact  establish  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk on return because of his association with  a
    criminal gang. The panel found that the Appellant had failed to show he
    was at risk of harm prior to leaving Sri Lanka and he would not  be  at
    risk on return. The panel's findings were open to them on the  evidence
    before them.

58.  Therefore, I find that there was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed and the decision dated 4th July 2014 shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 17th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 17th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
