
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02296/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 Anthony [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with  permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ
    Rintoul) granted on 7 February 2019, against a decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge N  J  Osborne)  which  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision to deport him taken by the Secretary of State
    on 30 October 2013.  The basis of  the  deportation  decision  was  the
    conviction of the appellant at the Bristol Crown Court on 19 March 2012
    of five offences involving the possession  with  intent  to  supply  of
    class A drugs (heroin and crack cocaine) and possession of  a  class  B
    controlled drug (cannabis/cannabis resin).  He was sentenced  to  total
    of 2 years imprisonment.

 2. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant relied upon Art 8 of  the
    ECHR and, in particular, the impact upon his spouse and three  children
    if  he  were  deported.   In  reaching  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal, Judge Osborne found that the  appellant  could  not
    establish Exception 2 in s.117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002") and para 399(a)  and  (b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  Judge Osborne  found  that  the
    consequences of the appellant's deportation would not be "unduly harsh"
    upon his  children  or  spouse.   Further,  applying  s.117C(6),  Judge
    Osborne  was  not  satisfied   that   there   were   "very   compelling
    circumstances over and above" those described in Exceptions E.1  and  2
    in s.117C(4) and (5) of the NIA Act 2002.

 3. In reaching his finding  in  respect  of  Exception  2,  Judge  Osborne
    approached the issue of whether the impact upon the appellant's  spouse
    and children would be "unduly harsh" in accordance with  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  617.   As  a
    result, he balanced the seriousness of the appellant's offences against
    the impact upon the appellant's spouse and children.

 4. At the time of Judge Osborne's decision, that was a correct application
    of the law.  However, subsequently the Supreme Court overruled MM in KO
    (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  In granting permission  to
    appeal UTJ Rintoul considered that it was arguable in the light  of  KO
    (Nigeria) that the judge had  misdirected  himself  as  to  the  proper
    approach to Exception  2  and  the  issue  of  whether  the  impact  of
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" upon his family.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Howells who represented the  Secretary  of
    State, accepted that the judge had materially erred in  law  in  taking
    into account the public interest (in the form of the seriousness of the
    appellant's offending) in reaching his finding as to whether the impact
    upon his family of his deportation would be "unduly harsh".  Mr Howells
    accepted that Judge Osborne's decision should,  as  a  result,  be  set
    aside and the decision be remade.  Further,  he  acknowledged  that  as
    Judge Osborne's decision was almost twelve  months  ago,  it  would  be
    necessary at  a  rehearing  to  consider  the  up-to-date  position  in
    relation to the appellant's family.  He acknowledged that it  would  be
    prudent that the rehearing should be de novo  in  order  that  findings
    could be made on the present circumstances of  the  appellant  and  his
    family.

 6. The respondent's concession was correctly made.  I  accept  that  Judge
    Osborne materially erred in law in dismissing the appellant's appeal by
    misdirecting himself (albeit through no fault of his own) in accordance
    with the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  MM  (Uganda)  in  applying
    Exception 2 in s.117C(5) of the NIA Act 2002.  MM (Uganda) has now been
    overruled by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).  As a consequence,  his
    decision cannot stand.  I set it aside and it must be remade.

 7. It is clear from Judge Osborne's decision  that  his  factual  findings
    were based to a significant extent upon  his  assessment  of  the  oral
    evidence given by the  appellant  and  his  spouse.   In  remaking  the
    decision, the judge is likely to have to make his or her own assessment
    of the credibility of the appellant (and indeed his spouse)  in  making
    factual findings as to  the  family's  present  circumstances  and  the
    impact upon them of the  appellant's  deportation.   I  agree  with  Mr
    Howells' position that the judge should make the  new  factual  finding
    unconstrained by those of Judge Osborne and his view of  the  appellant
    and  his  spouse  formed  when   they   gave   evidence   before   him.
    Consequently, I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de
    novo rehearing.  None of Judge Osborne's findings are preserved.

Decision

 8. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and I set it aside.

 9. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing.  The appeal should be listed before a judge who  has
    not previously been involved with the  appeal,  namely  Judge  Osborne,
    (and Judge Britton and Judge Davidge  who  have  also  previously  been
    involved in the appeal).



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                                         Dated 11, June 2019




