
[pic]
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02268/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ricardo o'Neil harrison
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy
For the Respondent:    Mr Harding


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this case we maintain the designations as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Thus Mr Harrison is the  Appellant,  the  Secretary  of
    State the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1979.  He arrived in  the
    UK as a visitor in August 1999 and was granted leave to enter  for  six
    months.  Variations of leave followed including  as  the  spouse  of  a
    person present and settled in the UK.  In April  2003  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.

 3. In August 2007 he was convicted of possession of a class  A  drug.   He
    was fined.

 4. In November 2011 he was convicted of various offences including assault
    occasioning actual bodily  harm  and  supplying  class  A  drugs.   His
    sentence in total was four years and nine months' imprisonment.

 5. On 31 October 2013 a deportation order was made by virtue of s32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

 6. He appealed.

 7. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 6 August 2014 and 13 April  2015
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Tiffen allowed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds (Article 8).

 8. In essence, she found that the Appellant has a strong relationship with
    his teenage son by a previous relationship, his daughter aged 5  and  a
    baby daughter by his present partner.  There is also a stepdaughter.

 9. She concluded at paragraph 52 of her determination that the  effect  of
    the proposed deportation on the children would be 'extremely  serious'.
    Having 'taken into account the considerable weight to be given  to  the
    public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals  particularly
    where ... the provision of drugs causes such misery and distress to the
    community', she, nonetheless, considered that the Appellant has  'shown
    deep remorse for his actions and a clear  intention  to  care  for  his
    family in the future'.

10. She went on: 'Taking this into account and the serious  effect  on  his
    children, I do not believe that  the  public  would  wish  to  see  him
    removed from his family or for three children plus a stepdaughter to be
    left without a father to whom they can turn for guidance and advice and
    care in their  upbringing.   I  conclude  that  the  interests  of  the
    children in this appeal are very compelling circumstances sufficient to
    outweigh the public interest in removal of the Appellant'.

11. Permission to appeal was sought by the Respondent which was granted  on
    22 May 2015.

12. At the error of law hearing before us Mr Harding,  for  the  Appellant,
    conceded that the decision showed material errors of law such  that  it
    had to be set aside.

13. We agreed.

14. It suffices to note the following: In Chege (section 117D - Article 8 -
    approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC) the Tribunal stated that the  correct
    approach where an appeal on human rights grounds has  been  brought  in
    seeking to resist deportation, is to consider (i) is  the  Appellant  a
    foreign criminal as defined by s117D (2) (a), (b) or (c); (ii)  if  so,
    does he fall within paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules;
    (iii) if not are there very compelling circumstances  over  and  beyond
    those falling within 399 and 399A relied upon, such  identification  to
    be informed by the seriousness  of  the  criminality  and  taking  into
    account the factors set out in s117B.

15. There is no dispute  that  the  Appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal  as
    defined.

16.  In  this  case,  however,  although  the  FtT  Judge  (at  [42])  made
    perfunctory reference to paragraphs 399 and 399A and the need for  very
    compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  identified  in  those
    paragraphs,  she  entirely  failed  to  carry  out  an  assessment   in
    accordance with the structured legal framework required.

17. In the refusal letter it is conceded that it would be unduly harsh  for
    the children to live in Jamaica.  However, among the other requirements
    to be considered, the judge failed to  consider  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to remain  in  the  UK  without  him.  No
    findings were made on, for example, whether the children's needs  could
    continue to be adequately met by their mother who has always been their
    primary carer. Also, no reasoned findings  were  made  to  justify  the
    conclusion (at [52]) that the effect of  deportation  on  the  children
    would be 'extremely serious'.

18. Having failed to consider on the facts whether paragraph  399  or  399A
    applied, the judge went straight to  'very  compelling  circumstances'.
    She failed to engage with the requirement  that  the  'very  compelling
    circumstances' are 'over and above those described  in  paragraphs  399
    and 399A' (paragraph 398).  She also appears not to have considered the
    provisions of s117C in respect of  foreign  criminals  sentenced  to  a
    period of at least four years.

19. Further, (at [52]) she failed to identify any factors  which  would  be
    'very compelling circumstances'.

20. Moreover, the judge erred in stating (at [52]) that she did not believe
    that 'the public would wish to see (the  Appellant)  removed  from  his
    family or for three children plus a stepdaughter to be left  without  a
    father to whom they can turn for guidance and advice and care in  their
    upbringing'.

21. It was not open to the judge to substitute her own view of  the  public
    interest in deporting the Appellant since Parliament has  set  out  the
    public interest in s32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and Part  5A  of  the
    2002 Act.  In LC (China) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1310  the  Court  of
    Appeal stated that where a person is sentenced to a term of four  years
    or more, weight to  be  attached  to  public  interest  in  deportation
    remains very great.

22. In variously misdirecting herself on material aspects of  the  law  and
    failing to give adequate reasons she erred in law.

23. By consent the decision was set aside to be remade.

24. The parties were content that  as  facts  will  need  to  be  found  on
    material issues, the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be reheard with no findings preserved.

25. We therefore direct accordingly.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the extent of setting aside the  FtT  decision
    and remittal for rehearing  and  fresh  decision,  to  be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted bench.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

