
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02022/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 17 December 2014                         |On : 19 December 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, born in September 1988.  Following  a
grant of permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
to revoke a deportation order previously made against him, it was  found  at
an error of law hearing on 30 June 2014 that the Tribunal  had  made  errors
of law in its decision. Directions were made for the decision be  set  aside
and re-made by the Upper Tribunal with respect to the question  of  risk  on
return under Article 3 of the ECHR.

The appellant was encountered by police on 21 October 2004  and  claimed  to
have entered the United Kingdom  clandestinely  the  previous  day.  He  was
issued with illegal entry papers and detained. He then claimed asylum as  an
unaccompanied child, aged 16 years, and  was  released  the  same  day  with
reporting restrictions but failed to report and was listed as an  absconder.
He failed to complete a Statement of Evidence Form and to  comply  with  the
asylum process and his asylum application was accordingly  refused  on  non-
compliance grounds on 25 August 2005.

On 13 September 2006 the appellant was convicted of possession of  a  false,
improperly obtained identity document and was sentenced to four months at  a
Young Offenders Institution.  On  21  February  2008  he  was  convicted  at
Maidstone Crown Court of two counts of sexual activity with a  female  child
under 16 and was sentenced on 8 May 2008  to  four  years'  detention  in  a
young offender's institution,  registered  on  the  sex  offenders  register
indefinitely, disqualified from working with children and put  on  a  sexual
offenders prevention order. As part of his sentence he was  recommended  for
deportation.

On 11 August 2008 the appellant  made  a  fresh  claim  for  asylum.  On  29
October 2009 a deportation order was made against him under  the  provisions
of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  a  decision  was  made  the  same  day  that
section 32(5) of the 2007 Act applied and refusing  his  asylum  claim.  His
appeal against that decision was heard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  11
February 2010 and was dismissed. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
was refused.

On 1 March 2013 the appellant submitted  a  fresh  asylum  claim  which  was
treated as an application to revoke the deportation order  and  was  refused
on 23 September 2013, following an interview on 30 July 2013.

The Appellant's Claim

The appellant claimed to be  at  risk  on  return  to  Eritrea  for  various
reasons, including his religion, his illegal exit from the country, being  a
failed asylum-seeker, his lack of loyalty  to  the  regime  and  because  he
would be conscripted into the Eritrean army. He claimed  to  have  converted
from Catholicism to Pentecostal Christianity together with  his  family,  in
2000, and to have attended church in Eritrea and experienced problems  as  a
result, including the arrest of his parents and sister in 2002 and  his  own
arrest together with his mother in May 2004. He tried to  leave  Eritrea  at
that time but was stopped at a checkpoint and sent back to his home  village
when he produced his student identity card. In August 2004 the  police  came
to his house looking for him and threatened his family. He left  Eritrea  in
September 2004, travelling on foot to Kesala, Sudan. He  then  travelled  to
Khartoum before flying to France on 19  October  2004  and  from  France  he
travelled by lorry to the United Kingdom.

In dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision to deport him  the
First-tier Tribunal, in its decision of 16 February 2010, found his  account
to be lacking in credibility and concluded that he had fabricated his  claim
after arriving in the United Kingdom. The Tribunal did not find that he  had
given a credible account of his journey to the United Kingdom  and  rejected
his claim as regards his membership of the Pentecostal church. The  Tribunal
did not consider that the appellant would be regarded  as  a  deserter  from
military service, did not accept his claim  as  regards  his  father's  past
allegiance to the ELF, did not accept that he would be  at  risk  as  having
left Eritrea illegally, did not accept that he would be at  risk  by  reason
of being forced  to  undertake  military  service  and  concluded  that  his
deportation would not put the United Kingdom in breach  of  its  obligations
under the Refugee Convention or the ECHR. The appeal was  dismissed  on  all
grounds.

The  appellant's  fresh  claim,  made  on  1  March  2013,  was   based   on
developments recognised in the more recent country guidance in  MO  (illegal
exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011]  UKUT  190.  It  was  submitted  on
behalf of the appellant that he was at risk  of  forcible  conscription  and
persecution on return to Eritrea and that, regardless of the  fact  that  he
had been found not to be  a  credible  witness  and  to  have  left  Eritrea
legally, he was still at risk as a failed asylum seeker.  Those  submissions
were expanded  upon  in  further  representations  made  on  behalf  of  the
appellant on 12 September 2013, in which it was submitted that there was  no
evidence to show that he fell within the  two  narrow  exception  categories
referred to in MO for people eligible for exit visas and, as  such,  it  had
to be concluded that he had left Eritrea illegally.

The respondent considered the representations as a  request  to  revoke  the
deportation order previously made against  the  appellant  and  refused  the
claim in her letter of 23 September 2013, concluding that section 72 of  the
Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  was  applicable  to   the
appellant and that in accordance with Article 33(2), the Refugee  Convention
did not prevent his removal from the United Kingdom. The respondent did  not
accept that the appellant left Eritrea  illegally  and  considered  that  he
would be at no risk on return. It was not considered that his removal  would
breach his human rights and the exceptions to  deportation  accordingly  did
not apply to him.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 13 January 2014. The appeal was essentially pursued  on  Article
3 grounds as the s72 certification was not challenged. The Tribunal did  not
find the appellant to be a truthful witness and did not accept that  he  was
a member of the Pentecostal Christian church and that he would  be  at  risk
on such a basis. It was not accepted that he would be treated,  upon  return
to Eritrea,  as  someone  who  had  evaded  army  conscription  and  it  was
considered that there was a  real  possibility  that  he  had  left  Eritrea
legally. The Tribunal considered there to be  no  reason  why  the  Eritrean
authorities would be aware that the appellant was  a  failed  asylum  seeker
and considered that he would not be at any risk on  return  and  accordingly
dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal  was  sought  on  various  grounds  and  was  initially
refused.  However  permission  was  subsequently  granted,  upon  a  renewed
application, on 29 April 2014, on the limited ground that  it  was  arguable
that the Tribunal had failed properly to apply MO and had failed to  make  a
clear finding on whether or not the appellant left Eritrea illegally.

  12. At an error of law hearing on 30 June 2014 the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination was found to be materially  flawed,  for  the  following
      reasons:

"12. As was made clear  in  the  previous  country  guidance  in  MA  (Draft
    evaders; illegal departures; risk) Eritrea CG [2007]  UKAIT  00059  and
    continued to be the case in the more recent  guidance  in  MO,  illegal
    exit is a key factor in assessing risk on return to Eritrea. That being
    so, it was incumbent upon the Tribunal to make clear  findings  on  the
    circumstances and nature of the appellant's exit from  Eritrea  and  to
    support such findings with  full  and  proper  reasons.  As  the  Upper
    Tribunal found in MO at paragraph 116, those reasons have to go  beyond
    assumptions arising  from  generalised  adverse  credibility  findings,
    particularly in the case of an appellant of draft age.

13. In the appellant's case, the Tribunal rejected his claim  to  have  left
    Eritrea illegally, finding at  paragraph  18  that  there  was  a  real
    possibility that he had left Eritrea legally. However there is a  clear
    lack of reasoning accompanying that finding and  a  failure  to  engage
    with and address the guidance in  MO.  Of  particular  concern  is  the
    Tribunal's failure to  make  any  reference  to,  or  findings  on  the
    documentary evidence at pages 65 and  66  of  the  appellant's  bundle,
    despite that evidence being specifically referred to  in  the  skeleton
    argument before the panel (paragraph 35). The reliability or  otherwise
    of that evidence was clearly relevant to the question of  illegal  exit
    and the failure by the Tribunal to make any findings on it, when  taken
    together with the absence of full and proper reasoning to  support  its
    conclusions, leads me to conclude that the decision simply cannot stand
    and must be set aside.

14. Accordingly I find that the Tribunal made material errors  of  law  such
    that its decision has to be set aside and re-made, with respect to  the
    question of legal/ illegal exit and the issue  of  risk  on  return  to
    Eritrea.

15. At the hearing I indicated to the parties that, in the  event  that  the
    Tribunal's decision was set aside and was to be re-made there  appeared
    to be no need for further oral evidence, given the limited  basis  upon
    which permission was granted.  However,  upon  reflection,  and  having
    further considered the documentary evidence at  pages  65  and  66,  it
    seems to me that there is a need for the appellant to  provide  further
    details about that letter including its provenance and his  ability  to
    obtain such evidence from  Eritrea.  The  findings  otherwise  made  in
    regard to credibility are preserved. "


The following directions were made for the resumed hearing:

"Directions

(a) No later than ten  days  before  the  date  of  the  next  hearing,  any
    additional documentary evidence relied upon by either party  is  to  be
    filed with this Tribunal and served on the opposing party, to include a
    statement from the appellant addressing the provenance of the letter at
    pages 65 and 66 of his bundle of evidence.
(b) Both parties are to file with the Tribunal  and  serve  upon  the  other
    party a skeleton argument setting out  all  lines  of  argument  to  be
    pursued at the hearing and in particular applying the guidance in MO to
    the appellant's circumstances."

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before us for a resumed hearing on 17 December 2014.

The appellant gave oral evidence before us, through  the  court  interpreter
in the Bilin language. He adopted his more recently  made  statement  which,
in compliance with the Tribunal's directions, provided some  explanation  as
to the provenance of the document at page 65 of the appeal bundle, namely  a
letter from the Eritrean authorities demanding from his father  the  payment
of a penalty for his illegal exit from the country.  When  presented  by  Mr
Walker with the results of a Eurodac search  indicating  that  he  had  been
apprehended and fingerprinted in Italy, he admitted that he  was  indeed  in
Italy in September 2004. He said that he had not told the Home  Office  this
when interviewed because he feared being sent back to  Italy.  He  confirmed
his route to the United Kingdom, stating that  he  left  Eritrea  in  August
2004, crossed the border illegally into Sudan  with  the  assistance  of  an
agent paid for by his uncle, travelled through the Sahara desert by  car  to
Libya, took a boat from Libya  to  Italy,  left  Italy  after  being  denied
accommodation there and took a train to France from where he then  travelled
clandestinely in a lorry to the United Kingdom. He  confirmed  that  he  had
never taken part in any events or demonstrations in favour of  the  Eritrean
government in the United Kingdom  and  had  never  paid  any  money  to  the
Eritrean Embassy.

When cross-examined, the appellant said that he had last  had  contact  with
his parents in January 2014 and had lost contact with his brothers in  Sudan
a year ago. With regard to the document at page 65  of  the  appeal  bundle,
the government had withdrawn the  demand  for  payment  of  the  outstanding
fine. He obtained the letter produced as evidence from his  paternal  uncle,
at page 6 of the supplementary bundle,  through  his  cousin  who  had  been
living in Germany for ten years. He had only recently got in touch with  her
when a friend who had visited Germany met with her.  She  had  left  Eritrea
legally with a marriage visa.

In response to our further questions, the appellant said that  the  Eritrean
government had found out through their  informants  that  he  had  left  the
country illegally and a police officer had  delivered  by  hand  the  letter
about the penalty fee to his father in October  2006,  following  which  his
father had been summonsed to the government offices to pay the fine but  had
paid only a part of it. His father had been released from prison  some  time
in 2006 and he found out about that in mid-2011.

In his submissions, Mr Walker relied on paragraph 132 of MO and asked us  to
find that in light of  the  appellant's  age  and  the  date  when  he  left
Eritrea, at a time when the regime  took  a  less  restrictive  approach  to
issuing exit visas, and given the adverse credibility findings made  against
him, it ought not to be accepted that he left the country illegally. He  was
not evading the draft at the time he left and he would  be  at  no  risk  on
return.

Mr Palmer submitted that even if it was not proven that the  appellant  left
Eritrea illegally he would still be at risk as a  failed  asylum-seeker  and
as  someone  who  would  be  conscripted.  He  relied  upon  a  Home  Office
Operational Guidance Note (OGN) of February  2014  in  submitting  that  the
appellant qualified for  protection  on  the  basis  of  being  forced  into
indefinite military service as well as on the  basis  of  his  inability  to
show pro-government activity and payment of tax for the Eritrean  government
during his stay in the United Kingdom.

Consideration and findings

We accept that if the appellant had left Eritrea illegally,  as  he  claims,
he would very likely encounter hostility from the Eritrean  authorities.  We
note in that respect paragraph 133(iv) of the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in
MO:

    "(iv) The  general  position  adopted  in  MA,  that  a  person  of  or
    approaching draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over  and  still  not  above  the
    upper age limits for military service, being under 54 for men and under
    47 for women) and not medically unfit who is accepted as  having  left
    Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely to  be  regarded  with  serious
    hostility on return, is reconfirmed...."

 It was on that basis that the Tribunal in MA considered that a  finding  as
to whether an Eritrean appellant had shown that  it  was  reasonably  likely
that he or she had left the country illegally was likely to  be  crucial  in
deciding risk on return to that country.

In MO the Upper  Tribunal  made  it  clear  at  paragraph  133(iii)  of  its
determination that a finding that an appellant lacked  credibility  was  not
in itself a sufficient basis upon which to  conclude  that  their  claim  to
have left Eritrea illegally was not to be believed:


    "the general position concerning illegal exit remains as  expressed  in
    MA, namely that illegal exit by a person of or  approaching  draft  age
    and not medically unfit cannot be assumed if they had been found wholly
    incredible."

However, MO focussed in particular on the change in circumstances since  the
decision in MA and the fact that the Eritrean regime had,  since  2006,  and
particularly since August/ September 2008, taken  a  much  more  restrictive
approach to issuing exit visas, noting that since that  time  there  were  a
number of indications that it had become more  difficult  for  Eritreans  to
obtain lawful exit from Eritrea. With regard to those people found  to  have
left Eritrea prior to August/ September 2008, the Tribunal at paragraph  132
in MO said the following:

    "That brings us back to the significance  of  determining,  if  at  all
    possible,   whether   a   person   left   Eritrea   before   or   after
    August/September 2008. If they left before, it seems  to  us  that  the
    guidance given in MA remains broadly applicable and that, even if of or
    approaching draft age,  if they have been found wholly incredible, they
    are likely to  be  found  not  to  have  established  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return."


That in turn reflects the findings of the Tribunal in MA at paragraph 449:

    "A finding as to whether an Eritrean appellant has  shown  that  it  is
    reasonably likely he or she left the country  illegally,  is  therefore
    likely to remain crucial in deciding risk on  return  to  that  country
    (see paragraph 234 above). In making such  a  finding,  judicial  fact-
    finders will need to be aware  of  evidence  that  tends  to  show  the
    numbers of those exiting Eritrea illegally appear to be substantially
    higher than those who do so legally  and  that  distaste  for  what  is
    effectively open-ended service at the behest of the state lies behind a
    good deal of the current emigration from Eritrea. Nevertheless, where a
    person has  come  to  this  country  and  given  what  the  fact-finder
    concludes (according to the requisite  standard  of  proof)  to  be  an
    incredible account of his or her experiences, that person may well fail
    to show that he or she exited illegally."


Accordingly, on the basis that the appellant's  evidence  is  that  he  left
Eritrea in 2004, credibility is a significant issue in  determining  whether
or not he exited Eritrea  illegally,  albeit  having  regard  to  the  above
comments as to  the  statistics  showing  substantially  higher  numbers  of
illegal, rather than legal, exits.

We note that the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (as it then  was),  in  its
determination of 16 February 2010, found the appellant to be wholly  lacking
in credibility, rejecting his claim as regards his  religion,  his  father's
past allegiance to the ELF and his account of  his  journey  to  the  United
Kingdom and concluding that he  had  fabricated  his  entire  asylum  claim.
Further,  Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Ockelton,  in  refusing
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  15  April  2010,  found  that
there was no basis in credible evidence  for  assuming  that  the  appellant
left Eritrea illegally. We note also that the First-tier  Tribunal,  in  its
decision  of  20  February  2014,  found  the  appellant's  claim  to   lack
credibility and rejected his account in its entirety  (and  other  than  its
conclusion on illegal exit, those adverse findings have been preserved).

With regard to the appellant's evidence before  us,  we  also  make  adverse
findings. The appellant  relies,  as  evidence  of  his  illegal  exit  from
Eritrea, upon  a  document  at  page  65  of  his  main  appeal  bundle  and
translated  at  page  66,  a  letter  purporting   to   emanate   from   the
Administrative Office of Keren advising his father about finalising  payment
of a penalty fee, which he claims was delivered by hand to  his  father.  It
is his case, as expressed in his initial statement of  8  January  2014  and
his supplementary statement of 9 October 2014,  that  his  father  had  been
fined by the  Eritrean  government  because  he  (the  appellant)  had  left
Eritrea illegally and that his father had paid part  of  the  fine  and  had
since had the rest of the debt wiped off.  However  the  existence  of  that
document, dated 10 October 2006, and the explanation as to how  it  came  to
be with his father, was plainly contradicted by previous evidence  given  by
the appellant in his interviews and at his appeal hearing in February  2010,
as to a complete lack of contact  with  his  father  since  his  arrest  and
detention in 2002.

As can be seen from paragraph 9 of the  determination  of  the  AIT  in  the
appellant's appeal in February 2010, discrepancies had  already  been  noted
by the Tribunal in the appellant's account of when he last saw  his  father,
which he blamed on interpretation problems, but he maintained at  that  time
that he had last seen his father (and his sister) in  2002  when  they  were
arrested, so suggesting that they remained in detention at the time  of  the
appeal hearing (in February 2010). His explanation for the existence of  the
document of 10 October 2006 is to be found in his  statement  of  8  January
2014 where he claimed to  have  only  discovered,  after  recently  resuming
contact with his family, that his father had  actually  been  released  from
prison in 2006. In his later statement of 9 October 2014 and at the  hearing
before us his evidence was modified once again to suggest that  he  had  had
contact with his father at an earlier stage, in mid-2011, and had found  out
at that time that he had been released  some  time  in  2006.  However  that
entire explanation was contradicted by the  grounds  of  appeal  before  the
First-tier Tribunal, dated 4 October 2013, which stated at paragraph 5  that
his father was released from prison around  November  2011  and  also  by  a
letter of 23 December 2010 from the UKBA at  page  69  of  the  main  appeal
bundle  confirming  the  appellant's  claim  that  all  his  family  members
including his father, were living at that time in their village in  Eritrea.
It is also relevant to note the GCID case record sheet at  page  80  of  the
appeal bundle, where the case  notes  record  information  provided  by  the
appellant at an interview in late 2011/early 2012 stating that  his  parents
still lived in Eritrea and that he was in contact with them and that he  had
provided the same information previously.

Clearly the appellant was  unable  to  give  a  consistent  account  of  his
father's whereabouts and  his  earlier  indication  that  his  father  still
remained in prison after his arrest in 2002 stood in  direct  conflict  with
the claim that his  father  had  been  served  with  a  fine  for  his  (the
appellant's) illegal exit in 2006. We note that the letter  at  page  65  is
not on properly headed paper as would reasonably be expected of an  official
document and, contrary to the appellant's claim, has  not  been  accompanied
by a receipt for payment of  part  of  the  fine.  We  also  note  that  the
appellant was unable to provide us with  a  coherent  chronology  of  events
involving  the  demand  for  payment  of  the  fine.   In   all   of   those
circumstances, and considering also the appellant's previous  reliance  upon
false documentation, we do not consider the document at  page  65  to  be  a
reliable piece of evidence and we reject  the  appellant's  account  of  the
government fining his father for his illegal exit from Eritrea. We place  no
weight upon the document at page 6 of the  supplementary  bundle,  a  letter
from his uncle claiming that the appellant was smuggled out of Eritrea,  and
do not consider it to be reliable and independent  evidence.  We  note  that
the letter claims that he left Eritrea because the government wanted him  to
join the army, which is inconsistent with the reason  he  gave  himself  for
fleeing the country and is unsupported by any evidence  or  suggestion  that
he was due to be conscripted at the time he left. We consider such  attempts
by the appellant to support his claim of  illegal  exit  by  producing  such
unreliable evidence serve only to undermine the claim further.

The appellant has lied about his journey to  the  United  Kingdom,  choosing
previously not to mention his stay and encounter  with  the  authorities  in
Italy, he has fabricated an asylum claim based  on  religion  and  perceived
political activities and has lied about his family circumstances. It  became
apparent from his evidence before us that he has family living in Germany  -
a cousin who was able to obtain an exit visa from Eritrea  around  the  same
time as the appellant himself left the country. It seems also  that  he  has
family or other close links in Sudan as his evidence  was  that  his  family
attended a wedding there in  2011  and  his  parents  were  able  to  travel
freely. It is relevant to note that  there  is  a  paucity  of  evidence  of
difficulties faced by those seeking exit visas from Eritrea in 2004.  As  we
stated earlier, MO focussed on the  situation  subsequent  to  2006  and  Mr
Palmer did not point to evidence relating to the period of time relevant  to
the appellant's departure. In all  of  these  circumstances  we  reject  his
claim to have exited Eritrea in the manner stated and we  conclude  that  he
was able to exit lawfully, most likely through  the  sponsorship  of  family
living outside the country, on the basis of seeking to visit  or  join  such
family members or on another basis, and that he did so at  a  time  and  age
sufficiently in advance of the age  of  conscription  so  as  to  avoid  any
problems from the authorities on the grounds that he was  seeking  to  avoid
being drafted. We conclude that his claim to have exited  Eritrea  illegally
was a fabrication intended to frustrate  his  deportation  from  the  United
Kingdom and that he would in fact be at no risk on return to Eritrea on  any
such basis.

We do not consider that the appellant would be considered as a draft  evader
or would be at risk on the basis of having failed to undertake his  military
service, considering in particular the  young  age  at  which  he  left  the
country and the absence  of  any  suggestion  that  his  family  have  since
received conscription papers  for  him.  We  take  note  of  the  Tribunal's
findings in MA at paragraph 448:

    "A person of or approaching draft age who fails to show that he or  she
    left Eritrea illegally is not reasonably likely to be  regarded  with
    serious hostility on return, even if the authorities are  or  would  be
    reasonably likely to be aware that that person had made an unsuccessful
    asylum claim abroad."


That particular issue was also considered by  the  AIT  in  the  appellant's
appeal, in February 2010 and its findings, that the appellant would  not  be
at risk on such a basis was upheld by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  refusing  to
grant permission to appeal in the decision of 15 April  2010.  The  decision
in MO has not undermined such findings.

Mr Palmer relied upon the Home Office Operational Guidance Note of  February
2014 in submitting that there remained a risk to the appellant as  a  result
of being conscripted on return to Eritrea. However we do not  consider  such
a submission to  be  supported  by  any  background  information.  Paragraph
3.12.19 of the OGN, as quoted at  paragraph  2.5  of  Mr  Palmer's  skeleton
argument, is related specifically to those  who  exited  Eritrea  illegally,
which we have found not  to  be  the  case  with  the  appellant.  Paragraph
3.12.20 refers to  applicants  of  draft  age  who  did  not  leave  Eritrea
illegally but face being  drafted  on  return,  but  goes  no  further  than
stating that there may be situations where such applicants may  qualify  for
protection "on the particular circumstances of their  case".  We  have  been
provided with  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant's  particular
circumstances would be such that he would face a real likelihood of  Article
3 risk on such a basis.

Mr Palmer also submitted that the appellant would be at  risk  as  a  failed
asylum seeker who had not shown support for the Eritrean government  in  the
United Kingdom and who had not paid taxes to the Eritrean  Embassy.  However
such arguments were considered in full in MO and  comprehensively  rejected.
Consideration was given in particular in that case,  at  paragraph  130,  to
situations such as those of the appellant whose evidence  was  found  to  be
wholly incredible. We consider for the same reasons that there is  no  basis
upon which to conclude that the  appellant  would  be  perceived  as  having
committed an act of  disloyalty  by  virtue  of  having  claimed  asylum  or
otherwise. Mr Palmer submitted that the OGN goes further than  the  findings
in MO in that respect and refers to paragraph 6 of the OGN. However we  find
nothing in that paragraph to suggest that the appellant would be  perceived,
by having claimed asylum abroad (if, indeed, it was even known that  he  had
done so), to have acted disloyally to the Eritrean government.  In  view  of
his overall lack of credibility there is no reason to accept  his  claim  to
have paid no taxes to the Eritrean government, but in any  event  we  uphold
the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that he could  not  be  expected  to
have paid a proportion of his income  when  he  has  not  been  working  and
earning an income in the first place.

We find, accordingly, that the appellant has failed to show  that  he  would
be at any risk on return  to  Eritrea.  He  has  failed  to  show  that  his
deportation would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  ECHR
and has failed to establish that he falls within the exceptions set  out  at
section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007. Accordingly his appeal  is  dismissed
on all grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law and the decision has accordingly been set aside.  We  re-make
the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  We  continue
    that order, pursuant to pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






                               Signed   Date 19 December 2014
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
