

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/02501/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court  |Determination Promulgated|
|On 6 and 20 August 2014                |On 29 August 2014        |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NASEER AHMED
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
instructed
For the Respondent:    Mr H. Bashir (at resumed hearing on 20 August 2014
only)

                          Determination and Reasons

   1. This determination is in two parts. Part 1, apart from a correction in
      respect of the appellant's date of release from  custody,  is  in  the
      form already served upon the parties  in  respect  of  the  Tribunal's
      decision following the hearing on 6 August 2014 that the determination
      of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed  an  error  of  law  such  as  to
      require that it be  set  aside  and  the  decision  remade.  For  that
      purpose, the hearing was reconvened on 19 August 2014. Part 2  is  the
      redetermination of the appeal.


                      Part 1: Decision on error of law.


   2. The Secretary of State, who was the respondent before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, has been granted permission to appeal against  the  decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Law, sitting with a non-legal  member  of
      that tribunal.  The  panel,  by  a  determination  promulgated  on  27
      February 2014, allowed Mr Ahmed's appeal against a  deportation  order
      made by the Secretary of State pursuant to s32 of the UK  Borders  Act
      2007 as a consequence of his conviction before  the  Birmingham  Crown
      Court on  26  April  2010  of  offences  including  causing  death  by
      dangerous driving, possession  a  controlled  drug  of  class  B,  and
      driving while unfit through drink or drugs.. For those offences he was
      sentenced to a total of seven years and four months  imprisonment.  He
      has now served that sentence and was released on bail from immigration
      detention on 18 July 2014.


   3. That means, of course, that Mr Ahmed  is  the  respondent  before  the
      Upper Tribunal and it is the Secretary of State that is the appellant.
      But for ease of reference, as we shall be  reproducing  extracts  from
      the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  we  shall  refer  the
      parties as they were below so that references to the appellant are  to
      Mr Ahmed and references to the respondent  are  to  The  Secretary  of
      State.

   4. Although the appellant was represented before the First-tier Tribunal,
      he appeared before us unrepresented, explaining that he  had  gone  to
      see his solicitor the day before to tell him not to come. He had  dis-
      instructed his solicitor because he was expensive  and  the  applicant
      had discovered on the internet that it was now  possible  to  instruct
      counsel directly, without paying for a solicitor as well. He said also
      that his father had recommended an alternative representative. On that
      basis he applied for an adjournment so that he could arrange for fresh
      representation.

   5. The appellant has known since April 2014, when  permission  to  appeal
      was granted, that a hearing would follow before the Upper Tribunal. He
      was released on bail on 18 July and has had adequate  notice  of  this
      hearing yet it was just  the  day  before  the  hearing  he  told  his
      solicitors not to represent him at this hearing, but he has  taken  no
      steps at all to  instruct  a  fresh  representative.  We  refused  the
      application for an adjournment, explained to the  appellant  what  the
      purpose and format of  the  hearing  would  be  and  ensured  that  he
      understood the issues that we would have to address, making clear that
      we were first concerned with the question of whether, for the  reasons
      set out in the respondent's grounds and developed by Mr Smart  in  his
      submissions, the determination disclosed an error of law  such  as  to
      require the decision to be set aside.

   6. There is no doubt that the offences committed by  the  appellant  were
      very serious indeed. The sentencing remarks of the judge who sentenced
      the appellant to a total of 88 months imprisonment are set out in  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal. The Crown Court Judge said:

           "Some years ago  you  were  convicted  of  driving  with  excess
           alcohol [3 December 1998].  Therefore  on  the  day  that  I  am
           concerned with, this was not the first time you had  done  that.
           It made  what  happened  even  more  serious.  You  were  not  a
           qualified driver who had passed a test. You took a  drunken  and
           irrational decision to drive a  large  vehicle.  You  were  very
           drunk indeed. That is evidenced not  only  by  the  reading  two
           hours later but by that which was observed  by  the  police  and
           indeed admitted to by you to the probation officer.


           It may be that you were also affected by cannabis. It  does  not
           matter. The net effect was that you were in absolutely no  state
           to drive a vehicle. You then  proceeded  to  drive  with  excess
           speed and in an erratic and  dangerous  fashion.  The  road  was
           busy. There were people about. You  went  round  an  island  the
           wrong way confronting wholly innocent  people  in  a  Volkswagen
           who, despite the lady driver's attempt to avoid you, resulted in
           a collision. Mercifully and it is only a matter of chance,  they
           were not severely injured or worse.


           You went on to drive on the wrong side of the road along a  dual
           carriageway. You were driving at excessive speed,  ignoring  red
           traffic lights. You hit a  Skoda  vehicle,  again  driven  by  a
           wholly innocent person, who, as a result of which, together with
           the occupants in his car, were injured.  You  then  ploughed  on
           into a Renault which was driven by a lovely man, a family man, a
           good father, a sportsman, a good husband and a good son and your
           terrible driving resulted in his death when your car crashed the
           driver's side of his car. He is  being  completely  responsible,
           taking all the precautions that were available to him, having  a
           seatbelt; it would not help him against  the  stupid,  dangerous
           and  wicked  driving  by  you.  You  then  tried  to  run  away.
           Fortunately  there  were  members  of  the  public  who  behaved
           responsibly and the police, helped by them, were able to  detain
           you."

   7. The judge then summarised the reasons  given  by  the  respondent  for
      rejecting the submissions advanced on the appellant's  behalf  to  the
      effect that he fell within one of  the  exceptions  to  liability  for
      automatic deportation. In particular,  the  respondent  accepted  that
      deportation would bring about an interference with rights protected by
      Article 8 of the ECHR; that the appellant had five children,  four  of
      whom  were  British  Citizens  and  that  the   appellant   maintained
      relationships with other family members in the United Kingdom and that
      he himself had lived in the United Kingdom since he arrived aged  just
      a few months old. The respondent recognised that the best interests of
      the children may lie in the appellant remaining in the United  Kingdom
      so that they could continue  their  relationships  with  him  but  the
      respondent considered that, in the light of  the  seriousness  of  the
      offence, it would be a proportionate  interference  with  that  family
      life to proceed with the appellant's deportation.


   8. The judge then summarised the broad range of  evidence,  both  written
      and oral, offered on the appellant's behalf. Again, that is set out in
      some  detail  in  the  determination  but  for  present  purposes  the
      following summary will suffice.

   9. The appellant himself gave  oral  evidence,  adopting  and  confirming
      everything set out in his witness  statement.  He  explained  that  he
      married his wife in Pakistan in 1994, although she had  not  moved  to
      the United Kingdom until 2000. He said that his wife could not  accept
      the possibility that he might have to leave and return to Pakistan. He
      said he was genuinely sorry for the mistakes he had made in  the  past
      and was not the person he used to be.

  10. The appellant's wife, who although living in this country for 14 years
      needed the assistance of an Urdu interpreter to  give  oral  evidence,
      said that while the appellant had been in  prison  she  received  help
      from family members. She had maintained a good relationship  with  the
      appellant, visiting him regularly in  prison.  It  had  been  hard  to
      manage without him, especially as one of her children was ill and  she
      had health problems as well.

  11. The appellant's parents also both gave evidence with the assistance of
      an interpreter. While his father  did  all  he  could  to  assist  his
      daughter in law while his son was in prison,  he  was  in  receipt  of
      kidney dialysis following a transplant in 2010. The appellant's mother
      said that the appellant's wife had to look after the children  all  by
      herself, although the appellant's  nephew  gave  evidence  before  the
      judge to the effect that while the appellant  was  in  prison  he  had
      helped by doing the shopping  and  looking  after  the  children  when
      needed, although as he had a family of his own there was only so  much
      he could do.

  12. Next, having summarised the submissions advanced by both parties,  the
      judge directed himself as to the  legal  framework.  Since  a  correct
      understanding of this  is  at  the  heart  of  the  challenge  to  the
      determination now pursued by the respondent, we reproduce that here:

  13. Sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  provide,  so  far  as
      material:
           "32. Automatic deportation
           (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-
           (a) who is not a British citizen,
           (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
           (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.
           (2) Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a  period  of
           imprisonment of at least 12 months.
           ...
           (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act
           1971 (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive
           to the public good.
           (5) The Secretary of State must  make  a  deportation  order  in
           respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33). ...'
           33. Exceptions
           (1) Section 32(4) and (5)-
           (a) do not apply where an  exception  in  this  section  applies
           (subject to subsection (7) below), and
           ...
           (2) Exception 1 is where removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
           pursuance of the deportation order would breach-
           (a) a person's Convention rights, or
           (b)  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
           Convention."
  14. The relevant Immigration Rules are, so far as relevant, as follows:
           362. Where Article 8 is raised in  the  context  of  deportation
           under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim  under  Article  8  will
           only succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 9  July
           2012 are met, regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to
           deport or the deportation order, as appropriate, was served.
           ...
           396. Where a person is liable  to  deportation  the  presumption
           shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in
           the public interest to deport where the Secretary of State  must
           make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK
           Borders Act 2007.
           397. A deportation order  will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
           removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
           Convention. Where deportation would not  be  contrary  to  these
           obligations, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
           the public interest in deportation is outweighed.
           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and
           (a) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good because they have been convicted of  an  offence
           for which they have been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
           of at least 4 years;
           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good because they have been convicted of  an  offence
           for which they have been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
           of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,
           their offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
           offender who shows a  particular  disregard  for  the  law,  the
           Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
           paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will  only
           be in exceptional circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
           deportation will be outweighed by other factors.
           399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and
           (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
           (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
           7 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
           decision; and in either case
           (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           UK; and
           (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for  the
           child in the UK; or
           (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  settled  in
           the UK,  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and
           (i) the person has lived in the UK with valid leave continuously
           for at least the 15 years immediately preceding the date of  the
           immigration decision (discounting any period  of  imprisonment);
           and
           (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
           partner continuing outside the UK.
           399A. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least  20
           years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
           (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no  ties
           (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which
           he would have to go if required to leave the UK; or
           (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he  has  spent  at  least
           half of his life  living  continuously  in  the  UK  immediately
           preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting  any
           period of imprisonment) and he has no  ties  (including  social,
           cultural or family) with the country to which he would  have  to
           go if required to leave the UK.
           399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave  may  be
           granted for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall be
           given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State deems
           appropriate. Where a person who has previously  been  granted  a
           period of leave under paragraph 399B would not fall for  refusal
           under paragraph 322(1C),  indefinite  leave  to  remain  may  be
           granted."
  15. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:
           "Right to respect for private and family life
           1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
           life, his home and his correspondence.
           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic well-being of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
           protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the
           rights and freedoms of others."
  16. The judge then set out the approach he took to his assessment  of  the
      evidence. At para 42 of his determination he said this,  the  emphasis
      being added by the judge:

           "This brings us back to the statement at the  end  of  paragraph
           398, namely that "the Secretary of State in assessing that claim
           will consider whether paragraphs 399 or 399A applies and, if  it
           does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the
           public interest in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
           factors." [our emphasis]. We  regard  the  question  of  whether
           exceptional circumstances exist  as  being  encompassed  in  the
           issues which we would have to consider under Article  8  itself.
           However, to preserve the two stage approach, we  have  first  of
           all asked ourselves whether there are exceptional  circumstances
           in this case that outweigh the public interest in deporting  the
           appellant."

  17. Before embarking upon his  search  for  the  presence  of  exceptional
      circumstances  such  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   the
      appellant's deportation the judge made a series of findings of fact:


        a. The appellant's marriage is genuine and  continues  to  subsist,
           notwithstanding the appellant's imprisonment;
        b. The appellant has  five  children,  four  of  whom  are  British
           citizens. The eldest, who was born in  Pakistan,  has  now  been
           living in the United Kingdom for 13 years;
        c. It is in the best interest of the children  that  the  appellant
           should remain in the United Kingdom so that  their  relationship
           with him can be maintained;
        d. The appellant has made good progress in  prison  and  had  shown
           real remorse. In particular there was a "very good  report  from
           the carpentry teacher";
        e. The appellant does not have an alcohol problem;
        f. If the appellant were deported,  his  wife  and  children  would
           remain in the United Kingdom.

      Further, the judge recorded a finding that:

           "Although the respondent suggests in the refusal letter that the
           appellant's wife could manage without the appellant  because  of
           the wider family support available, the evidence at the  hearing
           did not support that view."

      That is not altogether easy to follow, given  evidence  of  assistance
      provided, in particular, by the nephew who gave evidence about  having
      helped the appellant's wife by doing the shopping  and  looking  after
      the children when needed.

  18. The  key  findings  are  set  out  between  paras  58  to  60  of  the
      determination. At para 58 the judge said:


           "In the ordinary run of cases, if  there  is  such  a  thing,  a
           foreign  criminal  sentenced  to  7  years   and   four   months
           imprisonment would be unlikely to be able to resist deportation.
           In most cases, that would be the proper reflection of  society's
           revulsion and  a  stark  deterrent  to  others.  We  have  asked
           ourselves why that should not be the outcome in this  case.,  an
           outcome which can only  be  avoided  if  there  are  exceptional
           circumstances outweighing the respondent's legitimate aims."


  19. In our judgment it is at this point that the  judge  fell  into  legal
      error. At para 59 the judge identified the  maters  he  considered  to
      constitute exceptional circumstances such as to  outweigh  the  public
      interest in deportation in this  case.  Those  can  be  summarised  as
      follows:


        a. Enormous disruption would be cause to the  appellant's  children
           if he were deported, whether they give up  their  lives  in  the
           United Kingdom to accompany him  to  Pakistan  or  whether  they
           remain here without him;
        b. The best interests of the children "point to the appellant being
           allowed to remain";
        c. The appellant has himself lived in the United Kingdom  since  he
           was six months old so that "he would find it  difficult  now  to
           readjust to life in Pakistan";
        d. Deportation of the appellant would have  an  adverse  effect  on
           other family members, "chiefly his wife and parents" and because
           of  financial  constraints,  visits   to   Pakistan   would   be
           infrequent;
        e. There is a low risk of the appellant reoffending.

      Which led the judge to conclude:

           "Accordingly, for all these reasons, we have decided that  these
           exceptional circumstances do outweigh  the  public  interest  in
           deporting the appellant. We find that the applicant is  entitled
           to succeed under paragraph 398 of the immigration rules."


  20. The difficulty with that reasoning is that the judge had lost sight of
      the  legal  framework  that  he  had   identified   earlier   in   his
      determination. The "exceptional circumstances" he identified were  not
      exceptional at all and it was not, rationally, open  to  him  to  find
      that they were exceptional. Subject to what we say  below,  they  were
      all matters encompassed  by  paras  399  or  399A,  but,  because  the
      appellant had committed an offence for which he was sentenced to  more
      than four years imprisonment he did not stand to benefit  from  having
      established that he fell within those  provisions.  That  is  because,
      given the seriousness of the crimes committed, the public interest  in
      his deportation was much more cogent and compelling so that  something
      more than falling within para 399 or 399A was  required  in  order  to
      outweigh the public interest. It is because of that the  circumstances
      for such a foreign criminal need to be not just such as to fall within
      paras 399 or 399A but they need to be exceptional. Nothing  less  than
      that will do.


  21. Put another  way,  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  setting  aside  the
      applicable  legal  framework  and  so  leaving  out  of  account   the
      respondent's view of where the public interest lie in respect of those
      foreign criminals who have committed particularly serious crimes. That
      is not just the respondent's view. It reflects  established  Strasberg
      jurisprudence. By leaving that out of account, the judge  has  started
      the exercise of striking a balance between the competing interests  in
      play from  the  wrong  point.  The  starting  point  is  a  compelling
      presumption in favour of deportation, significantly more pressing than
      is the case for those sentenced to less than four years  imprisonment.
      That is why something more than the factors identified  in  paras  399
      and 399A  will  be  required  for  such  foreign  criminals  to  avoid
      deportation.

  22. The qualification  expressed  above  is  that  the  finding  that  the
      appellant has no alcohol problem and that he  represents  only  a  low
      risk of reoffending are not matters falling within para  399  or  399A
      but they are not capable of amounting  to  exceptional  circumstances.
      There is nothing exceptional about a  man  serving  a  lengthy  prison
      sentence having avoided alcohol and asserting an intention to maintain
      that  position  after  release.  More  difficulty  still  arises  from
      reliance of a  low  risk  of  reoffending  because  that  discloses  a
      fundamental misunderstanding of the  statutory  scheme  applicable  to
      foreign criminals.

  23. The appellant is someone whose deportation is conducive to the  public
      good because  he  is  a  foreign  criminal  in  respect  of  whom  the
      respondent must make a deportation order unless an exception  applies,
      which the respondent found it did not. The fact that  he  is  said  to
      represent a low risk of further offending does not in any way  at  all
      reduce the importance  or  cogency  of  the  public  interest  in  his
      deportation. He faced deportation because  of  the  offences  that  he
      committed on this occasion and not because those offences were part of
      a series of offences possibly to be committed in the future.  He  does
      not cease to be a foreign criminal  because  there  is  no  reason  to
      believe that he will reoffend in future.

  24. For these reasons we are satisfied that the judge made an error of law
      and his decision cannot stand. The decision to allow the appeal  under
      the immigration rules will be set aside and be remade afresh. There is
      no need, though, to disturb his findings of fact,  which  to  a  large
      extent go unchallenged by the respondent in any event.

  25. The judge also erred in law in  going  on  to  carry  out  a  separate
      freestanding assessment of the family life claim under  Article  8  of
      the ECHR. That is because, as is established by MF  and  the  line  of
      cases that followed it, the provisions of  the  rules  in  respect  of
      assessment of the article 8 claim of a foreign criminal is a  complete
      code, assuming, of course, it is correctly  applied:  MF  (Nigeria)  v
      SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

  26. In any event, as the judge made clear at para 70 of the determination,
      the reasons for allowing the appeal, quite separately, on human rights
      grounds were the same, legally flawed, reasons set out in  respect  of
      the decision to allow the appeal  under  the  rules.  Therefore,  that
      decision will be set aside also.

  27. Having informed the parties that the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal
      would be set aside  and  the  reasons  for  that  being  necessary  we
      indicated to the appellant that, in  accordance  with  the  directions
      that had been sent out with the notice of the grant of  permission  to
      appeal, the expectation was that we would proceed immediately  to  re-
      make the decision.  The  appellant  renewed  his  application  for  an
      adjournment  of  about  two  weeks  in   order   to   instruct   fresh
      representatives.

  28. Having regard to the fact that the effect of s.19 of  the  Immigration
      Act 2014 is to insert a new s117 into the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002, with effect from 28 July 2014, the  remaking  of  the
      decision in this appeal will now be informed by those  provisions.  It
      was plain that the appellant had no understanding of this and was  not
      equipped to deal with that issue and so we granted his application for
      a short adjournment so that he could seek legal advice, whether or not
      that led to arrangements for him to  be  represented  at  the  resumed
      hearing.

  29. We advised the parties also that the resumed hearing would proceed  at
      the same venue, the Birmingham Magistrates Court, at 10.00 a.m. on  20
      August 2014. The appellant is aware that the hearing will  proceed  on
      that date whether or not he has arranged to be represented.

                    Part 2: Redetermination of the appeal

  30. The appellant, who was unrepresented at the earlier hearing,  was  now
      represented by  Mr  Bashir.  Without  objection  from  Mr  Smart,  who
      appeared for the respondent at both of the hearings before  the  Upper
      Tribunal,  Mr  Bashir  submitted  witness  statements  from  both  the
      appellant and his wife.  However,  he  acknowledged  that  they  added
      nothing of any real significance to the facts already established  and
      that it was not necessary  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  receive  any
      further oral evidence.


  31. Mr Bashir opened his submissions  with  an  acknowledgement  that  the
      decision now at large before the Upper Tribunal is to be  informed  by
      reference to the matters set out in section 117A-D of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, inserted by s19  of  the  Immigration
      Act 2014. He recognised also that there has been an amendment  to  the
      immigration rules applicable to deportation issues.

  32. Relying upon the findings of fact  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  together  with  the  undisputed  facts  as  recorded   in   the
      respondent's letter setting out the reasons for refusing to revoke the
      deportation order, Mr Bashir submitted  that  the  following  factors,
      when   considered   together,   constituted   the   very    compelling
      circumstances demanded by s117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002 for a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced  to  a
      period of imprisonment of at least four years to  establish  that  the
      public interest in his deportation has been outweighed:

        a. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom aged just  3  months
           old and has remained here since  then,  making  only  occasional
           visits to Pakistan, the last being in 2000, the  year  in  which
           his wife, to whom he was married in Pakistan in  1994,  came  to
           join him in the United Kingdom;
        b. He has, therefore, been resident in the United  Kingdom  for  39
           years and his wife for 14 years;
        c. They have 5 children, 1 of whom has special needs and 4 of  whom
           are British citizens. The respondent has accepted that it is  in
           the best interests of the  children  for  the  appellant,  their
           father, to remain here so that the family  unit  remains  intact
           and that it is not reasonable to expect the appellants  children
           or his wife to accompany him to Pakistan,  so  that  deportation
           will break up the family;
        d. It would be unduly harsh for the  children  to  be  deprived  of
           their father's presence within the family  unit  in  the  United
           Kingdom;
        e. The appellant has elderly parents in the United Kingdom;
        f. The appellant is fully integrated into the  United  Kingdom  and
           should be treated, effectively, as if he were a British citizen;
        g. The appellant would have no family support in Pakistan and would
           find it difficult to find accommodation and a job so  that  this
           would represent very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
           there;

  33. Mr Smart, for the respondent, submitted that these  factors,  properly
      considered, could not be considered to amount to the  very  compelling
      circumstances required for the appellant  to  avoid  deportation.  The
      appellant speaks the local language, has visited Pakistan on a  number
      of occasions and has renewed his  Pakistani  passport  despite  living
      here for a long period of time. He holds a current  passport  and  his
      continuing links with his country of nationality are indicated by  his
      choosing to  marry  a  Pakistani  national  who  still  speaks  little
      English, despite having lived here for 14 years. Nothing had been said
      about whether his wife had relatives in Pakistan who might be able  to
      assist the appellant upon return, other than  that  her  parents  were
      deceased. The matters advanced, in  Mr  Smart's  submission,  did  not
      amount to very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration on
      return to Pakistan.


  34. The respondent  accepts  that  one  of  the  appellant's  children  is
      receiving special needs tuition but there  is  no  evidence  that  the
      presence of the appellant  has  any  positive  impact  upon  that  or,
      indeed, that his absence during the four years he spent in prison  had
      any negative impact. The evidence did not, he  submitted,  demonstrate
      that the effect upon the children would be unduly harsh.

  35. Mr Smart  submitted  that,  in  any  event,  that  was  not  the  test
      applicable so that even if  the  tribunal  were  to  accept  what  was
      asserted by the appellant, as he is a foreign criminal  who  has  been
      sentenced to more than 4 years imprisonment, something more had to  be
      shown than significant obstacles to integration in  Pakistan  or  that
      the effect of separation on his children or wife would be unduly harsh
      because that was the effect of s.117C of the 2002 Act.

  36. Before considering those submissions it is necessary to  set  out  the
      new legal framework now applicable to the remaking of the decision.

  37. So far as is relevant s117 of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

           117A Application of this Part

               . (1)  This  Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                 required to determine whether a  decision  made  under  the
                 Immigration Acts-

                     . (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private
                       and family life under Article 8, and

                     . (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of
                       the Human Rights Act 1998.

               . (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court
                 or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                     . (a)  ...

                     . (b)  in cases concerning the deportation  of  foreign
                       criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                       117C.

               . (3)  In subsection  (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                 means the  question  of  whether  an  interference  with  a
                 person's right to respect for private and  family  life  is
                 justified under Article 8(2).

           117B ...

           117C Article 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
           foreign criminals

               . (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the  public
                 interest.

               . (2)  The more serious the offence committed  by  a  foreign
                 criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation
                 of the criminal.

               . (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C")  who  has  not
                 been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or
                 more, the public interest requires C's  deportation  unless
                 Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

               . (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                     . (a)  C has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                       Kingdom for most of C's life,

                     . (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated  in  the
                       United Kingdom, and

                     . (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                       integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                       to be deported.

               . (5)   Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                 subsisting relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a
                 genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship   with   a
                 qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on  the
                 partner or child would be unduly harsh.

               . (6)  In the  case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                 sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  four
                 years, the  public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
                 there are very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
                 those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                 (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be
                 taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering
                 a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the  extent
                 that the  reason  for  the  decision  was  the  offence  or
                 offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

                 117D Interpretation of this Part

                 (1) ...

                 (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

                          . (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                          . (b)  who  has  been  convicted  in  the  United
                            Kingdom of an offence, and

                          . (c)  who-

                                . (i)  has been sentenced  to  a  period  of
                                  imprisonment of at least 12 months,


  38. It is clear from this that a structured approach is needed in  respect
      of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  more  than  4  years
      imprisonment.


  39. The starting point is to recognise that a  foreign  criminal  who  has
      been  sentenced  to  more  than  4  years  imprisonment  cannot  avoid
      deportation  by  demonstrating  that  his  circumstances  fall  within
      Exception 1 or 2.  Next, as s.117C(6) provides that for such a  person
      the  public  interest  requires  deportation  unless  there  are  very
      compelling circumstances over and above those described in  Exceptions
      1 and 2, it is plain  that  there  must  be  something  more  than  is
      required to demonstrate that the appellant would  have  fallen  within
      one of those Exceptions if that had been open to him. Therefore, it is
      helpful to look first at upon what factors  the  appellant  relies  to
      establish that he would have fallen within Exceptions 1 or 2 had those
      been open to him and then ask whether  he  had  anything  to  say,  in
      addition, that amount to very compelling circumstances.


  40. But, in seeking to establish those very compelling  circumstances  the
      appellant cannot rely upon factors he points to in order to  establish
      that he falls within Exceptions 1 or 2 because he would not then  have
      identified  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and   above   those
      described in those Exceptions.

  41. Applying this approach to the factors identified by Mr Bashir  in  his
      submissions, the respondent accepts that the appellant meets the first
      2 requirements of Exception 1 because he has  been  lawfully  resident
      here for most of his life and is plainly fully  integrated.  Thus,  to
      fall within Exception 1 the  appellant  must  demonstrate  that  there
      would  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his  integration   into
      Pakistan. Mr Bashir submits that is established because the  appellant
      has not visited Pakistan since 2000 and he has no  family  network  of
      support there. He would find  it  difficult  to  find  employment  and
      accommodation, especially as he does not  have  significant  financial
      resources to assist in doing so.

  42. We do not doubt that  the  appellant  would  find  it  challenging  to
      establish himself in Pakistan but we are  unable  to  accept  that  to
      amount  to  very  significant  obstacles  to  his   integration.   The
      requirement of primary legislation that there be not just  significant
      obstacles but very significant obstacles is not to be overlooked.  The
      only factor that arguably stands out from what might be thought to  be
      the ordinary is the fact that this appellant has  lived  here  for  39
      years, having arrived as a baby. But it is unambiguously clear that he
      has chosen to retain cultural and  other  ties  with  his  country  of
      nationality, including choosing a wife who remained in Pakistan for  6
      years after their marriage and who continues to speak Urdu as her main
      language  which  suggests  that  the  language  must   have   remained
      predominant in the appellant's home life.

  43. To fall within Exception 2 the  appellant  needs  to  demonstrate,  as
      indeed he has, that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
      his wife and children. But he must also show that the effect upon them
      of his deportation would be unduly harsh. In our judgement,  that  has
      not been established.

  44. The requirement that the effect be unduly harsh imports  reference  to
      the seriousness of the offence. That much is plain from the fact that,
      unlike  a  foreign  criminal  sentenced  to  more   than   12   months
      imprisonment but less than 4 years, a foreign  criminal  sentenced  to
      more than 4 years imprisonment does not have access to protection from
      deportation either by looking to para 399 of the immigration rules  or
      to  Exception  1  of  s117C  unless  able  to  show  very   compelling
      circumstances over and above the fact that deportation would  have  an
      unduly harsh effect upon the appellant's wife and children.  There  is
      no evidence before us that the children suffered any  particular  harm
      from being separated from him while he  served  his  prison  sentence,
      although we do not doubt that the children and  his  wife  missed  him
      during his absence. They maintained contact by visits and,  no  doubt,
      other  means  of  communication  and  that  can  continue  should  the
      appellant return to Pakistan.

  45. Mr Bashir submitted that the combination of his length  of  residence,
      that four of the children are British and one has spent  most  of  his
      life in the UK and that his wife has been here for fourteen years  are
      sufficient factors to render the effect  of  his  deportation  on  the
      children/wife as unduly harsh.

  46.  The evidence before  us,  considered  in  the  light  of  Mr  Bashir'
      submissions, does not in our judgement establish, given the absence of
      anything to support the  assertion  to  that  effect  and  the  public
      interest in the appellant's deportation, that the effect upon his wife
      and children would be unduly harsh.

  47. In any event, it is plain that this appeal falls to be dismissed. That
      is because, even if the appellant was able to establish that he  would
      face very significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan and/or that
      the effect upon his children would be unduly harsh he would then  need
      to go on to show something more than that. The effect of  s117C(6)  is
      that he needs to show that there  are  very  compelling  circumstances
      over and above what he has relied upon to establish that he would have
      fallen within Exceptions 1 or 2 had they been open to him .

  48. It seems to us that means that there must be factors not  accommodated
      within those Exceptions, or in addition to what is required  to  bring
      him within them, that speak cogently against deportation. In this case
      the appellant can point to the fact that he has elderly parents living
      in the United Kingdom. But if  separation  from  his  wife  and  minor
      children, whose bests interest are served by him  remaining  here,  is
      not sufficient to outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation  then
      plainly disruption of his  relationship  with  his  parents  will  not
      either.  We invited Mr Bashir to identify what factors  in  particular
      he relied upon to establish very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
      above that relied upon to qualify for Exception 1 or 2. He  said  that
      as the appellant has been here for 39 years since he was 3 months  old
      he should be treated, effectively, as a British citizen. We are unable
      to accept that submission. The length of  his  residence  has  already
      been taken regard of within the statutory framework we have discussed.
      The appellant is not a British citizen. That may well  be  because  he
      began to commit criminal offences in 1998,  a  Community  Serve  Order
      being imposed for offences of driving  a  motor  vehicle  with  excess
      alcohol and while disqualified and having  no  insurance.  Nor  do  we
      accept these matters taken together with the mental upset that he  may
      suffer on being separated  from  his  family,  including  his  elderly
      parents, combined with the difficulties  of  establishing  himself  in
      Pakistan are  of  sufficient  import  to  amount  to  very  compelling
      circumstances.


  49. For all these  reasons  we  are  satisfied  that  the  making  of  the
      deportation order was lawful and that there will be no infringement of
      any rights protected by article 8 of the ECHR as  a  consequence.  For
      the avoidance of any possible doubt,  we  have  looked  at  everything
      advanced on the appellant's behalf and  it  is  plain  that  the  same
      outcome would be delivered by an assessment of the appellant's article
      8 claim even outside the added focus now provided by s117 because  the
      appellant's deportation is plainly a  proportionate  response  to  the
      serious crimes he has  committed.  There  are  no  factors  not  fully
      accommodated by the statutory framework against which that  claim  now
      falls to be assessed  that  provide a basis for concluding otherwise.

  50. For the avoidance of doubt we have also considered  the  relevance  of
      the changes to the immigration rules that accompanied the coming  into
      force of s19 Immigration Act 2014. To a large extent these reflect the
      legislative change introduced by s.19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.
      Where there is  any  tension  between  those  amended  rules  and  the
      provisions of s117 of the 2002 Act, for example as might  be  detected
      in a comparison of paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a)  and  s.117C(5),  then  the
      primary legislation would prevail as that cannot be  displaced  by  an
      immigration rule. However, nothing of relevance to this appeal  arises
      from an examination of the amended immigration rules  which  no  doubt
      explains why neither representative addressed them in submissions.

   Summary of decision

  51. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law  and  their  decision  to
      allow the appeal is set aside.


  52. We substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the appeal.


                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    21 August 2014

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

