
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02164/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice,|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Belfast                              |On 25 November 2015                  |
|On 21 October 2015                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                       ANTONIO MANUEL ABEGOA VARANDAS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Ms  C  Tierney,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Gerard  Maguire
Solicitors
Respondents:  Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. By my decision dated 20 June  2014,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT")  was  set  aside.   My  decision  is  attached  at
    Appendix 1 hereto.



THE APPELLANT'S CRIMINALITY

 2. In brief compass, the underlying decision is that made by the Secretary
    of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State"),  dated  21
    October 2013, whereby it was determined that the Appellant, a  national
    of Portugal now aged 50 years, should be deported  to  his  country  of
    nationality under Regulation 21 of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations").  The  decision  recites
    the Secretary of State's assessment that the Appellant  was  considered
    to pose a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  "the
    interests  of  public  policy/public  security"  thereby  meriting  his
    deportation.   The  immediate  impetus  for  the   decision   was   the
    convictions made in respect of the Appellant for  offences  of  forgery
    and theft.  The Appellant first resided in Northern Ireland in 2006.

 3. The Appellant's criminal record in this  jurisdiction  has  four  basic
    components.  In 2009 he was  convicted  of  a  series  of  offences  of
    dishonesty committed in 2006, punished by a suspended sentence.   Next,
    in 2010, he was sentenced to six months imprisonment for the commission
    of two offences of theft and three breaches of his suspended  sentence.
    Third, in 2011, he was convicted of three offences of  theft,  punished
    by three months  imprisonment.   Finally,  on  28  June  2012,  he  was
    convicted, on indictment, of 13 counts of forgery  and  two  counts  of
    theft, attracting imprisonment for  one  year  followed  by  a  licence
    period of one year.  All of his previous offences had  been  prosecuted
    summarily.

 4. The Secretary of State's decision was based on the Appellant's criminal
    record.  It made reference to the Probation Service assessment  of  the
    Appellant, which identified a medium  likelihood  of  reoffending.   It
    recited the assessed risk factors, which  included  in  particular  the
    Appellant's  previous  heroin  addiction.   The  decision  maker   also
    considered the comments of the sentencing Judge, who pronounced himself
    satisfied that the Appellant did not present a risk of serious harm  to
    the public under the Criminal Justice (NI) Order  2008.   The  decision
    maker  also  considered  the  various  representations  made   on   the
    Appellant's behalf, together with  a  clinical  psychologist's  report.
    (considered in greater detail infra). The decision maker asserted  that
    the Appellant had relayed a significant untruth  to  the  psychologist,
    instancing this as proof of the  Appellant's  continued  engagement  in
    deceit and a reason to call into question any favourable assessment  of
    him based on a history provided by him.  The decision states:

         "It is not considered reasonable to leave the public vulnerable  to
         the effects of your reoffending".

5.   As regards proportionality, it was stated:

         "Given the threat that you pose to the public it is considered that
         your personal circumstances do not preclude your deportation  being
         pursued.  The decision to deport you complies with the principle of
         proportionality."

    Finally, the decision letter considered the  issue  of  rehabilitation.
    The assessment was made  that,  given  his  family  circumstances,  the
    Appellant could expect family support  upon  return  to  Portugal.   It
    further noted that no obstacle to his partner returning to Portugal had
    been identified.   The  Appellant's  claim  that  he  had  successfully
    attended a rehabilitation centre in Portugal was also  considered.   It
    was further noted that such support as the Appellant had received  from
    friends in Northern Ireland had proved inefficacious  in  breaking  his
    cycle of criminality.  This  assessment  culminated  in  the  following
    conclusion:

         "Therefore the view is taken that there is no reason why you  could
         not continue to work towards rehabilitation in  Portugal  with  the
         support of family members living there and that you do not need  to
         remain in the United Kingdom to become rehabilitated. Having regard
         to all the available information, it is concluded that  deportation
         to  Portugal  would   not   prejudice   the   prospects   of   your
         rehabilitation.  In any event it is considered that interference in
         your rehabilitation  would  be  proportionate  and  justified  when
         balanced against the continuing risk you pose to the public."

Decision of the FtT

6.   The decision of the FtT was  promulgated  in  January  2014.   The  FtT
    noted the roles of the agencies NIACRO and the Probation Service in the
    Appellant's rehabilitation.   It  evidently  accepted  the  Appellant's
    assertion that the reason for his  criminality  was  his  addiction  to
    heroin. It noted that, at that stage, the Appellant had  been  free  of
    drugs for  almost  two  years  and  continued  to  undergo  appropriate
    monitoring  and  therapy.  He  was  also  complying  fully   with   the
    requirements of his licence and had secured employment.   The  positive
    opinion of the Clinical Psychologist was highlighted.   Based  on  this
    and  other  pieces  of  evidence,  the  FtT  made  the  following  main
    conclusion:

         "We are therefore satisfied at this time and on the  basis  of  the
         current evidence that the  Appellant  does  not  pose  a  'genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society'."

    In this passage the Tribunal was quoting from  regulation  21(1)(c)  of
    the EEA Regulations. Finally, the FtT addressed its mind to the factors
    in regulation 21(6) which it was obliged to consider.  The  appeal  was
    allowed accordingly.

    The Decision Remade

7.   The Appellant's representatives are to be commended for the lengths  to
    which they have gone  in  the  preparation  and  presentation  of  this
    appeal.  Their endeavours include the  collation  of  relevant  updated
    evidence  and  well  composed  bundles.   While  it  would  have   been
    preferable to relist this appeal considerably sooner, I  should  record
    that the delay was  occasioned  mainly  by  complications  in  securing
    public funding.

8.   I have considered the following:

      a) All of the evidence available to the FtT.

      b) The testimony of the Appellant.

      c) The testimony of the Appellant's partner.

      d) The updated documentary evidence, which consists of a brief medical
         report; evidence of employment; character testimonials; and written
         statements of the Appellant and his partner.

    I have also had the benefit of the oral and written submissions  of  Ms
    Tierney of counsel.

9.   It is not disputed that the Appellant has been drug free for  a  period
    of some 3 � years.  Given this  consideration,  it  is  appropriate  to
    reflect at this stage on the report of Dr Pollock, dated  01  September
    2013.  Dr Pollock  is an experienced and respected Consultant  Forensic
    Clinical  Psychologist,  with  particular  expertise  in  working  with
    convicted offenders.   Applying  recognised  tools  of  assessment,  Dr
    Pollock, in  his  characteristically  comprehensive  report  expresses,
    firstly, the opinion that the Appellant has  the  designation  of  "low
    risk of harmful conduct in the future".

10.  Next, giving effect to the various tools  applicable  to  the  risk  of
    future reoffending, Dr Pollock notes that the Appellant is a person  of
    average intellectual abilities; he had secure attachment in  childhood;
    he has empathy and, in particular, "... shows genuine regrets and guilt
    for his actions during past offending"; and shows partial  evidence  of
    self-control.  Dr Pollock then turns to consider the seven motivational
    factor tools: all of these are positively present  in  the  Appellant's
    life. The same applies to all of  the  so-called  "external  protective
    factors".  Dr Pollock expresses the following omnibus opinion:

         "... Mr Varandas has sustained  lengthy  periods  of  time  without
         relapsing  to  drug  misuse  ....  He  presents  with  a  range  of
         protective factors within his current lifestyle .... He presents as
         motivated to address underlying problems and ..... he  is  actively
         seeking to engage with services that will  assist  him  to  achieve
         meaningful  changes.  He  does  not  present  with  antisocial   or
         psychopathic personality disorder  predictive  of  recidivism  ....
         [he] is capable of showing some insight into his behaviour .....

         I do take note that Mr Varandas has made  positive  efforts  whilst
         imprisoned towards improving  his  chances  of  sustained  recovery
         through participation in certain substance related  programmes  and
         educative work ....

         [He] should not be considered to represent a serious risk  of  harm
         to others through offending.  He represents a low risk  of  serious
         harm  to  others  if  he  reoffends.  ....   [He]  presents  as   a
         moderate/medium risk of acquisitive  reoffending,  most  likely  to
         become evident if the client relapses to drug misuse in response to
         stress or when placed under social pressure."

    Dr Pollock completes his opinion in the following terms:

         "I would express the opinion that, if the client remains  abstinent
         from drug misuse, the summary judgment of medium risk is likely  to
         diminish  significantly  and  that,  if  the  client  engages  with
         programmes  of  work  with  professionals  towards  improving   his
         emotional regulation and stress tolerance,  this  summary  judgment
         will be diminished further.  I find, therefore, that if the  client
         is able to sustain abstinence, he is less likely to commit  further
         acquisitive offences in the future."

    As these passages demonstrate, there is an inextricable  nexus  between
    the Appellant's heroin misuse and the issues of both  past  and  future
    offending.

11.  The main benefit arising out of the delay in relisting this  appeal  is
    that over two years have elapsed since Dr Pollock made the above expert
    assessment. Based on the further medical evidence  now  provided  (from
    the General Practitioner) and the evidence of  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner, which was not challenged in this  respect,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has not engaged in illicit substance consumption  since  mid-
    2012.  I further find that following his release on licence in mid-2013
    he has engaged positively with the  aforementioned  agencies.   I  make
    further findings that he has acquired a  series  of  qualifications  in
    English and  mathematics  (while  in  prison)  and,  post-release,  the
    necessary qualifications to be employed as a forklift truck driver.   I
    note, in this respect, the very positive testimonial from the  employer
    concerned. Also of significance is the stable relationship which he has
    developed with a Lithuanian lady during the past 1 � years.  It is  not
    without significance that this lady testified  that  her  husband,  now
    deceased, had been addicted to heroin, which I accept.  This  indicates
    that the Appellant's conduct and lifestyle generally have provided  her
    with sufficient confidence and  assurances  to  maintain  a  long  term
    relationship with him and to make plans for the  future.   Furthermore,
    she would be more equipped than most to identify the kind  of  stresses
    and weaknesses which might precipitate a relapse.  Finally, it is clear
    that the Appellant has had the  stabilising  influence  of  employment,
    with reasonable future prospects in this respect.

12. In summary, the main consequence of the delay in relisting this  appeal
    for final decision is that the Appellant presents a stronger  and  more
    compelling case at this stage than he did when he appealed successfully
    to the FtT in January 2014.

13. In  my  first  decision  I  rehearsed  at  some  length  the  statutory
    framework, in  [3]  and  do  not  repeat  this.  I  refer  also  to  my
    consideration of the jurisprudence and governing principles in  [14]  -
    [18].  One of the most recent contributions  to  the  jurisprudence  in
    this sphere  is  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MC  (Essa
    Principles Recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC).   Having  regard  to
    the principles enunciated therein, I am satisfied that  this  Appellant
    has  participated  fully  in  and  has   completed   a   programme   of
    rehabilitation which  began  during  his  period  of  imprisonment  and
    continued for one year  during  his  ensuing  licence  period.  I  find
    further that he has completed this programme successfully.

14. Bearing in mind the various findings rehearsed above, I  remind  myself
    that, per regulation 19(3)(b), the overarching question is whether  the
    Appellant's removal is justified on grounds of public policy or  public
    security in accordance  with  regulation  21.   As  regards  regulation
    21(5), this is clearly a case where the Secretary of  State's  decision
    was made under (b) and  (c).   The  crucial  question  is  whether  the
    Appellant represents  "a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society".  The
    application of this test requires an evaluative judgment on the part of
    the Tribunal.  This judgment is made on the basis of material  findings
    relating to the past and the  present,  coupled  with  findings  of  an
    evaluative and predictive nature.  In a case such as the present it  is
    not possible, absent a crystal ball, to make a  concrete  finding  that
    the person concerned will not reoffend. Rather, the exercise is one  of
    predictive evaluative judgment.

15. As regards regulation 21(6), consideration  whereof  is  obligatory,  I
    take into account  the  additional  factors  -  and  find  -  that  the
    Appellant's  connection  with  this  country  is  one  of   substantial
    dimensions, dating from 2006; his partner here is his only "family"  in
    the real sense, given that his only  sister  lives  in  Australia,  his
    mother resides in a care home in Portugal and they have had  no  family
    life for many years; it would  not  be  feasible  for  his  partner  to
    accompany him to Portugal, having  regard  to  her  maternal  and  care
    duties relating to her children  in  Northern  Ireland;  she  plays  an
    important role in maintaining the Appellant's law abiding and abstinent
    lifestyle; the  Appellant's  links  with  his  country  of  origin  are
    minimal; and his  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
    Kingdom are of an advanced nature.  I juxtapose these findings with the
    expert medical  evidence  rehearsed  above  and  the  other  series  of
    findings which I have made. Having done so, I conclude  that  the  test
    enshrined in regulation 19(3)(b), in tandem with  regulation  21(5)(c),
    is to be applied in the Appellant's favour.

DECISION

16. I therefore remake the decision by allowing the appeal.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date:  14 November 2015
                                 Appendix 1

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/02164/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ANTONIO MANUEL ABEGOA VARANDAS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

 Appellant:       Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
 Respondent:      Mr S McQuitty (of Counsel) instructed  by  Gerard  Maguire
                  Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary
    of State"), dated 26 April 2013, whereby it was  determined  to  deport
    the Appellant to his country of origin, Portugal.   In  thus  deciding,
    the Secretary of State rejected the Appellant's case  that  deportation
    would  be  contrary  to  the   Immigration   (EEA)   Regulations   2006
    (hereinafter "the 2006 Regulations") and, further, would  infringe  his
    rights under Article 8 ECHR.  On  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("the FtT"), the Appellant's case succeeded on both grounds.  The grant
    of permission to appeal to the Secretary of State giving rise  to  this
    further appeal is couched in the following terms:


         "The panel allowed [the  Appellant's]  appeal  against  deportation
         because they considered the Appellant's chances  of  rehabilitation
         were better if he  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  than  if  he
         returned to his own country.  In doing so they  arguably  erred  in
         law and failed to apply ESSA [2013]  UKUT  316  correctly  for  the
         reasons set out in the Respondent's grounds."


     The second limb of the grant of permission to appeal  focuses  on  the
    FtT's approach to the public interest. Thus are the  contours  of  this
    appeal.


Factual Matrix


 2. The material facts are uncontested  and  are  susceptible  to  succinct
    recitation. The Appellant is a  Portuguese  national,  aged  48  years.
    Between 2000 and 2006, he resided in England  and  Holland.   While  in
    Holland he accumulated eight criminal convictions.  In 2006 he went  to
    Northern Ireland.  During the ensuing six year period he augmented  his
    criminal record substantially, committing a total  of  43  offences  in
    this jurisdiction.  These consisted of thefts,  burglaries,  forgeries,
    driving offences and possessing Class A and Class B  drugs.   His  most
    recent convictions were registered at Newry Crown Court on 28 June 2012
    where, pursuant  to  a  plea  of  guilty,  he  received  a  determinate
    custodial sentence of 1 year, to be followed by a licence period of one
    year, in respect of forgery and  theft  offences.  His  licence  period
    expired recently, on 31 May 2014.


The Impugned Decision


 3. On 21 October 2013, the Secretary of State made a decision  to  make  a
    deportation order.  The statutory framework within which this  decision
    was made is shaped by certain provisions of the 2006 Regulations.    By
    regulation 19, it is provided:

         "(3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an  EEA  National  who  has
             entered the United Kingdom or the  family  member  of  such  a
             national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed  if
             -


             (a)  That person does not have or ceases to have  a  right  to
                  reside under these Regulations; or


             (b)  The Secretary of State  has  decided  that  the  person's
                  removal is justified on grounds of public  policy,  public
                  security or public health in  accordance  with  regulation
                  21."


      A decision of this genre  attracts  the  appellation  of  a  "relevant
      decision",  per regulation  21(1).    It  is  provided  in  regulation
      21(5):


        "Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy  or
        public security, it  shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
        proceeding paragraphs of this regulation, be  taken  in  accordance
        with the following principles:


              a)  the  decision  must   comply   with   the   principle   of
                 proportionality;


          b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
             of the person concerned;


          c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one
             of the fundamental interests of society;


          d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do  not  justify
             the decision;


          e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not, in themselves,
             justify the decision."

    This is followed by regulation 21(6):


         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."


    In accordance with regulation 15(1), an EEA National who has resided in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years  acquires  the
    right of permanent residence.  In the instant case, it is  agreed  that
    this Appellant did not acquire this right.

 4. The Secretary of  State's  decision  was,  predictably,  based  on  the
    Appellant's criminal  record.   It  made  reference  to  the  Probation
    Service  assessment  of  the  Appellant,  which  identified  a   medium
    likelihood of re-offending.  It  recited  the  assessed  risk  factors,
    which include in particular the Appellant's previous heroin  addiction.
    The decision maker also  considered  the  comments  of  the  sentencing
    Judge, who pronounced himself satisfied that  the  Appellant  does  not
    present a risk of serious harm to the public under the Criminal Justice
    (NI) Order 2008.  The decision maker  further  considered  the  various
    representations  made  on  the  Appellant's  behalf,  together  with  a
    clinical psychologist's  report.   The  latter  noted  the  Appellant's
    history  of  manipulation,  chronic  deceit  and  pathological   lying,
    together with the prevailing assessment  of  "moderate/medium  risk  of
    acquisitive reoffending, most likely to become evident  if  the  client
    relapses to drug misuse in response to  stress  or  when  placed  under
    social pressure".   The decision maker noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    relayed a significant untruth to the psychologist, instancing  this  as
    proof of the Appellant's continued engagement in deceit and a reason to
    call into question any favourable assessment of him based on a  history
    provided by him.  The decision states:


         "It is not considered reasonable to leave the public vulnerable  to
         the effects of your reoffending".


    As regards proportionality, it is stated:


         "Given the threat that you pose to the public it is considered that
         your personal circumstances do not preclude your deportation  being
         pursued.  The decision to deport you complies with the principle of
         proportionality."


    Finally, the decision letter considered the  issue  of  rehabilitation.
    The assessment was made  that,  given  his  family  circumstances;  the
    Appellant could expect family support  upon  return  to  Portugal.   It
    further noted that no obstacle to his Portuguese partner  returning  to
    Portugal had been  identified.   The  Appellant's  claim  that  he  had
    successfully attended a rehabilitation  centre  in  Portugal  was  also
    considered.  It was further noted that such support  as  the  Appellant
    has received from friends in Northern Ireland had proved  inefficacious
    in breaking his cycle of criminality.  This  assessment  culminated  in
    the following conclusion:


         "Therefore the view is taken that there is no reason why you  could
         not continue to work towards rehabilitation in  Portugal  with  the
         support of family members living there and that you do not need  to
         remain in the United Kingdom to become rehabilitated. Having regard
         to all the available information, it is concluded that  deportation
         to  Portugal  would   not   prejudice   the   prospects   of   your
         rehabilitation.  In any event it is considered that interference in
         your rehabilitation  would  be  proportionate  and  justified  when
         balanced against the continuing risk you pose to the public."


The FtT's Decision


 5.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the  FtT"),
    successfully.  Its determination  contains  the  following  passage  in
    [19]:


         "We consider that the prospects of the  Appellant's  rehabilitation
         are stronger in the UK where he has  the  support  of  NIACRO,  the
         Probation Service and the other state agencies than in Portugal, as
         it is unclear whether his mother and sister will return there  from
         Australia and for how long they will stay."




    Turning to consider the risk of reoffending, the FtT pronounced  itself
    satisfied that the Appellant had been drug free  for  almost  2  years,
    noting the evidence which supported this.  The Appellant  continued  to
    undergo appropriate monitoring and therapy.   He  was  complying  fully
    with the requirements of his license and had  secured  employment.  The
    FtT  also  highlighted  the   following   passage   in   the   clinical
    psychologist's report:


         "I would express  the  opinion  that  if  [the  Appellant]  remains
         abstinent from drug misuse the summary judgment of medium  risk  is
         likely to  diminish  significantly  and  that  if  [the  Appellant]
         engages  with  programmes  of  work  with   professionals   towards
         improving his  emotional  regulation  and  stress  tolerance,  this
         summary judgment will be diminished further.   I  find,  therefore,
         that if [the Appellant] is able to sustain abstinence, he  is  less
         likely to commit further acquisitive offences in the future."


    I have supplied the underlining simply for the purpose of  highlighting
    the essentially predictive nature of the psychologist's assessment  and
    the imponderables which it involves.


 6. The main finding made  by  the  FtT  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  is
    contained in [23]:

     "We have considered all of the evidence relating to the risk posed  by
        the Appellant and we are satisfied that if  he  remains  drug  free
        there is a low to medium risk of him reoffending.  We are therefore
        satisfied at this time and on the basis of the current evidence the
        Appellant does  not  pose  a  'genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
        serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
        society'.  Of course if the Appellant were to return to drug misuse
        and to reoffending it will be open to the Respondent to  reconsider
        this matter."


    The FtT expressed its omnibus conclusion in  the  following  terms;  in
        [25]:


         "We are satisfied that the decision to remove the  Appellant  under
         Regulation 19(3)(b) of the 2006 Regulations is not justified on the
         grounds of public policy, public security or public health security
         in accordance with regulation 21."


    This followed a recitation of the factors enshrined in regulation 21(6)
    which the  FtT  purported  to  consider.   Duly  analysed,  these  were
    confined to the Appellant's age (48); the duration of  his  links  with
    the United Kingdom (seven  years);  his  current  employment;  and  the
    absence  of   anything   in   his   personal   circumstances   weighing
    significantly in favour of deportation.


Conclusions


 7. Having described the exercise conducted by the  FtT  noted  immediately
    above,  I  consider  it  important  to  emphasise  the   function   and
    significance of  regulation  21(6)  of  the  2006  Regulations  in  the
    juridical framework under scrutiny. Before doing so, it is  appropriate
    to take cognisance of some of  the  other  central  provisions  of  the
    regime of the 2006 Regulations:


    (a)


 8. The effect of this provision is to oblige the decision  maker  to  take
    into account a  range  of  considerations  before  making  a  "relevant
    decision" on the ground of public  policy  or  public  security.   This
    exercise is obligatory ("must").  It is also appropriate  to  add  that
    the menu  of  considerations  which  follows  is  not  designed  to  be
    exhaustive ("such as").  Where in any case it is demonstrated that  the
    decision making has failed to discharge  the  duty  thus  imposed,  the
    ensuing decision would not be in accordance with the  law,  unless  the
    error were shown to be immaterial.  A decision maker who is mandated by
    legislation to take into account certain factors  has  no  choice:  the
    Parliamentary edict must be obeyed.  This is an elementary  public  law
    duty,  the  non-performance  whereof  renders  the   ensuing   decision
    susceptible to being set aside.


 9. In the present case, it was not contended that the decision  maker  had
    failed to perform the duty contained in regulation 21(6).  The exercise
    which the FtT undertook in [23] of its  determination,  is,  therefore,
    questionable.  It did not stand in the shoes  of  the  decision  maker.
    Rather, the question for the FtT was whether  the  decision  maker  had
    erred in law in discharging the relevant duty.   In  my  judgment,  the
    difficulty with [23] of its determination, quoted in [6] above, is that
    the FtT has expressed itself as  if  it  had  the  function  of  either
    primary decision maker or an appellate tribunal seized of an appeal  on
    the merits.   This was not, however, the FtT's  function.  Rather,  its
    central function, and duty, was to decide whether the impugned decision
    of the Secretary of State was in accordance with the law. I  base  this
    analysis on the relevant statutory framework.  In short:

       a) the right of appeal against  an  EEA  decision  is  conferred  by
          Regulation 26(1) of the 2006 Regulations.


       b) by Regulation 26(6), the appeal lies to the FtT.

       c) Regulation  26(7)  provides  that  specified  provisions  of  the
          Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")
          apply to appeals of this genre.  These provisions  are  contained
          in Schedule 1.

       d) The provisions contained in Schedule 1 include section  84(1)  of
          the 2002 Act, excluding paragraphs (a) and (f)

10. Accordingly, by virtue of section 84(1) of the 2002 Act, as modified in
    this particular statutory context, the grounds on which a EEA  decision
    may be challenged on appeal to the FtT are the following:


       a) That the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 19(B)  of  the
          Race  Relations  Act  1976/Article  20  of  the  Race   Relations
          (Northern Ireland) Order 1976.

       b) That the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
          Act 1998.

       c) That the Appellant is an EEA national or a member of  the  family
          of an EEA national and  the  decision  breaches  the  Appellant's
          rights under the Community Treaties in respect  of  entry  to  or
          residence in the United Kingdom.

       d) That the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law.

       e) That the removal of the Appellant from the United  Kingdom  would
          breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligation  under   the   Refugee
          Convention.

    As these provisions demonstrate, the appellate jurisdiction of the  FtT
    is the subject of specific prescription.


11.  While it is possible that, in the present case, the FtT  did  not  have
    its  attention  focused  on  section  84  of  the  2002  Act,  this  is
    understandable to some extent having regard to the formulation  of  the
    grounds of appeal.  While one of the grounds  clearly  articulated  the
    Appellant's challenge  on  the  basis  that  the  deportation  decision
    infringed his rights under Article 8 ECHR - which fits  within  section
    84(1)(c) - the other ground embodied an  umbrella  complaint  that  his
    deportation would be contrary  to  the  2006  Regulations.   I  do  not
    consider this ground  of  appeal  to  have  been  properly  formulated.
    Having regard to Regulation 26(7) and section  84(1),  as  modified  in
    this discrete context, this ground  was  relatively  meaningless.  Good
    practice dictates, in this sphere as in all  others,  that  grounds  of
    appeal are  formulated  with  clarity,  by  precise  reference  to  the
    appropriate provision/s of section 84 of the 2002 Act and, furthermore,
    are adequately particularised.


12.  The FtT considered the ECHR (Article 8)  ground  separately.   However,
    before doing so, it made the conclusion in [23] set out in  [6]  above.
    In my judgment, the error betrayed in this  passage  is  that  the  FtT
    treated the appeal as an appeal on  the  merits  in  which  it  was  at
    liberty to disagree with the Secretary of  State's  assessment  of  the
    requirements of public policy, public security  or  public  health  and
    substitute its own opinion.  In my estimation, the test which  the  FtT
    should have applied was whether the Secretary of State's  decision  was
    in accordance with the law, by virtue of section 84(1)(e) of  the  2002
    Act.  Approaching its task correctly, it was incumbent on  the  FtT  to
    decide whether a material error of law vitiated the impugned  decision.
    However, this approach was not adopted and, in consequence, no error of
    law was identified.  I consider that the FtT treated the appeal  as  an
    appeal on the merits. It thereby committed the error of approaching and
    discharging its  task  in  an  impermissible  manner,  lapsing  into  a
    significant misdirection in law  in  consequence.  This  is  the  first
    discernible error of law in the FtT 's Determination.


13.   Secondly,  the  FtT  neither  considered  nor  concluded  whether  the
    impugned decision complied with the principle of proportionality.  This
    is a question of law in respect whereof the Tribunal  is  the  ultimate
    arbiter.  I accept that in [25] the FtT may have had the  principle  of
    proportionality in  mind  in  pronouncing  itself  satisfied  that  the
    decision was not "justified".  However, there was  a  failure  in  this
    aspect of the decision to identify the public  interest  in  play  and,
    having done  so,  to  conduct  a  balancing  exercise.   Moreover,  the
    Determination  makes  no  reference  to   Regulation  21(5)(a),   which
    stipulates that a relevant decision must comply with the  principle  of
    proportionality. Nor is there any reference to Article 8(2) ECHR. It is
    important for Tribunals to be aware that, in cases such as the present,
    the principle of proportionality arises under two separate  guises  viz
    under Regulation 21(5)(a) and pursuant to  Article  8(2)  ECHR.    This
    discrete failure features in the  second  of  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted. Furthermore, in that
    section of its decision addressing Article 8 ECHR, the  FtT  failed  to
    conduct an orthodox proportionality assessment.   This  is  the  second
    ascertainable error of law in the FtT's decision.

14.  Finally, I turn to consider the FtT's approach  to  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's rehabilitation.  This is apparent from the passage in  [19]
    reproduced in [5] above. In Essa v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKUT316 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal,  having  distilled
    from the decision of the Court of Appeal in FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA  Civ
    119 the proposition that, as regards a deportation decision  under  the
    2006 Regulations,  the  relevant  date  for  evaluating  the  specified
    criteria is the date when the decision is made, stated in [26]:

         "We agree that the [the Court of Justice's]  reference  to  genuine
         integration must be directed at qualified persons and their  family
         members who have resided in the host state as such for  five  years
         or more.  People who have just arrived in the host state  have  not
         yet become qualified persons, or have not been a  qualified  person
         for five years, can always be  removed  for  non-exercise  of  free
         movement rights irrespective of public good grounds to curtail free
         movement rights.  If their presence during this time makes  them  a
         present threat to public policy it would be inconsistent  with  the
         purposes  of  the  Directive  to  weigh  in  the  balance   against
         deportation their future prospects of rehabilitation". "

     [My emphasis]

         This passage formed the  basis  of  the  first  ground  upon  which
    permission to appeal was sought and was duly granted.  It was argued on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that  the injunction contained in this
    passage is clear: in cases such as the present, it is impermissible  to
    consider  the  issue  of  the  subject  person's  future  prospects  of
    rehabilitation. This argument is  to  be  evaluated  in  the  light  of
    certain decisions, both domestic and European and the Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in Essa as a whole .

15.  The decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Essa  was  the  culmination  of
    something of an odyssey, consisting  of  a  deportation  order  by  the
    Secretary of State, a dismissal of the ensuing appeal  by  the  FtT,  a
    refusal by the Upper Tribunal of permission to  appeal,  the  grant  of
    permission to apply for judicial review challenging such  refusal,  the
    dismissal  of  the  substantive  application  for  judicial  review,  a
    successful appeal against such dismissal to the Court  of  Appeal  and,
    ultimately, remittal to the Upper Tribunal.   In  the  course  of  this
    somewhat protracted journey, the Administrative  Court  gave  judgment:
    see [2012] EWHC 1533 (QB).  Lang J identified the Claimant's  principal
    ground of challenge as a complaint that the FtT had  erred  in  law  by
    failing to consider his better prospects of rehabilitation in the  host
    state  (the  United  Kingdom)  rather  than  the  country  of  proposed
    destination (the Netherlands).


16.  At this juncture, it is convenient to consider Regulation 21(6) of the
    2006 Regulations, which provides:


         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public policy
        or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
        United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
        considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
        economic situation of the person, the persons length  of  residence
        in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
        into the United Kingdom and the extent of the  persons  links  with
        his country of origin."


     [My emphasis]


     There  is  no  death  of  authority  relating  to  the  central  issue
    identified by Lang J.  In Batista - v - Secreary of State for the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ 896, Carnwath LJ stated, at [27]:


         "I would add a further possible consideration, although it was  not
         an aspect explored in any detail before  us.  Even  in  respect  of
         those deemed sufficiently dangerous to  justify  deportation  under
         the EEA rules, common  sense  would  suggest  a  degree  of  shared
         interest between the EEA countries in helping  progress  towards  a
         better form of life. The prospects offered by the relationship with
         Miss Deane in this country may have been fragile, as  the  tribunal
         thought, but in Portugal they would  be  practically  non-existent.
         Although he has siblings in that country, there seems to have  been
         no evidence that they would be able or willing to offer the support
         needed to prevent what the tribunal saw as his likely drift back to
         crime. There may be room for argument as to the relevance  of  such
         points under the Directive, but as at  present  advised  I  see  no
         reason in principle why they may not be taken into account  in  the
         overall balance  of  proportionality.  It  will  be  a  matter  for
         tribunal to consider whether  they  have  any  materiality  in  the
         present case."


    While this was an obiter statement,  it  finds  support  in  subsequent
    authority.  In Land Baden v Tsakouridis [2011] 2CMLR 11 the ECJ gave  a
    preliminary ruling on certain issues concerning the  interpretation  of
    Directive 2004/38/EC (the "Citizen's Directive").   It  drew  attention
    to, inter alia, recital (24) which states:


         "Accordingly, the  greater  the  degree  of  integration  of  Union
         Citizens and their family members in the  host  Member  State,  the
         greater the degree of protection against expulsion should be."

     By Article 28(1) of the Directive:

         "Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds of public policy or
         public security, the  host  Member  State  shall  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual  concerned  has
         resided on its territory, his/her age, state of health, family  and
         economic situation, social and cultural integration into  the  host
         Member State and the extent of his/her links with  the  country  of
         origin."

    This is the genesis of Regulation 21 (6). In its judgment, the ECJ made
    specific reference to the issue of "social rehabilitation", at [50]:


         "In the application of Directive 2004/38, a balance must be  struck
         more particularly between the exceptional nature of the  threat  to
         public security as a result of the personal conduct of  the  person
         concerned, assessed if necessary at the  time  when  the  expulsion
         decision is to be made ......  by reference in  particular  to  the
         possible  penalties  and  the  sentences  imposed,  the  degree  of
         involvement in the criminal activity and, if appropriate  the  risk
         of re-offending, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, the  risk
         of compromising the social rehabilitation of the Union  citizen  in
         the State in  which  he  has  become  genuinely  integrated,  which
         ................   is not only in his interest but also in that  of
         the European Union in general."

     [Emphasis added.]

    The  import  of  this  passage  would  appear   to   be   that   social
    rehabilitation of the person concerned  is  not  merely  a  permissible
    consideration to be  weighed  in  the  balance.    It  is,  rather,  an
    obligatory factor to be considered.


17.  Returning to Essa, the assessment of Lang J,  aided  by  the  guidance
    contained in the two decisions  considered  above,   at  [46],  was  as
    follows:


          "In  my  judgment,  the  judgment  of  the  ECJ  in   Tsakouridis
        establishes that the decision maker, in applying Regulation  21  of
        the EEA Regulations, must consider whether a decision to deport (a)
        prejudice the prospects of rehabilitation from  criminal  offending
        in the host country  and  weigh  that  risk  in  the  balance  when
        assessing  proportionality  under  Regulation  21(5)(a).   In  most
        cases, this will necessarily entail a comparison with the prospects
        of rehabilitation in the receiving country .... ".


     On appeal, the Court of Appeal expressly endorsed this  approach:  see
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1718 at [12], where Maurice Kay LJ stated:


         "The European dimension, as I have called it, is now  part  of  the
         proportionality exercise when  the  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to
         deport an EU citizen."


    The Court  pronounced  itself  in  complete  agreement  with  Lang  J's
    interpretation of Tsakouridis.  However, it allowed the appeal  on  the
    basis that the FtT had not properly considered the relevant  provisions
    of EU law.


18. This elaborate chain of litigation culminated in an order of the  Court
    of Appeal remitting the case  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal against the decision of the FtT  and  the  ensuing
    decision to which I have referred above: [2013] UKUT 3136  (IAC).   The
    discrete issue of the claimant's prospects of  rehabilitation  received
    considerable attention in the determination of the Upper Tribunal.   It
    said, in [34]:

     "If the very factors that contribute to his integration that assist in
           rehabilitation   of   such   offenders    (family    ties    and
           responsibilities,    accommodation,     education,     training,
           employment, active membership of a community and the like)  will
           assist in the completion of a process  of  rehabilitation,  then
           that can be a substantial factor in the balance. If the claimant
           cannot constitute a present threat  when  rehabilitated  and  is
           well advanced in rehabilitation in a host state where there is a
           substantial  degree  of  integration,  it  may  very   well   be
           disproportionate to proceed to deportation".

     The Tribunal then considered a rather different scenario, at [35]

     "At the other end of the scale, if there are  no  reasonable  prospects
           of rehabilitation, the claimant  is  a  present  threat  and  is
           likely to remain so for the indefinite future, it cannot be seen
           how  the  prospects  of  rehabilitation   could   constitute   a
           significant factor in the balance.  Thus  recidivist  offenders,
           career criminals, adult offenders who have failed to engage with
           treatment programmes, claimants with impulses to  commit  sexual
           or violent offences  and  the  like  may  well  fall  into  this
           category".

     As a consideration of these passages demonstrates, it is misleading  to
    consider [26] of the Upper Tribunal's determination in  isolation.   It
    is clear  from  reading  the  determination  as  a  whole  that  it  is
    harmonious with the binding ECJ and Court of Appeal authority rehearsed
    above.  There is no conflict. In summary,  the  person's  prospects  of
    rehabilitation in the host State may be a  significant  factor  in  the
    proportionality equation.

19. It seems uncontroversial to analyse these decisions as giving  rise  to
    the proposition that an examination of the obligatory consideration  of
    social rehabilitation of the person concerned will normally entail some
    comparison between the facilities, services and conditions in  the  two
    States under scrutiny.  Since this will entail fact finding on the part
    of the FtT, I would emphasise that  this  exercise  must  be  based  on
    evidence and not assumption or conjecture.  Having found the  necessary
    facts, the FtT  will  then  be  engaged  in  a  process  of  predictive
    evaluative assessment, or  judgment.

20. Further,  at all stages the  FtT  must  be  alert  to  the  constraints
    imposed by its statutory jurisdiction and  the  grounds  of  appeal  as
    formulated: see [9]-[11]  above.   It  must  also  take  cognizance  of
    proportionality as a freestanding principle, under  Regulation  21(1(a)
    and proportionality under the different guise which  arises  where  the
    debate focuses on interference with a  Convention  Right  -  typically,
    though not invariably, Article 8 - in  pursuit  of  a  legitimate  aim.
    Finally, the FtT must not treat  paragraphs  [33]  -[35]   of  Essa  as
    constituting  an  exhaustive  ordinance.   Cases  of  this  kind   will
    invariably be intensely fact sensitive.

21. It follows from my analysis of the jurisprudence above that the FtT did
    not err in law  in  turning  its  attention  to  the  question  of  the
    Appellant's rehabilitation prospects.  However, I consider that, having
    done so, the FtT fell into error in two respects.  First, it considered
    this issue as if it were a primary decision maker, rather than from the
    perspective of  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law or through the lens of proportionality: see [8]
    - [11] above.  Second, there was a failure to engage with the reasoning
    in the Secretary of State's decision - see  [4]  above  -  and,  allied
    thereto, a failure to  make  clear  relevant  findings  of  fact,  with
    supporting reasons.  Furthermore, it is clear from the determination as
    a whole that this error was influential in the decision  to  allow  the
    appeal. Thus materiality is established.

DECISION


22.  I decide and direct as follows:


          a. The determination of the FtT is infected by material errors  of
             law and must be set aside in consequence.


          b. The decision will be remade in this forum  as  soon  as  it  is
             feasible to relist the case.

          c. Upon the relisting of the appeal, consideration will  be  given
             to the Appellant's  application  for  further  evidence  to  be
             adduced under Rule 15(2)(a) of the Tribunal's Procedure  (Upper
             Tribunal) Rules 2008.   The Secretary of State must respond  in
             writing to this application by 07 July 2014.

          d. Both parties  shall,  within  21  days  of  the  date  of  this
             decision, make representations in writing relating to the issue
             of preservation of findings of fact of the FtT.
                                    Signed:
                                             [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date:   20 June 2014

