
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02117/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral judgment given at hearing                |On 26 August 2014            |
|On 11 July 2014                               |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                reda leghmizi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria who was born on 18 December 1971.
     He claims to have arrived in the UK  in  November  2000  although  the
    First-tier Tribunal whose decision I refer to below found that in  fact
    he arrived in 2004.

 2. On 16 July 2004, in  the  Crown  Court  at  Lewes,  the  appellant  was
    convicted  of  an  offence  that  is  described  as  assisting  illegal
    immigration.  He pleaded guilty to that offence and received a sentence
    of eighteen months' imprisonment.  He was released from  the  custodial
    sentence on 5 April 2005.

 3. A claim for asylum was made on 10 September 2004 but it seems that  the
    appellant was un-cooperative in prosecuting the  claim  for  asylum  in
    terms of completing relevant forms and  it  is  said  that  he  further
    failed to comply with the process later on in September 2004.   He  was
    apparently sent a letter later in 2004, in November, stating  that  his
    asylum claim would be refused on non-compliance grounds if  he  refused
    to comply with the process.   Ultimately,  his  claim  for  asylum  was
    refused in 2005.  As  already  indicated,  he  was  released  from  his
    sentence of imprisonment on 5 April 2005.

 4. It may be, although it is not clear from the chronology, that there was
    an appeal against the refusal of  the  asylum  claim  but  for  present
    purposes that is not an issue that is particularly relevant.

 5. Between 2005 and 2010 the appellant was classed as an absconder, having
    failed to comply with restrictions on his immigration status.  He  next
    made himself known to immigration authorities in April 2010  through  a
    letter  from  his   representatives   submitting   further,   or   new,
    representations.

 6. The response from the Home Office was in February 2011 stating that  he
    had no further basis of stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  a
    judicial review which I understand was in relation to 'legacy'  issues,
    or at least a threatened judicial review,  which  ultimately  seems  to
    have been settled by consent.

 7. On 30 July 2013 he was served with a notice of liability to deportation
    and that process resulted in a decision dated 7 October  2013  being  a
    decision to make a deportation order on the basis that his removal from
    the UK was conducive to the  public  good.   His  appeal  against  that
    decision came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  28  April  2014,  the
    panel consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert and Mr J.  O.  De
    Barros, a non-legal member.  The  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 8. In the determination the panel  set  out  the  appellant's  immigration
    history, recorded the oral evidence given by him, and the stance  taken
    by the respondent in relation to his removal.  In their findings it  is
    clear that they did not accept that the appellant had given a  credible
    account in terms of the asylum ground of appeal which  they  dismissed.
    No complaint is made in  the  grounds  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    relation to the dismissal of that aspect of the appeal.

 9. It is however contended that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    assessment  of  the  deportation  issue.   The  matter  that  was  most
    forcefully put before me in oral submissions  is  in  relation  to  the
    question of whether the appellant was liable to deportation and in that
    respect the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Bah  (EO  (Turkey))  -
    liability to deport) [2012] UKUT 00196 (IAC) is  relied  on.   In  that
    case the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  the  question  of  liability  to
    deportation.  It was decided that in a deportation appeal that was  not
    an automatic deportation under Section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007,
    the sequence of decision-making set out  in  EO  (deportation  appeals:
    scope and process) Turkey [2007] UKAIT 62 still applies but  the  first
    step (in that decision) was to be expanded to the following effect:

        "(i) Consider whether the person is liable to be  deported  on  the
             grounds set out by the Secretary of State.  This will normally
             involve the judge examining:

             a.   Whether the material facts alleged by  the  Secretary  of
             State are accepted and if not whether they are made out to the
             civil standard flexibly applied;

             b.   Whether on the facts established viewed as  a  whole  the
             conduct character  or  associations  reach  such  a  level  of
             seriousness as to justify a decision to deport;

             c.   In considering b), the judge will  take  account  of  any
             lawful policy of  the  Secretary  of  State  relevant  to  the
             exercise  of  the  discretion  to  deport  and   whether   the
             discretion has been exercised in accordance with that policy;"



10. Mr Khubber referred to various  aspects  of  the  decision  in  Bah  in
    support of the proposition that the first task of the Tribunal in  this
    case in relation to the deportation issue was to consider the liability
    to deportation and the exercise of discretion that is inherent in it.

11. I was also referred to the detailed  skeleton  argument  that  was  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal in which this issue  is  flagged  up  in
    terms of whether the decision is in  accordance  with  the  law.   That
    appears effectively  as  the  first  issue  at  [3a]  of  the  skeleton
    argument, where it is dealt with comprehensively.  It is submitted that
    contrary to the correct approach set out in Bah the First-tier Tribunal
    did not turn its mind to that first and important issue until later  on
    in the determination at [76] whereby it stated that the deportation  of
    the appellant is conducive to the public good notwithstanding  that  he
    has not committed any further offences for a period of nine  years  and
    the fact there is little or no  obvious  risk  of  re-offending.   That
    conclusion was foreshadowed in the previous paragraph, [75], where  the
    decision in Bah is referred to.

12. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that this is not an argument
    simply about a technical or structural approach to the appeal but is an
    argument that has underlying substance. In that regard I  was  referred
    to the detailed chronology which includes instances, of which  I  think
    four were cited, whereby up until 2011 and certainly between  2004  and
    2005, the Secretary of State had opportunities to make a decision  that
    the appellant should be deported.  No  such  decision  was  made  until
    after the 'legacy' issue was resolved, if resolved is the right word.

13. The proposition contended for plainly involves the question  of  delay.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  deal  with  delay  at   [65]   of   the
    determination. There it  is  stated  that  that  period  of  delay  had
    benefited the appellant because, if a decision had been  taken  at  the
    relevant time, it is almost certain that it would have been a  decision
    that would have been effected, that is  his  removal  would  have  been
    effected.

14. At [57] the Tribunal stated that "There has clearly been an  inordinate
    delay in relation to the decision  by  the  Respondent  to  deport  the
    Appellant".  Again it is there stated that he had benefited  from  that
    delay because he had "enjoyed life" in the United  Kingdom  instead  of
    being removed and that if the  deportation  proceedings  had  commenced
    much earlier his removal would have happened by now.

15. I am in due course going to refer to the other grounds of appeal but it
    is as well to deal with this one first because it was the one that  was
    most forcefully relied on in oral submissions and  it  perhaps  is  the
    most significant ground of appeal.

16. It is clear that there are deficiencies in  this  determination  and  I
    shall refer in a few moments to some of them. There  was  a  structural
    deficiency in the way that the  Tribunal  approached  the  question  of
    liability to deportation  and  indeed  other  issues.   I  am  however,
    satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  did  consider  the  question   of   the
    appellant's liability to deportation for itself and did not  accept  it
    as a 'given' as Bah has said is no longer to be done.

17. At [75], in relation to Bah, the Tribunal stated as follows:

         "We recognise the authority set out in paragraph 26 and 31  of  Bah
         (EO (Turkey) - liability to deport) [2012] UKUT  00196  (IAC)  that
         the Appellate body has jurisdiction to  consider  the  exercise  of
         discretion to make  a  deportation  order,  and  in  doing  so  can
         consider  for  itself  whether  the  individual's  deportation   is
         conducive to the public good."

    At [76] it was concluded that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  is
    conducive to the public good, with the remainder of  the  paragraph  as
    previously quoted.

18. Whilst it would undoubtedly have been better for  this  issue  to  have
    been considered as a first issue as clearly indicated in  the  decision
    in Bah, I am not satisfied that the  manner  in  which  the  issue  was
    considered amounts to an error of law, or if it does,  that  it  is  an
    error of law that requires the decision to be set aside.  The  Tribunal
    did have in mind the period of the delay which was accepted as being an
    inordinate period of delay.  Whilst its  reasons  for  concluding  that
    that period was not significant in terms of the  appellant  having  had
    the "benefit" of the delay the panel could equally have referred to the
    fact that the appellant had absconded for five years between  2005  and
    2010 and also the fact that he  had  no  right  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It seems to me that those matters would have weighed  against
    the  appellant  in  the  assessment  of  whether  he  was   liable   to
    deportation.

19. So far as the other grounds are concerned, reference is made to [58] of
    the  determination  whereby  the  panel  stated  that  "there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances which meant that the burden of  removing  the
    presumption in favour of deportation was overturned." It was noted that
    the appellant has no children or partner in the United Kingdom.

20. The grounds understandably contend  that  it  is  not  clear  what  the
    Tribunal was referring to in that paragraph in that it  was  not  clear
    where  the  presumption  referred  to  is,  or  where  the  exceptional
    circumstances  requirement  lies.  However,  it  seems  to  me  to   be
    reasonably apparent that what the Tribunal was referring to  there  was
    the Immigration Rules in relation to deportation  and  the  requirement
    for exceptional circumstances.

21. The overall thrust of the grounds of  appeal  as  supplemented  by  the
    submissions  to  me  today  was  in  relation,  effectively,   to   the
    'structure'  of  the  determination,  the  grounds  starting  with  the
    contention that the Tribunal failed to adopt a structured  approach  to
    the legal issues in the appeal.  I mention that  not  to  minimise  the
    arguments but to indicate that that was the overarching  contention  on
    behalf of the appellant. Of  course,  underlying  that  contention  are
    arguments about alleged significant failures in  the  determination  in
    relation to its approach.

22. I do agree that this determination is structurally  deficient.   It  is
    also the case that at times there is a conflation of legal  principles,
    for example at [64] where it  is  said  that  the  appellant's  removal
    cannot be said to be disproportionate to the maintenance of immigration
    control "given the fact that he has been convicted of quite  a  serious
    offence in 2004". This is an obvious conflation of issues,  albeit  one
    that is not complained about in submissions, the skeleton  argument  or
    in the grounds before me.

23. There is also a lack of logical reasoning in  terms  of  the  reasoning
    process.  The determination in this respect for example deals with  the
    Immigration Rules, at least by implication, at [58], then moves  on  at
    [59] and [60] to deal with  Articles  8  and  3  in  terms  of  medical
    conditions. The determination then returns to the Immigration Rules  at
    [61] (misquoting paragraph 399A and writing it as 339A). Then of course
    there is  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant's  deportation  is
    conducive to the public good which was considered towards,  if  not  at
    the end of, the determination.

24.  It  is  plain  then,  that  there  are  deficiencies  in  the  panel's
    determination, but it is necessary to  take  a  step  back  from  those
    deficiencies and look at the substance of  the  determination  and  the
    underlying facts.  The appellant was convicted of a serious offence  in
    relation to the system of immigration control.  He is someone who has a
    very poor immigration history which is  relevant  to  the  question  of
    delay. It is possible to see from the determination, although I do  not
    say without any effort, what conclusions the panel  came  to  and  what
    legal principles were applied.  There is more that could have been said
    against the appellant in terms of the public interest.

25. In conclusion, even if an error or errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination can be identified, it or they, do not  require
    the decision to be set aside. Notwithstanding  the  clear  and  helpful
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant, the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on all grounds stands.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 26/08/14

