
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02333/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Crown Court               |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 May 2014                                |On 15th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                          MR PAUL WAYNE STEPHENSON

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative, in person
For the Respondent:    Sarah Marsh, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who is a citizen of Jamaica born 29 January 1975  appeals
    with permission the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy and Mrs
    S A Hussain JP (the panel) who dismissed the appellant's appeal against
    the decision dated 11 November 2013 whereby pursuant to s.32 of the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 the respondent made a deportation order on  the  basis
    of the appellant being a foreign criminal as  defined  by  s.32(1)  and
    that his removal under s.32(4) was conducive to the public good for the
    purposes of s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. This followed the appellant's conviction by a  jury  of  wounding  with
    intent and criminal damage on dates in January 2011 for which the court
    ordered a custodial  sentence  of  eight  years'  imprisonment  and  an
    extended sentence of thirteen years under s.227 of the Criminal Justice
    Act 2003 so as to include an  extension  a  period  of  five  years  in
    addition to the custodial term, applying the provisions of chapter 6 of
    the Criminal Justice Act 2013.

 3. The appellant advanced a number of grounds in his appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal; in essence he relied on Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention in that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  to  take  into
    consideration   the   potential   indefinite   ban   on   return,   the
    proportionality of the effect on the appellant's family and that  there
    were  no  issues  or  public  protection  (concerns)  which   warranted
    deportation.  The appellant had been on bail in the  community  without
    further convictions  or  misbehaviour.   Reference  was  made  to  "the
    parties" being in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  adequate
    accommodation and maintenance and intention to live together.

 4. The appeal was listed for hearing on 4 February  2014.   The  appellant
    was not produced and the panel heard no  evidence.   They  nevertheless
    proceeded and after submissions from a Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    reserved their decision.  The judge's determination is dated 5 February
    2014.  She found that the appellant may well be the  biological  father
    of British children  (it  was  his  case  that  there  were  five)  but
    concluded in the  absence  of  evidence  from  any  witnesses  that  no
    "practical family life actually exists between the appellant and any of
    the children."  The panel concluded that the appellant's:

         "... deportation will therefore have little impact on  the  welfare
         of the children or their best interests,  as  the  appellant  is  a
         father to them in  name  only.   The  appellant  has  presented  no
         evidence that  he  even  begins  to  suggest  that  there  are  any
         exceptional circumstances in  his  private  life  to  outweigh  the
         presumption in favour of this deportation."

         And thus, the panel dismissed the appeal.

 5. The court file indicates that the panel had before them, in addition to
    the reasons letter from the Secretary  of  State  and  the  grounds  of
    appeal,

      i) A letter from Dawn Roberts referring to  their  daughter  who  also
         provided a letter referring to her age as 9 years old.

       ii) A NOMS 1 form.

    iii) A record of prison visits, a Home Office questionnaire completed by
         the appellant.

     iv) A copy of the order for imprisonment  and  the  sentencing  judge's
         remarks.

      v) A letter dated 13 January 2013 from Sarah Howell in support of  the
         appellant.  It refers to the anticipated hearing on 4 February 2014
         and the absence of financial support for the solicitor's fees to be
         met.  She attaches her birth certificate and one for a  child  born
         17 January  2010  recording  the  appellant  as  the  father.   The
         explanation is given that the appellant was  appealing  because  he
         has children in the United Kingdom whose life he wants to  be  part
         of and that he wants to start a life with Ms Howell and his son.

     vi) A letter from the  appellant  dated  22  January  2014  giving  his
         address as HMP Risley.  This  refers  to  the  important  role  the
         appellant plays in the life of his children, his  employment  as  a
         chef and to his temperament as mild-mannered with no  intention  of
         hurting anyone.

    I observe in respect of the letter of 22  January  2014  that  this  is
    placed on the court file after the Record of Proceedings and  there  is
    the possibility it was not before the panel.

 6. In his application for permission to appeal, the  appellant  refers  to
    the prison where he is staying not  having  taken  him  to  the  appeal
    hearing where he could have spoken on his own behalf.  He refers to the
    presence in the United Kingdom of five children  and  the  private  and
    family life which he has established.  He has  relationships  with  all
    mothers of those children and with the children themselves.  He  refers
    to s.55, the case of ZH (Tanzania) and emphasises his affection for the
    children as well as his rehabilitation.  He describes himself to have a
    mild-mannered temperament and that he never intended hurting anyone  at
    any  time.   He  expresses  remorse  and  regret  that  it  has   taken
    incarceration for him to see a different path and problem solving.

 7. In granting permission to appeal Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Philips considered it was arguable that it is a  fundamental  principle
    of justice that an appellant should at least have the opportunity to be
    heard.  It was further arguable that the panel failed to have regard to
    Rule 19 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    there being no explanation in the determination why the panel proceeded
    with the hearing when the appellant was not produced.  It was difficult
    to understand what justification there could be in proceeding.

 8. I have noted a legible Record of Proceedings with the opening note "had
    not been produced."  A letter from Peer and Co dated 19  December  2013
    indicates that they were no longer representing Mr Stephenson and  gave
    his address as HMP Risley.  A pro forma document on the  letterhead  of
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  indicates  an  instruction  for  the
    appellant's production on 4 February.

 9. The appellant was produced at the  hearing  before  me  and  sought  an
    adjournment.  He explained that  his  legal  representatives,  BHB  Law
    Solicitors who had been instructed on 28 April were unable to represent
    him due to lack of time and instructions although it emerged  that  the
    underlying reason was a lack of funds which were being put in place  by
    his mother and "baby mothers."  I refused the application because  Peer
    & Co had stepped down as his representatives in January because of lack
    of funding; there was no evidence from any of the parties who were said
    to be providing funding and they  were  not  present  at  the  hearing.
    There was, as submitted by Miss Marsh, too much uncertainty.  She  also
    observed in her submissions that were the matter to proceed  before  me
    today it would not be to the appellant's detriment.

10. I explained to the appellant the basis on which  the  appeal  had  come
    before me. He understood my task was to decide whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had made an error of law and if so  whether  it  required  the
    decision to be set aside.  A further consideration  were  I  to  do  so
    would be whether I should re-make that decision or whether the case  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I observed to Miss Marsh that  on
    the face of it  it  appeared  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    considered  Rule  19(1)  of  the  Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005:

        "Hearing appeal in absence of a party

        (1)  The Tribunal may hear an appeal in the absence of a party or a
             representative, if satisfied that

             (a)   the party or his representative has been given notice  of
                 the date, time and place of the hearing, and

             (b)   there is no good reason for such absence."

11. The panel was clearly aware that the appellant was detained despite the
    suggestion otherwise in the grounds of appeal to the FtT in  the  light
    of the endorsement on the Record of  Proceedings  I  have  referred  to
    above.  The file also includes what appears to be part of a  production
    order process.  There was no  indication  before  the  panel  that  the
    appellant had chosen not to attend.

12. Miss Marsh candidly accepted that the panel had not  asked  itself  why
    the appellant had not been produced.  The appeal had been listed in the
    Manchester Piccadilly Hearing Centre where there were no facilities for
    appellants serving  custodial  sentences  and  thus  he  could  not  be
    produced.  It had been noted at an earlier Case Management Review  that
    the case would need to be listed  at  Manchester  Crown  Court  but  it
    appears that had not been arranged.   She  accepted  that  because  the
    appellant was unable to attend his hearing it was un-manifestly unfair.
     She accepted that the decision must be set  aside  and  the  appellant
    given a proper opportunity to put his case.

13. Miss Marsh was  correct  to  make  these  candid  submissions.   It  is
    axiomatic that an appellant has a right to be heard. As observed by the
    Upper Tribunal in MM (Unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC) at
    [14]:

         "The matrix of this appeal, rehearsed above, prompts reflections on
         the content in reach of one of the cornerstones of the common  law,
         namely the right of every litigant to a fair hearing.  The right in
         play  is  properly  described  as  fundamental,   irreducible   and
         inalienable."

14. As to whether the decision should be re-made in the Upper  Tribunal  or
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, the Practice  Statements  for  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  provides  the
    answer at [7.2]:

         "The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or ..."

15. Further, the Tribunal in MM (Unfairness; E & R) Sudan concluded at [26]

         "By s.12 of the 2007 Act, where the Upper Tribunal  concludes  that
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error on a point of law and decides to set the decision  aside,  it
         must either remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  or  re-make
         the decision itself.  We consider that, as a fairly strong  general
         rule, where a first instance decision is set aside on a basis of an
         error of law involving the deprivation of the appellant's right  to
         a fair hearing, the appropriate course will be to remit to a  newly
         constituted First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.   This  is  so
         because the common  law  right  to  a  fair  hearing  is  generally
         considered to rank as a right of constitutional importance  and  it
         is preferable that the litigant's statutory right of appeal to  the
         Upper Tribunal should be triggered only where the former right  has
         been fully enjoyed."




16. I do not consider that having regard to the nature of the error, it  is
    necessary or indeed desirable to consider the merits of the appellant's
    case.  As observed by Moses LJ in ML (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    844 at [14]:





         "... In my view it would  be  wrong  to  consider  the  chances  of
         success that the claimant might have a second  time  round.   I  am
         perfectly prepared, as a matter of hypothesis, to  assume  that  he
         will have a very difficult run on a  further  occasion.   But  that
         cannot displace the obligation for the  procedure  to  provide  him
         with a fair opportunity of deploying his case.  It is,  after  all,
         the reputation of  the  courts,  and  the  courts  in  relation  to
         immigration, which is at stake here.  It  seems  to  me  that  they
         cannot be preserved and protected as to  serve  and  respect  if  a
         decision which is so flawed is allowed to stand."



17. I consider that the decision by the First-tier Tribunal to  proceed  in
    the absence of the  appellant  without  good  reason  so  fundamentally
    undermined the appellant's rights.  Regardless of  the  merits  of  his
    case, he must be given the opportunity of arguing that  case  before  a
    differently constituted panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   On  that
    basis this appeal is allowed and the case remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing by a differently constituted panel.


Signed
         [pic]                                   Date 15 May 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



