
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/02396/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22 June 2015                      |On 10 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  but  we
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. This appeal comes back before the Upper Tribunal following a hearing on
    23 March 2015 following which Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  found  an
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The error  of
    law decision, described as a 'Decision and Directions' is  attached  as
    an Annex to this determination.

 3. To summarise  the  background,  the  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to deport the appellant following his convictions for  various
    offences of robbery, attempted robbery and handling stolen  goods,  was
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.   Although  its  decision  was  set
    aside, a number of findings of fact were preserved as set  out  in  the
    error of law decision at [28].   For  convenience  we  reproduce  those
    preserved findings as follows:

         "28. The question of what findings of fact are to be preserved  was
             canvassed with the parties. My provisional  view,  subject  to
             any  further  submissions  by  either  party  at  the  resumed
             hearing, is that the following findings  of  fact  are  to  be
             preserved:

             (i)  The appellant is a national of Iran and  was  born  on  4
                  October 1995.

             (ii) He arrived in the UK on 24 February 2005.

             (iii)    The appellant does not  have  any  family  ties  with
                  Iran.

             (iv) He speaks Farsi with his mother.

             (v)  The appellant's mother has a friend in Iran whom she  has
                  visited on more than one occasion.

             (vi) The appellant has an established private and family  life
                  in the UK and his deportation  would  interfere  with  his
                  private and family life.

             (vii)    The appellant has a particularly strong bond with his
                  mother  and  his  deportation  would  be   a   source   of
                  considerable distress to her.  He has lived with  her  all
                  his life. The appellant had a difficult upbringing because
                  of his father's violent conduct.

             (viii)   The  risk  of  the  appellant  being  reconvicted  is
                  medium.

             (ix) The appellant  has  attended  drug  awareness  and  anger
                  management classes in prison.

             (x)  His mother is supportive and  she  is  able  to  play  an
                  important role in the appellant's rehabilitation."

 4. With one  exception,  neither  party  sought  to  disagree  with  Judge
    Kopieczek's provisional view as to the findings of fact that were to be
    preserved.  That exception relates to [28(viii)]  whereby  a  suggested
    modification on behalf of the appellant was to  the  following  effect:
    the risk of the appellant being reconvicted was assessed as  medium  in
    the pre-sentence report dated 9 April 2013.  Mr Walker did  not  object
    to that modification of that preserved finding and we agreed that it is
    appropriate.

 5. At the start of the hearing Mr Walker made an application to admit  new
    evidence not previously relied on.  In part the evidence was  the  same
    as that referred to at [7] of the error of law decision.  Additionally,
    we were informed that there  were  a  number  of  computer  records  in
    relation to the appellant's conduct in detention since July 2014.

 6. Mr Walker informed us that the documents had been  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 19 June 2015, the Friday before the hearing.   He  accepted
    that they were not served in accordance with the  directions  given  at
    the end of the last hearing, as set out in the error of  law  decision.
    He said however, that the case papers in this appeal only came back  to
    him last week.  Mr Hodson objected to  the  admission  of  the  further
    evidence.

 7. We declined to allow this evidence to  be  admitted.   Directions  were
    given in the error of law decision,  sent  in  April  2015.  There  was
    included a direction that any further  evidence  relied  on  by  either
    party was to be filed and served no later than 14 days before the  next
    date of hearing.  Plainly that  direction  was  not  complied  with  in
    respect of the new evidence sought to be admitted.  Indeed, as  at  the
    time of the hearing on 22 June 2015, the evidence had not found its way
    onto the Tribunal file.  It has to be said that Mr  Walker  really  did
    not offer much, if anything, by way of explanation for the very belated
    attempt to introduce this evidence, stating only that the file came  to
    him "by chance" on the Friday preceding the  hearing,  indicating  that
    the appeal had not previously been allocated to him or reserved to  him
    since his representation on behalf of the respondent before  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 23 March 2015.  We do not attribute any blame to Mr  Walker
    for the failure to file and serve the evidence in a timely manner,  but
    the fact remains that the  evidence  was  sought  to  be  admitted  at,
    almost, the last possible moment.

 8. Not only was there a failure to comply with the directions  given  some
    two months ago, it is to be noted that at the earlier hearing there was
    a similar application to adduce evidence late, described at [9] of  the
    error of law decision as an application made "at the very last  minute,
    that is to say on the day of the hearing, there having been no  advance
    notice either to the Tribunal or to the  appellant's  representatives."
    As already indicated, one aspect of the evidence sought to be  admitted
    late is precisely that evidence which  was  the  subject  of  the  late
    application to admit evidence at the earlier hearing. It can reasonably
    be assumed that if the evidence that was sought to be admitted  by  the
    respondent was so important to the respondent's  case,  it  would  have
    been the subject of a timely application.

 9. We proceeded to hear submissions from the parties  which  we  summarise
    below.  Mr Hodson indicated that no further oral  evidence  was  to  be
    called on behalf of the appellant.

    Submissions

10. Mr Hodson accepted that the relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules
    in play now is paragraph 399A, given that the appellant cannot rely  on
    the provisions of paragraph 399 in terms of  any  relationship  with  a
    child or a partner.  It was also accepted that it is paragraph 399A  in
    its current form, that is to say as inserted into the Immigration Rules
    from 28 July 2015 that applies, having regard to  the  decision  in  YM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292.

11. With reference to the decision in CG (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 194, it was submitted that  if  the
    appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 399A he  is  entitled  to
    succeed in his appeal.

12. Mr Hodson submitted that the appellant has, in terms of  399A(a),  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, that is to say as  at
    the date of the hearing.  Similarly, in terms of 399A(b) he is socially
    and culturally  integrated  in  the  UK  notwithstanding  his  criminal
    convictions.  The decision in Masih (deportation -  public  interest  -
    basic principles) Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00046  (IAC)  indicates  that
    criminal offending in itself does not negate  a  person's  integration.
    We were also reminded of the decision in Maslov  v  Austria  No.1638/03
    ECtHR [2008].

13. So far as very significant  obstacles  to  integration  are  concerned,
    under 399A(c) it was accepted that the test is a stringent one  but  it
    was contended that there were parallels with the former 'no ties' test.
     If the appellant has no ties  to  Iran,  the  question  arises  as  to
    whether it could be  said  that  there  is  anything  other  than  very
    significant obstacles to his integration.  It was submitted that points
    of principle in previous authorities on the question of 'no ties' could
    assist in general terms.

14. Otherwise, it was argued that the  real  issue  in  the  case  of  this
    appellant is one  of  'integration'  as  opposed  to  very  significant
    obstacles.  In this respect we were again  referred  to  the  preserved
    findings.  Factors to be borne in mind included  his  ability  to  find
    work or accommodation and whether in the  long-term  he  could  achieve
    financial independence.  A precarious  financial  position  would  mean
    that there would be the lack of ability to integrate.  His age, the age
    that he left Iran and the fact that he has  no  experience  of  finding
    work, accommodation or financial security are relevant.  These are  not
    matters that he had ever experienced as an adult at all, let  alone  in
    Iran.  Although he may be able to speak Farsi with his mother, his life
    in the UK, to paraphrase the points made by  Mr  Hodson,  is  'English-
    centred'.  His evidence is that he is unable to read  or  write  Farsi.
    In addition, the appellant's father's violent conduct towards  him  and
    his mother needs to be taken into account in terms of integration.  The
    appellant's main support is his mother, a British citizen.

15. Furthermore, the appellant has  not  learnt  the  ways  of  the  strict
    Islamic code that prevails  in  Iran,  such  as  would  enable  him  to
    navigate his way through society there.

16. So far as concerns his mother's friend in Iran, the  appellant  has  no
    personal relationship with her and his mother says that she is not able
    to help the appellant.  To suggest otherwise is  speculation.   In  any
    event, the appellant's mother has only been there twice, for two  weeks
    on each occasion to visit her friend.  The appellant did  not  go  with
    her.  There is no evidence that she would be able to help the appellant
    to integrate, find accommodation or employment.

17. The appellant's mother has very  limited  financial  resources,  as  is
    evident from the documentation.  Her earnings amount to about �103  per
    week.

18. We were referred to the Pre-Sentence Report ("PSR")  in  terms  of  the
    extent of the appellant's vulnerabilities.   Similarly,  reference  was
    made to the Psychological report of Dr Catherine Campbell,  within  the
    appellant's bundle.

19. Even if the appellant is  unable  to  establish  the  very  significant
    obstacles to integration, within a proportionality  assessment  outside
    the confines of the Immigration Rules  it  is  relevant  to  take  into
    account the effect on the  appellant's  mother  of  his  removal.   The
    offences were committed whilst he was  still  a  minor  and  compelling
    reasons would be needed for his expulsion.  It  is  also  important  to
    recognise that this was his first custodial sentence and he is able  to
    rely on the significant support of his mother.

20.  Mr  Walker  relied  on  the  decision  letter,  reminding  us  of  the
    appellant's offending history.  So far as  very  significant  obstacles
    are concerned, he is an Iranian national, speaks  Farsi  and  had  some
    limited education in Iran.  He would be aware of  the  cultural  norms.
    The ties that he has there could be pursued and strengthened.

21. Although he has no contact with his father, there is no  evidence  that
    he would be unable to pursue contact with his father's relatives.

22. The appellant's mother was not able to influence the appellant  at  all
    in relation to his offending between the ages of 14 and 17.  He  is  an
    adult who has progressed to serious offending.  A distinction is to  be
    made between his  circumstances  and  those  in  the  case  of  Maslov.
    Reference was made to the sentencing judge's remarks.

    Our Conclusions

23. It is as well at this stage to  set  out  the  relevant  parts  of  the
    Immigration Rules as  they  apply  to  this  appellant.   They  are  as
    follows:

         "A398.   These rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked;

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law,

                the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
                whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,
                the public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed
                by  other  factors   where   there   are   very   compelling
                circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
                399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
                if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported; or

                (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                    with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen
                    or settled in the UK,  and

                    (i)    the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
                        person (deportee) was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and
                        their immigration status was not precarious; and

                    (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live
                        in the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                        deported, because of compelling circumstances  over
                        and above those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2  of
                        Appendix FM; and

                    (iii)  it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                        remain in the UK without the person who  is  to  be
                        deported.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -

                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                    most of his life; and

                (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                    and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                    integration into the country to which it is proposed  he
                    is deported."

24. We also  set  out  the  relevant  provisions  of  ss.117A-117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act").   They
    are as follows:




         "117A: Application of this Part

             (1)  This part applies where a court or Tribunal is required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Act -

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question the court or
                  Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117B, and

                  (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117C.

             (3)  In sub-Section (2), "the public interest question" means
                  the question of whether an interference with a person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is justified
                  under Article 8(2).

         117B: Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English -

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons -

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

         117C: Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                  in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted."

25. So far as the Immigration Rules  are  concerned,  it  was  accepted  on
    behalf of the appellant that he is not able to rely on  a  relationship
    with a child or with a partner, and thus paragraphs 399(a) and  (b)  do
    not apply.

26. Furthermore, it was also conceded that it  is  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules as they now are that apply  to  him,  notwithstanding
    the date of the decision.  Thus, the requirements of paragraph 399A  as
    we have set them out are those that are relevant.

27. At this point it is necessary to  remind  ourselves  of  the  preserved
    findings, as set out at [28] of the error of law decision.  Thus, it is
    established that the appellant arrived in the UK on 24  February  2005.
    According to the decision letter he was granted ILR on 7 February 2005,
    thus entering the UK lawfully.  He was then aged 9 years and 4  months.
    He is now aged 19 years and thus has been lawfully resident in  the  UK
    for most of his life.  Accordingly, he is able to meet the  requirement
    in 399A(a).

28. So far as 399A(b) is concerned (socially and culturally  integrated  in
    the UK) a preserved finding is that the appellant  has  an  established
    private and family life in  the  UK  and  that  his  deportation  would
    interfere  with  his  private  and  family  life.   Similarly,  it   is
    established that the appellant "has a particularly strong bond with his
    mother and his deportation would be a source of  considerable  distress
    to her.  He has lived with her all his life."  It was not suggested  on
    behalf of the  respondent  that  the  appellant  is  not  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK. A person's criminal offending is  very
    often relevant to this issue but it has not  been  suggested  that  the
    appellant's offending and his custodial sentence mean that he  has  not
    integrated socially and culturally.

29. Accordingly, the appellant is able  to  establish  that  he  meets  the
    requirement in 399A(b).

30. As regards 399A(c) we bear in mind not only the preserved findings, but
    also the witness statement of the appellant and his mother, the PSR and
    the report of the Clinical Psychologist, Dr Catherine Campbell, dated 6
    June 2014.

31. We accept that there are obstacles to the appellant's integration  into
    Iran.  He has not been there since the age of 9 years, not even  having
    visited since he left.  Undoubtedly he has become used to life  in  the
    UK and the relative freedoms that a young  person  is  able  to  enjoy,
    relative to life in Iran.  Similarly, we accept that the appellant does
    not read or write Farsi, there being no reason to think that he does so
    in the UK, without any need to, unlike conversing with  his  mother  in
    Farsi.

32. There is nothing to indicate that he is aware of any relatives in  Iran
    and nothing in the evidence suggests that there is any contact  between
    the appellant and/or his mother and any such relatives.  It  is  likely
    to be the case  that  the  appellant  will  encounter  difficulties  in
    obtaining employment and/or further education or training,  because  of
    the length of his absence from Iran and the lack of ability to read  or
    write Farsi.

33. However, we are not satisfied that there are significant  obstacles  to
    his integration or, if there are, that they amount to very  significant
    obstacles to his integration.

34. Integration, as was suggested on behalf of the  appellant,  involves  a
    number of features. It is what could be described as multi-dimensional.
     We have referred to those most important factors of integration  which
    seem to us to be relevant.  However, the fact is that  this  is  not  a
    case of an individual  returning  to  a  country  where  they  have  no
    familiarity with the  language,  for  example.   The  appellant  speaks
    Farsi, conversing with his mother. We note that the appellant's  mother
    says in her witness statement that the appellant speaks Farsi but is no
    longer fluent in the language.  We also bear in mind that the appellant
    says in his witness statement that his mother tells him that his  Farsi
    is not very good.  However, it is clear from the evidence, for  example
    from those witness statements, that although he underachieved at school
    in the UK, he is an intelligent person.  Similarly, at 3.2 of  the  PSR
    it states that the appellant "presents as an academically capable young
    man who is able to articulate himself in an  appropriate  manner."   He
    enrolled at Richmond College for a BTEC  in  Business  Studies,  albeit
    again that he did not achieve that qualification.  At 3.5 of the PSR it
    is stated that the appellant said that he  had  genuine  ambitions  and
    would like to go back to college to study business and psychology,  and
    again the point is made that he presents  as  an  academically  capable
    young man.  At paragraph 5 of the PSR it is stated that the appellant's
    ambition is eventually to go to university.  The  appellant's  evidence
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  [10(i)]  was  that  he  had  completed
    catering and cycle repair courses and  was  interested  in  becoming  a
    mechanic.

35. All this evidence supports the proposition that the appellant would  be
    able to adapt to life in Iran  because  of  his  intelligence  and  his
    ability to speak the language.  Again, we do not suggest that he  would
    not  encounter  obstacles  to  that  integration,  but  that   is   not
    determinative of the issue in question.

36. Similarly, we do not consider that the appellant  is  utterly  isolated
    from Iranian culture in terms of  knowing  nothing  about  it  and  not
    having the ability to adapt to that culture.  The appellant has  always
    lived with his mother.  His mother has connections with  Iran  in  that
    that is where she was born, brought up and lived until an  adult.   She
    has visited Iran twice since she came to the UK, once in 2008 and  once
    in 2012, staying for about two weeks each time.  She has a friend there
    whom she visited and with whom she keeps in  touch,  according  to  her
    witness statement.

37. We accept that there is some merit in the observation made by Mr Hodson
    to the effect that his mother's ties to Iran are  not  the  appellant's
    ties to Iran (on this see [124] of Ogundimu (Article  8  -  new  rules)
    Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC)).  However, notwithstanding Mr Hodson's
    reliance on CG (Jamaica) and the arguments advanced on the question  of
    'no ties', we must assess the extent to which the appellant is able  to
    establish that he comes within  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as they are now, however much it might be preferred on his behalf
    to argue the 'no ties' test under the Rules as they used to be.

38. The fact that the  appellant's  mother  has  visited  Iran,  retains  a
    connection with the country and has a close friend there we do consider
    to be a relevant matter, albeit that we accept that in a  direct  sense
    her ties are not the appellant's. They  are  nevertheless  ties  which,
    without speculation, can reasonably be said would be able to afford the
    appellant some assistance in terms of integration.  There is  at  least
    one point of contact in the country to which reference could be made by
    or on behalf of the appellant.  Whilst  we  accept  that  there  is  no
    direct  evidence  from  the  appellant's  mother's  friend,   and   the
    appellant's mother states that she could not  be  expected  to  support
    him, it is unrealistic to suppose that she would provide no  assistance
    or support at all, bearing  in  mind  her  close  friendship  with  the
    appellant's mother.

39. On behalf of the appellant reliance was placed  on  the  report  of  Dr
    Catherine Campbell which refers to the appellant's trauma memories from
    childhood, witnessing  and  experiencing  domestic  violence.   In  the
    assessment in  June  2014  she  said  that  it  appeared  that  he  was
    experiencing symptoms of hyper  arousal  e.g.  increased  irritability,
    being jumpy or easily startled.  Work  involving  tackling  the  trauma
    memories is said in the report to  have  resulted  in  a  reduction  of
    intrusions and time spent thinking about the domestic violence.

40. Also  in  the  report  it  refers  to  treatment  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's feeling of paranoia, including learning strategies to  take
    more control of his anger.  It states that he appears "very bright" and
    was  quick  to  understand  the  psychological  concepts  applying  the
    strategies discussed with success.   Under  the  heading  "Outcome"  it
    states that tackling past memories which were leading to high levels of
    anger  have  allowed  his  symptoms  of  trauma  to  reduce,  alongside
    improvements in mood, anxiety and general well-being.

41. Thus, it appears from that report that the appellant  needed  treatment
    to deal with trauma associated with  his  having  experienced  domestic
    violence at a young age.   The  PSR,  to  which  we  were  referred  in
    submissions, identified what could be described as various respects  in
    which the appellant could be said to be vulnerable, for example concern
    being expressed about his "emotional health".  We note that the PSR was
    completed on 9 April  2013,  before  the  treatment  undertaken  by  Dr
    Campbell.

42. It was submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  when  he  feels
    threatened he does not react well, which it was  contended  must  be  a
    very significant obstacle to  integration.   Allied  to  this  was  the
    submission that he has a problem with authority figures  and  that  the
    strict regime  in  Iran  is  relevant  to  these  issues  in  terms  of
    integration.

43. However, those submissions have to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the
    offences which the appellant committed,  as  clearly  set  out  in  the
    sentencing remarks.   These  were  knifepoint  robberies  at  night  of
    victims aged between 15 and 18 years.  The  offences  were  pre-planned
    against vulnerable young  victims  against  a  background  of  previous
    offences by the appellant of attempted robberies and possession  of  an
    offensive weapon.  On 11 April 2013 he was sentenced for  seven  counts
    of robbery, three counts of attempted robbery and one count of handling
    stolen goods.  That offending is indicative of  an  individual  who  is
    plainly and obviously very assertive.  We  consider  this  also  to  be
    relevant to the extent to which he would be able to adapt  to  life  in
    Iran because it reveals a certain robustness of character.

44. Having considered all the evidence, we are not  satisfied  that  it  is
    established that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Iran.

45. In coming to that view we  do  not  consider  that  a  separate  public
    interest enquiry is required within the  confines  of  paragraph  399A,
    those features of the Immigration Rules having been identified and  set
    by the Secretary of State as representing the balance to be struck in a
    case where the public interest requires  deportation  by  reason  of  a
    particular sentence of imprisonment. In other words, for  the  purposes
    of this appeal, we do not consider that we are required  discreetly  to
    assess  the  public  interest  in  deciding  whether  there  are   very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration.

46. We would reach the same conclusion as to the outcome of the  appeal  in
    terms of a consideration of  Section  117C(4)  of  the  2002  Act,  the
    provisions of which mirror those in  the  Immigration  Rules.   In  the
    language of s.117C,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established that Exception 1 (under subsection 4) applies.

47. Given that we are not satisfied  that  either  paragraph  399  or  399A
    apply, the question arises as to  whether  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over  and  above  those  described  in  those  paragraphs
    (paragraph 398).  Amongst other  things,  reliance  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant is placed on the decision in Maslov, in  particular  at  [75]
    which states that:

         "In short, the Court considers that for a settled migrant  who  has
         lawfully spent all or the major part of his or  her  childhood  and
         youth in the host country very  serious  reasons  are  required  to
         justify expulsion.  This is  all  the  more  so  where  the  person
         concerned committed the offences underlying the  expulsion  measure
         as a juvenile."

    However, as explained in Akpinar, R (on the application of) v The Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2014] EWCA Civ 937, that  is
    not to be regarded as a threshold that the state has to meet  in  every
    case involving deportation of a person whose  offences  were  committed
    when  they  were  a  juvenile.   In  considering  the  issue  of  'very
    compelling  circumstances'  we  nevertheless  take  into  account   the
    appellant's age  when  he  committed  the  offences,  although  such  a
    consideration it seems to us is to some extent inherent in any event in
    399A.

48. The effect on the appellant's mother of the appellant's deportation was
    urged upon us.  A  preserved  finding  is  that  the  appellant  has  a
    particularly strong bond with his mother and his deportation would be a
    source of considerable distress to her.  The fact  that  the  appellant
    was a victim of, and witnessed, domestic violence as a child is also  a
    matter that we take into account  in  considering  the  issue  of  very
    compelling circumstances.

49. However, albeit that 399A  does  not  on  its  own  terms  require  any
    assessment of the risk  of  re-offending  or  the  seriousness  of  the
    offences committed by the appellant, those issues are to  be  reflected
    in the question of whether there are very compelling circumstances over
    and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  The offences for
    which the appellant was convicted were plainly very serious, as already
    described.  The PSR assessed the risk of re-offending as medium.

50. There is a clear and potent public interest in the removal  of  persons
    who commit serious offences, as has repeatedly been stated. The risk of
    re-offending is but one factor to be  taken  into  account.   There  is
    nothing in the evidence to indicate that the medium risk of reoffending
    has  reduced,  notwithstanding  the  treatment  or   courses   he   has
    undertaken.

51. Even without taking into account the risk of re-offending or the public
    interest in deportation of those who commit serious offences, we cannot
    see that there are the very compelling circumstances over and above the
    requirements of the Rules which would indicate a decision in favour  of
    the appellant in this appeal.

52. Accordingly,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  terms  of  resisting  his
    removal, and we bear in mind what was said in MF (Nigeria  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home  Department)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  about  the
    deportation Immigration Rules forming a complete code.

53. There is no room for any argument therefore, in relation to  Article  8
    proper.

54. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of  law.   That  decision  is  set  aside.  We  re-make  the
    decision, dismissing the appeal.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      5/08/15





                                   ANNEX A

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Thus the appellant is a citizen  of  Iran,  born  on  4
    October 1995. He arrived in the UK on 24  February  2005  when  aged  9
    years and 4 months.  He was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  on  7
    February 2005.

 2. A decision was made by the respondent on 15 November  2013  to  make  a
    deportation order against the appellant under Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that his deportation is conducive  to
    the public good.

 3. That decision followed the appellant's convictions on 13 February  2013
    for seven counts of robbery, three counts of attempted robbery and  one
    count of handling stolen goods.  On 11 April 2013 he was sentenced to a
    total of three years imprisonment.

 4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Devittie on 26 August  2014,
    whereby he dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds with reference to Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 5. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal against  that  decision,  in
    summary, are to the effect that the First-tier Judge failed to have any
    regard to Section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  and  the  changes
    brought about by that  section  to  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  It is  argued  that  the  judge  had
    failed to engage  with  the  public  interest  considerations  inherent
    within ss.117A-D of the 2002 Act and had failed to identify  compelling
    circumstances necessary to engage Article 8, in circumstances where the
    appellant was not able to meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules or the provisions set out in the amendments to the 2002 Act.

 6. The second ground contends that Judge Devittie erred in his  conclusion
    that the appellant has no ties to Iran having regard to the  fact  that
    he had spent the majority of his life there, attended school there  and
    would have an understanding of the customs and cultures  in  Iran.   In
    addition, the appellant has linguistic ties to Iran given  that  he  is
    able to speak Farsi.  Those are  matters  which  would  assist  in  his
    reintegration to Iran.

    Submissions

 7. At the start of the hearing Mr Walker applied to amend the  grounds  to
    admit new evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal which it
    was said was relevant to the issue of error of law.  Such evidence,  in
    summary, is an intelligence report concerning the  appellant's  contact
    with an individual convicted in the UK of a terrorist  related  offence
    and who received a sentence of life  imprisonment.   It  was  submitted
    that the evidence was not put before the First-tier Tribunal because of
    an administrative error, the hearing having been brought forward.   The
    evidence was said to be relevant to the public interest  considerations
    that needed to be assessed by the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Mr  Walker  relied  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MM
    (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) as to the  principles
    to be applied in relation to evidence that was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal sufficient to found an error of law.

 9. I do not consider it necessary to rehearse in detail the  reasoning  in
    MM.  Suffice to say that  reference  was  made  in  that  case  to  the
    decisions in E & R v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]
    EWCA Civ 49, and R & Ors (Iran) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  I am not satisfied that  the  evidence
    which it is proposed to adduce in support of the proposed amendment  to
    the grounds before the Upper Tribunal comes within  the  principles  of
    any of those cases.  It seems to me  to  be  clear  that  the  evidence
    sought to be relied on was in existence  before  the  date  of  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal but  by  administrative  error  was  not
    adduced.  Furthermore, the evidence or information does not, on initial
    consideration at least, relate to the reasons for the decision to  make
    a deportation order against the appellant, although that is not to  say
    that that  information  could  never  be  relevant.   Furthermore,  the
    application to adduce that evidence before the Upper Tribunal was  made
    at the very last minute, that is to say on  the  day  of  the  hearing,
    there having been no advance notice either to the Tribunal  or  to  the
    appellant's representatives.

10. Insofar as the decision in MM has a bearing on the  application,  I  do
    not consider  that  it  could  be  said  that  there  is  a  defect  or
    impropriety of a procedural nature in the proceedings before the First-
    tier Tribunal. Furthermore, I do not consider that  it  could  be  said
    that there is any unfairness to the respondent in that evidence not now
    being received by the Upper Tribunal.

11. So far as the original grounds are concerned, Mr Walker relied on them.
      I  was  referred  to  the  decision  in  Bossadi  (paragraph  276ADE;
    suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 42  (IAC),  in  particular  [16],  which
    concluded that  the  question  of  family  ties  requires  not  only  a
    subjective assessment but also an objective one, which it is  submitted
    was lacking in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I was referred
    to various matters relied on in the grounds, in terms of what are  said
    to be the appellant's ties to Iran.

12. So far as ss.117A-D of the  2002  Act  are  concerned,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  needed  to  make  an  assessment  under   those   provisions.
    Furthermore, although at [29] there is reference to  "very  significant
    obstacles" to the appellant's integration in Iran, it was not explained
    what those very significant obstacles are.

13. Mr Hodson conceded that there is an error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal in the failure to refer  to  ss.117A-D  explicitly,
    but it was submitted that it was not an error of law that was  material
    to the outcome.  I was referred to the decision in Dube  (ss.117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) which was also a case  in  which  there  was  a
    failure to refer to s.117.

14. Furthermore, Mr Hodson submitted that in fact  the  amendments  to  the
    2002 Act changed nothing in favour of the respondent on  the  facts  of
    the appellant's case.  I was referred in detail to  the  provisions  of
    ss.117A-D.  The appellant was able to speak English, he was financially
    independent in the sense that he was fully supported by his mother  and
    then was in detention. At the time of the hearing he had been in the UK
    for most of his life, that is say nine and a half years, and  there  is
    no basis for suggesting that that period needed to  be  discounted  for
    periods of imprisonment.

15. As to very significant obstacles, that is a question of fact which  was
    resolved in favour of the appellant by the First-tier Tribunal.  In the
    circumstances the appeal should have been allowed with reference to the
    Immigration Rules, which contain parallel provisions.

16. So far as the respondent's ground 2 is concerned  (failing  to  provide
    adequate reasons), that is really nothing more than a disagreement with
    the  facts  as  found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was not  a  purely  subjective  assessment  of  the
    issues. I was referred to the decision in Green (Article 8 - new rules)
    [2013] UKUT 00254 (IAC) and Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) on the question of "ties".   It  was  submitted
    that Green contained a similar challenge to that advanced in the appeal
    before me.

    My assessment

17. I announced at the hearing that I was satisfied that there is an  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such  as  to  require
    the decision to be set aside.

18. Mr Hodson informed me, and of course  I  accept,  that  ss.117A-D  were
    canvassed in detail at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.  In
    those circumstances it is, with respect to Judge  Devittie,  surprising
    that the statutory framework within which his decision was required  to
    have been made, was not set out.  The only clue to any  recognition  of
    those issues that needed to be assessed is in the last  phrase  of  the
    penultimate paragraph of the determination whereby he  stated  that  in
    his view there would be very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
    integration in Iran.

19. That is the phraseology contained in s.117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A(c)
    of the Immigration Rules, both of which applied  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

20. Judge Devittie concluded that the appellant did  not  have  any  family
    ties with Iran, noting that the appellant spoke Farsi with  his  mother
    who has visited Iran on "a few occasions".   He  also  noted  that  the
    appellant left Iran at the age of 9 and concluded that at that  age  he
    would not have established any strong social ties that  he  would  have
    been able to retain  after  coming  to  the  UK.   He  found  that  the
    appellant's social and cultural ties with Iran  are  tenuous  and  that
    having lived in the UK for most of his life, is socially and culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom.  He  further  decided  that  with  no
    social or family ties and remote cultural ties with Iran, and given his
    young age, there would very significant obstacles to his integration in
    Iran.

21. Mr Hodson relies on those findings to suggest that, even accepting that
    the judge erred  in  law  in  not  making  explicit  reference  to  the
    statutory provisions and the provisions of the Immigration  Rules,  the
    error of law is not material because on the basis of those findings the
    outcome would have been the same.   I do not agree.  It is  plain  from
    the determination that Judge Devittie was concerned with the  issue  of
    whether the appellant had ties to Iran  in  terms  of  paragraph  399A,
    being the former manifestation of the Immigration Rules at 399A(b).  It
    was not sufficient in my judgement for Judge  Devittie  to  state  that
    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  in  Iran,
    at the end of an assessment of matters which were evidently directed to
    the question of "no ties".

22. Mr Hodson accepted that the issues of "no ties" and  "very  significant
    obstacles" to integration are not the same, although he submitted that,
    in effect, on the facts of this case, they are. However,  questions  of
    integration inevitably concern issues such as, a  person's  ability  to
    speak the language of the country to which they are to be returned, and
    whether for example, any family member in  the  UK  would  be  able  to
    assist with integration.  In this  case,  the  appellant's  mother  has
    visited Iran in the relatively recent past, including in 2012.  She has
    a friend there whom she has known for many years, albeit that she  does
    not know the appellant.   Whilst  the  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    mother was that her friend would not be able to provide  the  appellant
    with any support if he were returned, that does  not  necessarily  mean
    that she would not be able to assist in some way with integration.  All
    these are matters that were not the subject of any  assessment  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   Other  issues  such  as  employment  are   also
    potentially relevant.  It is to be noted that  the  appellant  said  in
    evidence that he had completed a catering course,  a  course  in  cycle
    repairs and was interested in becoming a mechanic.

23. My reference to those aspects of the evidence is not any indication  of
    my own view on the question of whether there would be very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration in Iran, only that this is  an
    assessment that should have been undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal.
    I do not consider that it could be said that  the  judge's  failure  in
    this respect was immaterial to the outcome of  the  appeal.   Likewise,
    the finding that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Iran does not follow from  any  reasoned  assessment  of
    that critical issue.

24. Thus, the failure to undertake that important assessment goes  hand  in
    hand with the judge's failure to consider and apply ss.117A-D  and  the
    amendments to the Immigration Rules that came into effect  on  28  July
    2014.

25. Furthermore, Mr Hodson suggested that in actual fact there was no  need
    for Judge Devittie to have undertaken an Article 8  assessment  because
    the appeal could have been allowed with reference  to  the  Immigration
    Rules and ss.117A-D in any event.  Of course, if that be the  case,  it
    underlines the fundamental structural  (and  material)  defect  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision, considering the appeal  with  reference
    to Article 8 proper, on the basis that there were reasons to go  beyond
    the confines of the Immigration Rules.

26. I indicated to the parties that it was my view that  the  re-making  of
    the decision is appropriately to be dealt with by the  Upper  Tribunal,
    rather than the matter  being  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    There was no dissent from that proposition.

27. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal being  set  aside,
    the decision will be re-made in the Upper Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be
    notified.  I gave oral directions to the parties at the  hearing  which
    are now confirmed as set out below.

28. The question of what findings of fact are to be preserved was canvassed
    with  the  parties.  My  provisional  view,  subject  to  any   further
    submissions by either  party  at  the  resumed  hearing,  is  that  the
    following findings of fact are to be preserved:

    (i)  The appellant is a national of Iran and  was  born  on  4  October
         1995.

    (ii) He arrived in the UK on 24 February 2005.

    (iii)    The appellant does not have any family ties with Iran.

    (iv) He speaks Farsi with his mother.

    (v)  The appellant's mother has a friend in Iran whom she  has  visited
         on more than one occasion.

    (vi) The appellant has an established private and family life in the UK
         and his deportation would interfere with  his  private  and  family
         life.

    (vii)    The appellant has a particularly strong bond with  his  mother
         and his deportation would be a source of considerable  distress  to
         her.  He has lived with her all  his  life.  The  appellant  had  a
         difficult upbringing because of his father's violent conduct.

    (viii)   The risk of the appellant being reconvicted is medium.

    (ix) The appellant has attended drug  awareness  and  anger  management
         classes in prison.

    (x)  His mother is supportive and she is able to play an important role
         in the appellant's rehabilitation.

29.  The parties are reminded of the directions given orally at the  hearing
    and as set out below.

                                 DIRECTIONS

         (i)  Any further evidence relied on by either party is to be  filed
             and served no later than 14  days  before  the  next  date  of
             hearing.

         (ii) In relation to any witness whom it is proposed  to  give  oral
             evidence,  there  must  be  a  witness  statement   drawn   in
             sufficient detail to stand as  evidence-in-  chief  such  that
             there is no need for any further examination-in-chief.

         (iii)    The parties must be in a position at the next  hearing  to
             make submissions if necessary as  to  what  findings  of  fact
             should be preserved.
