
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/02307/2013
     DA/02308/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 14 March 2016                              |On 21 April 2016              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MS S C M
                                  MISS D D
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   The Respondents in person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

I make an anonymity direction in  order  to  protect  the  identity  of  the
children who are involved in this appeal.

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal  against  a  decision  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruth, which was promulgated on 6 October 2015
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 6 January and 18 September 2015.
     For ease of convenience I shall throughout this determination refer to
    the Secretary  of  State  who  was  the  original  respondent  as  "the
    Secretary of State" and to SCM and DD who were the original  appellants
    as "the claimants".

 2. The first claimant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born in  1978.   The
    second claimant is her minor  daughter  who  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on [ ] 2004 and is  also  a  citizen  of  Jamaica.   The  first
    claimant had entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in  2001  and
    claimed asylum which application  was  refused  but  she  came  to  the
    attention of the authorities following a  caution  for  theft  in  July
    2004.  The second claimant having been born in the  United  Kingdom  in
    August 2004, the  first  claimant  left  the  United  Kingdom  in  2005
    together with her daughter, using a false passport, but returned in the
    same year and began using a different  name.   Subsequently  the  first
    claimant entered into a relationship with a British citizen as a result
    of which she has two  other  children  who  were  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom, one born in 2010 and the other in 2014.   These  children  are
    British citizens.

 3. The claimant was convicted of serious benefit fraud at  Woolwich  Crown
    Court in 2012.  She pleaded guilty to eleven  counts  of  making  false
    declarations and using a false passport and identity in order to obtain
    housing benefit and council tax benefits for which she was sentenced to
    nineteen months' imprisonment.  The sentencing judge noted her previous
    conviction in June 2010 for making dishonest representations for  which
    she had received a six  month  custodial  sentence  suspended  for  two
    years.  In consequence of this conviction the Secretary of State made a
    decision to apply the automatic deportation provisions contained within
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 which decision  was  initially
    made in March 2013 and then remade in October 2013 after the  Secretary
    of State had withdrawn the initial decision.

 4. The claimants appealed against  this  decision  submitting  that  their
    deportation would be a disproportionate interference with their Article
    8 rights.  The immigration history is to  say  the  least  unfortunate.
    The appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights
    grounds by the First-tier Tribunal in a determination promulgated on 28
    May 2014.  Thereafter the Secretary of State's application for leave to
    appeal against this decision was originally refused in  the  First-tier
    but then granted in the Upper Tribunal.  On 29 October 2014  there  was
    then an error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal which resulted in  a
    decision made on 28 November 2014 that the First-tier Tribunal had made
    an error of law and the appeal was  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for there to be a "redetermination of the balancing exercise".

 5. The claimants applied for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    against the Upper Tribunal's decision remitting their case back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal pending the consideration of which the appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruth in the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing on 6 January 2015.  On that date as none of  the  parties  were
    able to inform the Tribunal as to the progress of the  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  Judge  Ruth  decided  to
    proceed with the hearing which he did on the  basis  that  the  factual
    findings which had previously been made by the First-tier Tribunal when
    that Tribunal had allowed the claimants' appeal had been preserved.

 6. Following that hearing, at which submissions had been made,  but  prior
    to any decision being made, Judge  Ruth  was  informed  that  the  Vice
    President of the Upper Tribunal was considering whether or not  to  set
    aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal remitting the case to him  and
    for this reason he did not make a decision on the submissions which had
    been  put  before  him.   Subsequently,  in  February  2015,  the  Vice
    President ordered that the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  which  had
    been made in November 2014 (in which  it  had  been  ordered  that  the
    appeal be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal) be  set  aside  and
    the matter re-heard by the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The appeal was then re-heard in the Upper Tribunal in July 2015 but  in
    a decision promulgated on 17 August 2015 the Upper Tribunal once  again
    found that there had been an error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal because insufficient weight had been placed on the public
    interest in deportation of foreign criminals  when  that  Tribunal  had
    concluded that the removal of the claimants was  disproportionate  such
    that the claimants should succeed in their appeal.  The decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal was set aside with regard to the  conclusions  only
    but the findings of fact to which  I  will  need  to  turn  below  were
    retained.

 8. The appeal then again came before Judge Ruth in September 2015 at which
    hearing it was  agreed  again  that  the  factual  findings  which  had
    previously been made in the First-tier Tribunal  decision  were  to  be
    preserved and that the issue in dispute which had to be  addressed  was
    the weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  when  considering
    proportionality.  Accordingly Judge Ruth heard further submissions form
    both parties but again heard no evidence.

 9. Having considered the further submissions Judge Ruth in a very thorough
    and clearly reasoned determination  amounting  to  some  27  pages  and
    having set out the findings of fact which had been made in considerable
    detail concluded that the claimants  had  to  succeed  both  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  separately  although  this  was  not  strictly
    necessary for his decision on Article 8 grounds outside  the  Rules  as
    well.

10. The Secretary of State yet again appeals  against  this  decision,  the
    basis of her appeal this time essentially being that  it  is  said  the
    judge wrongly considered the appeal under the Rules as they  previously
    had been, considering whether or not the removal of the first  claimant
    would be unreasonable as regards  the  position  of  the  two  youngest
    British citizen children rather than whether or not the effect of  that
    decision would be "unduly harsh" on them.

11. In my judgment although Ms Sreeraman advanced this argument as well  as
    it could be advanced this submission is wholly unarguable.  I  give  my
    reasons below.

12. It is first necessary  to  set  out  relevant  parts  of  the  previous
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  containing  the  factual  findings
    which are to be retained.  These are as follows and are at paragraph 34
    onwards of that earlier determination.

13. The Tribunal had  found  that  the  two  youngest  children  could  not
    reasonably be expected to be brought up by their father.  The  Tribunal
    found in terms at paragraph 38 of its determination as follows:

         "We are left in no doubt that it will be  totally  unreasonable  to
         expect them  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  Appellant.
         Furthermore, although  their  father  will  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom, considering that he was also involved in  caring  for  his
         two daughters from other relationships, and [the oldest child]  was
         only nearly 4 years old and [the youngest child] only 5 months  old
         and being breastfed by his mother, we are satisfied that this is  a
         situation where their father  as  a  single  parent  could  not  be
         expected to provide satisfactory level of  care  for  them  without
         their mother.  In the circumstances we are satisfied that it  would
         equally not be reasonable for the two children to  be  left  behind
         with their father without their mother."

14.  Accordingly  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that if the first claimant  were  to  be
    removed the only basis upon which her British  citizen  children  could
    reasonably remain would be if they were taken into some  sort  of  care
    either directly in the care of social services or a foster family being
    provided.

15. I set out the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules  that  apply
    in a deportation case where an applicant has been sentenced to a period
    of imprisonment of between  one  year  and  four  years  which  are  as
    follows:

         "399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
             [398(b) applies  in  this  case  because  the  first  claimant
             received a sentence of imprisonment of between  one  year  and
             four years] if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; ... and ...

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported...".

16. Although it is said that the initial consideration by Judge Ruth was on
    the basis of whether or not  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant's children to leave the United Kingdom, at  paragraph  77  of
    his determination, Judge Ruth found as follows:

         "77. I  note  that  in  the  respondent's  Immigration  Directorate
             Instructions at chapter 13,  section  3.5.14,  the  respondent
             advises her caseworkers that if the only  way  a  child  could
             remain in the UK if a foreign criminal is deported would be in
             the care of social services or a foster family this would  not
             generally be appropriate.  Indeed, the language used  in  this
             guidance is that such a situation would generally  be  'unduly
             harsh'.  This is the language of the new rule which came  into
             effect on 28 July 2014, but it seems to me  more  likely  than
             not that if a conclusion is 'unduly harsh' it is  likely  also
             to be unreasonable in all the circumstances.   Although  those
             instructions do not bind me, they form a useful backdrop to my
             consideration of the question of reasonableness in relation to
             this child."

17. It is accordingly clear in my judgment that whether  or  not  there  is
    anything in the submission that  Judge  Ruth  technically  applied  the
    wrong Rule insofar as he was looking at the  Rules  previously  drafted
    this could not have had any material bearing  on  his  decision.   Just
    looking at the provisions of paragraph 399 it  is  clear  and  was  not
    disputed that the first claimant has a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with her two youngest  children,  they  are  both  British
    citizens and it is not suggested that it would not be unduly  harsh  to
    expect these British citizen children to return together with the first
    claimant to Jamaica thus being deprived of all the  benefits  to  which
    they are entitled as British citizens.  With regard to whether  or  not
    it would be unduly harsh for these children to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without their mother in  light  of  the  IDIs  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 77 of Judge Ruth's decision, it is clear that he  would  have
    found and would have been entitled to find  that  this  also  would  be
    unduly  harsh.   In  these  circumstances  the  decision  he  made  was
    inevitable.

18. I must stress when making this decision that I do not myself and indeed
    neither did Judge Ruth attempt  to  minimise  the  seriousness  of  the
    offending of which the first claimant was  convicted.   Benefit  frauds
    such as she committed are very serious offences and the public attitude
    of revulsion  towards  those  persons  who  commit  these  offences  is
    entirely appropriate.  Further, there is a need if this  is  consistent
    with the Immigration Rules to deport people who commit crimes  such  as
    these to  deter  other  people  from  committing  them.   However,  the
    Tribunal has to follow the Rules  and  in  this  case  Judge  Ruth  was
    entirely correct in concluding under the Rules that it would be  unduly
    harsh for the applicant's two youngest children, both British citizens,
    in respect of whom a finding had already been made that no other person
    could appropriately care for them in this country, if their  mother  to
    be removed.  Of  course,  should  the  first  claimant  commit  further
    offences and  in  particular  if  she  is  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of more than four years (in which case the  provisions  of
    paragraph 399 would not apply), she would then be at much greater  risk
    of being  deported  whatever  the  effect  might  be  on  her  youngest
    children.

19. Regarding the second claimant, clearly the second  claimant  cannot  be
    returned to Jamaica without her mother.  It is not suggested that  this
    would not be wholly disproportionate.  I record also that this Tribunal
    was informed that the second claimant having been  here  for  over  ten
    years and having been born in this country an application has been made
    on  her  behalf  for  British  citizenship  which  is  currently  under
    consideration by the Secretary of State.

20. For the reasons I have set out above, the Secretary of  State's  appeal
    must be dismissed and I so find.

Decision

21. There being no material error of law  in  Judge  Ruth's  decision,  his
    decision allowing  the  claimants'  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to deport them is affirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 15 April 2016

