

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: DA/02063/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On: 3rd February 2016                  |             On: 12th February 2016  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                VENES TANASE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tetteh, Counsel instructed by Lawson Taylor
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Romania born on the 7th August 1975.


 2. Although the precise dates are  not  known  it  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been exercising his  EEA  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom since at least 2007. He was living in Manchester with his  wife
    and five children.

 3. On the 16th January 2012 he was convicted of affray and sentenced to 16
    months in prison.  The sentencing remarks of  the  Judge  explain  that
    this affray was a violent public order offence in which  up  to  twenty
    men, armed with knives, sticks,  golf  clubs  and  at  least  one  meat
    cleaver set about each other on the streets of south  Manchester.   The
    Appellant was identified as the leader of one of the opposing  "tribes"
    in this fight, a quarrel which erupting from a "Balkan style vendetta".
     The Appellant himself was armed with a cricket bat.

 4. On the 22nd November 2012 the Respondent  signed  a  Deportation  Order
    against the Appellant. He left the country of his own accord on the 3rd
    December 2012.

 5. On the 5th August 2013 the Appellant attempted to regain entry  to  the
    UK but was refused leave to enter. He subsequently made an  application
    for the Deportation Order  to  be  revoked.  It  was  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse that application which was the  matter  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  JS  Law  sitting  at
    Manchester. The  parties  agree  that  the  determination  applies  the
    correct legal framework.  It  was  for  the  Appellant  to  show,  with
    reference to Regulation 24A(4) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006, that  there  had  been  a  material  change  in
    circumstances since the Order had been made. The Order  could  only  be
    revoked if the criteria for making it in the first place were no longer
    satisfied.  This  was  to  be  determined  with   the   proportionality
    principles set down in Regulation 21(5).

 7. The Appellant relied on two matters which he submitted  amounted  to  a
    material change in circumstances. First, his family in the UK  had  now
    expanded. As well as  his  wife  and  five  children  he  now  had  two
    grandchildren. Second, he himself had committed no further offences and
    had been rehabilitated. He submitted  that  since  he  had  established
    family links in the UK and there was no risk of reoffending, he  should
    be readmitted.

 8.  Of  these  two  matters  Judge  Law  found  that  the  birth  of   two
    grandchildren added nothing to the situation as it was at the time that
    the Order was made. At that time the Appellant had four minor children,
    today he has three minor children plus two  grandchildren.  The  family
    claimed to need the help and support of the Appellant  but  had  chosen
    not to go with him back to  Romania.  In  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    alleged  rehabilitation  the  determination  notes  the  terms  of  the
    sentencing remarks and the pre-sentence material: there was no evidence
    of any remorse expressed by the Appellant who had  not  undertaken  any
    courses in prison.   His family, who appeared before  Judge  Law,  were
    found not to blame the Appellant, instead believing that  he  had  been
    wrongly  punished.     Finding  there  to  be  no  material  change  in
    circumstances since the Deportation Order was made, Judge Law dismissed
    the appeal.

 9. Permission has been granted, upon renewed application, on  the  grounds
    that it is arguable that Judge Law failed to have regard to s55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.  The  grounds  further
    alleged that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  material  evidence
    into account.


    My Findings

10. Although the reasoning in the determination is scant,  it  is  apparent
    from the determination as a whole  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    aware of all of the issues and the material evidence. The  evidence  of
    the witnesses is set out in some detail, as are the submissions.


11. On the first issue, relating to the 'best interests' of the Appellant's
    children, it is correct to say that the s55 assessment nowhere features
    in the 'findings' section of the determination. It was for that  reason
    that Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt  granted  permission.    I  am  however
    satisfied that this omission was not  material.  That  is  because  the
    question before the  Tribunal  was  so  narrow,  and  the  evidence  so
    limited. The Deportation Order was made in November 2012  and  at  that
    time the Appellant had been living with his five children and  was  the
    'head'  of  the  household.  Their  best  interests  were  specifically
    addressed in the unchallenged refusal letter dated  the  13th  November
    2012: as the  First-tier  Tribunal  notes,  the  Respondent  gave  full
    consideration to the nature and extent of the Appellant's  family  life
    in the UK.   The  decision  to  deport  was  nonetheless  found  to  be
    proportionate, noting inter alia that the family had coped  whilst  the
    Appellant was in prison, and that it was open to them  to  relocate  to
    Romania if  they  wished.   The  evidence  before  Judge  Law  did  not
    establish that any of  those  material  facts  had  changed.  He  heard
    evidence that the children were "not happy" about their father being in
    Romania and that they were "desperate  to  see  him".   This  does  not
    amount to a change in circumstance. They were not happy when he was  in
    prison, and had been desperate for him to stay at  the  point  that  he
    left the UK in December 2012. Had the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    the best interests of  the  children  (and  now  infant  grandchildren)
    outweighed the public interest in maintaining this Order, there can  be
    little doubt that the Secretary of State would  have  appealed  on  the
    grounds that there was simply not the  evidential  foundation  to  make
    such a finding.  There was no independent evidence, for  instance  from
    the children's  teachers,  that  their  behaviour  or  well  being  had
    deteriorated in his absence. The suggestion  that  there  was  no  male
    figurehead appeared to be at odds with the  role  now  assumed  by  the
    Appellant's eldest son, himself now a father.  In the  absence  of  any
    further evidence the First-tier Tribunal cannot be said to  have  erred
    in respect of the children.


12. As to the matter of rehabilitation, the evidence at  the  time  of  the
    deportation was that the Appellant had "given no consideration  to  the
    consequences of his actions". Although  the  NOMS  assessment  put  the
    overall risk of reoffending as low the  offender  manager  did  believe
    that the Appellant would continue to pose a risk of harm to those  whom
    he perceived to, for instance, have taken goods from him or his  family
    (the fight had apparently arisen  because  of  a  dispute  between  the
    Appellant's son and a boy on the other side). He had not completed  any
    courses in prison. In short, he had failed to demonstrate that  he  had
    shown any insight into his  offending  behaviour.    The  new  evidence
    before Judge Law was again, extremely limited.   Whilst  there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant had committed any further  offences,  there
    was no positive evidence to show that he had not. The evidence that  he
    had been rehabilitated amounted to statements to that effect  from  the
    Appellant and his son. Mr Tetteh complained  that  in  respect  of  the
    latter the determination does not fully reflect his evidence that  what
    his father did was wrong.  That evidence is recorded at  paragraph  24,
    as is his evidence that the circumstances of the offence  were  not  as
    described in court  and  that  "there  were  reasons  why  he  had  got
    involved". Given that the evidence of this witness was  being  advanced
    to demonstrate that the Appellant had been rehabilitated, Judge Law was
    perfectly entitled to take into account the fact that he was apparently
    trying to offer mitigation as to why his father had taken to the street
    with a gang wielding weapons.  Again, the evidence was not  capable  of
    showing there to be a change in circumstance. There was no error in the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision.




    Decisions

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and it is upheld.


14. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and in the circumstances
    I see no reason to do so.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   4th
                                February 2016
