
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02069/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                    z g-n
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION preserved)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pretzell, Counsel instructed by Messrs Aden &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Iran  born  on  18
    November 1980, against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal panel  who
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 4  July  2014  and  in  their  determination
    promulgated on  26  September  2014  dismissed  her  appeal  against  a
    decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  20  September  2013  to  make   a
    deportation order by virtue of Section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  In that regard her appeal was  dismissed  on  asylum  and  human
    rights (Articles 3 and 8) grounds.

2.   Whilst permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  I
    was persuaded to grant permission on the  renewed  application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, in  that  Ground  1  in  summary,  contended  that  the
    determination was "flawed in its  failure  to  take  into  account  the
    positive credibility findings about (the Appellant's)  relationship  to
    the husband". I considered that the renewed Ground 1 to  have  arguable
    merit, in consequence of what was said at paragraph  21  that  for  the
    sake of completeness I would set out below:

         "The grounds in no way seek to be misleading.  Her asylum claim has
         always been that she is at risk of ill-treatment on being  returned
         to Iran because of the way she will be perceived.  It  is  accepted
         the Judge did not find her credible to be a Jehovah's Witness or to
         have committed adultery.  But the Judge self-evidently  found  that
         she had been married, had been the victim of domestic violence  and
         had left Iran without the permission of her  husband.   It  is  the
         risk of her being accused and perceived of anti-Islamic conduct  by
         virtue of having left her husband which is a critical issue.  It is
         the risk that on return immigration and  security  officials  would
         immediately identify her as a married woman who has been out of the
         country illegally without her husband's  permission.   There  is  a
         real risk that she will be perceived as an adulteress woman.  There
         is a risk that she will be accused of  anti-Islamic  conduct  as  a
         result.  This is the concern that has not been addressed and  which
         was canvassed before the Judge  in  oral  submissions  and  in  the
         skeleton (paras 14-15)."

3.   Indeed I noted that at paragraphs 14 and 15 of  the  skeleton  argument
    that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel,  the  following  was
    stated:

         "14. The background  evidence  makes  clear  that  a  woman  cannot
             divorce her husband  without  his  consent.   There  is  every
             reason to believe particularly given her father's  report  and
             attitude to the break up, that the husband  refused  any  such
             consent.

         15.  It was undisputed that the Appellant  left  Iran.   Again  the
             background  evidence  makes  clear  that  a  woman  needs  her
             husband's consent to leave Iran.  There  is  every  reason  to
             believe this was not forthcoming and she exited illegally."

4.   In that regard reference was made to the pages in the bundle  that  was
    before the panel to support those contentions.

5.   This was also reflected in Mr Pretzell's  skeleton  argument  dated  27
    October 2015, that he elaborated upon in his  oral  submissions  before
    me.  It was his contention that the findings  of  the  panel  in  their
    determination at paragraphs 121 and 127 respectively,  particularly  in
    relation to the Appellant's illegal exit from Iran were  irreconcilable
    and consequently unsustainable.  It would be as well therefore  to  set
    out those two paragraphs to place his submissions  in  context  and  in
    which the relevant passages within those paragraphs stated as follows:

         "121.    Whilst there are elements of her account as we  have  said
             that  are  entirely  plausible  in  relation  to  an  arranged
             marriage and violence in the marriage, we are unable to accept
             even to the lower standard the other elements that she has put
             forward  in  relation  to  the  discovery  of  the  adulteress
             relationship, the flight to Greece and then what happened with
             her husband once in Greece and how  she  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom.  It is not for us to be able  to  give  a  definitive
             version of what must have happened, it is for the Appellant to
             establish to the low threshold her case.

         ...

         127. In summary we do  not  accept  the  claimed  threat  from  her
             husband or that there is or has been a  judgment  against  the
             Appellant for  adultery,  notwithstanding  the  witness  whose
             husband allegedly had a conversation with a person believed to
             be the Appellant's father and as a result of that  we  do  not
             accept that she has shown that she has at  any  real  risk  of
             serious harm if returned to Iran.  Whilst it may be  that  she
             left the country illegally, we do not accept that it has  been
             shown that that of itself will put her in  danger."  (Emphasis
             added)

6.   When this appeal came before me on 28 October 2015 my  first  task  was
    to decide whether or not the determination of the  panel  disclosed  an
    error or errors on a point of law such as may have materially  affected
    the outcome of  the  appeal.   Upon  the  conclusion  of  the  parties'
    submissions I was able to tell them that I was so persuaded.

7.    It  was  notable  that  Mr  Tarlow  for  the  Respondent,  opened  his
    submissions by immediately accepting that there was  "a  lacuna  within
    paragraph 121 concerning the circumstances of how  the  Appellant  left
    the country and whether it was with or without the  permission  of  her
    husband".  He did however continue, that at paragraph  127,  the  panel
    had stated "whilst it may be that she left the country illegally, we do
    not accept that it has been shown that that of itself will put  her  in
    danger".  Mr Tarlow submitted that this was a finding of fact that  was
    open to the Tribunal to make and that upon reading the determination as
    a whole including  the  panel's  adverse  credibility  findings,  their
    determination could properly stand.

8.   As reflected in the grounds and further raised by  Mr  Pretzell  before
    me, in making this observation, the panel were expressly  referring  to
    the country guidance of the Tribunal in SB (risk on  return  -  illegal
    exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT  00053.   There  the  Tribunal  specifically
    found that:

         "45. It is plain from the background evidence before us that  being
             accused of anti-Islamic conduct amounts to a significant  risk
             factor in respect of likely treatment a person  will  face  on
             return."

9.   The Tribunal in SB also held inter alia as follows:

         "(ii)    Iranians facing enforced return do not in general  face  a
             real risk of persecution or ill-treatment.  That  remains  the
             case even if they exited Iran illegally.  Having  exited  Iran
             illegally is not a significant risk factor, although if it  is
             the case that  a  person  would  face  difficulties  with  the
             authorities for other reasons,  such  a  history  could  be  a
             factor adding to the level of difficulties he or she is likely
             to face.

         (v)   Being  accused  of   anti-Islamic   conduct   likewise   also
             constitutes a significant risk factor." (Emphasis added)

10.  It is apparent to me that these were matters with which the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel failed to engage.  They failed to assess the risk to the
    Appellant on return to Iran as  someone  who  had  exited  the  country
    illegally, potentially without her husband's permission and  who  would
    be questioned by the authorities  upon  her  return  to  Iran  both  in
    relation to her reasons for illegal departure as well as in relation to
    her reasons for remaining in the UK for a total of five years.

11.  Mr Pretzell rightly reinforced  that  contention  within  his  skeleton
    argument, pointing out  that  the  panel  failed  to  engage  with  the
    argument that the Appellant's unlawful exit from Iran coupled with  her
    having spent five years in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  married  woman
    without a husband, might on return, expose her to the  accusation  that
    she had been guilty of un-Islamic or anti-Islamic conduct  particularly
    in light of the fact that the Iranian authorities would be  aware  that
    she had claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.

12.  Further, the November 2014 Country Information  and  Guidance  entitled
    "Background  Information  including  Actors  of  Protection,   Internal
    Relocation and Illegal Exit" postdates by five years the decision in SB
    and at paragraph 2.12.1 it states that:

         "According to Article 34 [of the Penal Code] any Iranian who leaves
         the country illegally, without a valid passport or  similar  travel
         document,  will  be  sentenced  between  one   and   three   years'
         imprisonment or will receive the fine between 100,000  and  500,000
         Rials.

         In order to deal with the cases relating to  illegal  departure,  a
         special court is located in Mehrabad Airport in Tehran.  Its branch
         number is given as 1610.  If an  Iranian  arrives  in  the  country
         without a passport or any valid travel documents, the official will
         arrest them and take them to this court.  The  court  assesses  the
         background of the individual, the date of their departure from  the
         country, the reason for their illegal departure,  their  connection
         with any organisations  or  groups  and  any  other  circumstances.
         Dependent on the outcome of the court's  investigation,  the  Judge
         will decide the severity of the punishment within the parameters of
         Article 34."

13.  Mr Tarlow submitted that mindful of Article 34, the fact remained  that
    the Appellant would be returning to Iran  with  "some  form  of  travel
    document" and that in such circumstances the Appellant would  not  fall
    into the category of an Iranian arriving  in  the  country  "without  a
    passport or any valid travel document" such as would lead  an  official
    to arrest her and take them to this court.

14.  Such a submission fails to  appreciate  that  the  background  material
    appears to suggest that whether with or without a travel document,  the
    Appellant in the circumstances would indeed be likely to be questioned.
     In that regard Mr Pretzell referred me to IK (returnees  -  Records  -
    IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312 where the Tribunal gave  guidance  on
    this issue and where the Tribunal had inter alia this to say:

         "85. Clearly further information may arise from the questioning  of
             a returnee by the police in the airport  police  station.   Mr
             Grieves submitted that a person should not be expected to  lie
             to the  authorities  during  questioning  in  order  to  avoid
             persecution.  Ms Giovannetti in her written reply  stated  the
             Home Office position as follows:

                  'The  Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  an   individual
                  detained and transferred to  the  airport  police  station
                  would be interrogated and that  it  is  reasonably  likely
                  that further checks would be  carried  out.   However  the
                  nature and extent of  such  interrogation  and  checks  is
                  likely to be related to the reason that the individual was
                  stopped.  So for example a person who has  not  had  valid
                  documents is likely to be questioned in order to establish
                  his identity.  An individual who is thought to  have  left
                  on false documents is likely to be  questioned  about  how
                  and from whom he obtained them.'"

             The Secretary of State does not  suggest  at  (and  never  has
             suggested) that Adjudicators should seek  to  proceed  on  the
             basis that an individual can lie about his background  to  the
             circumstances.  The right approach is to assess what questions
             are likely  to  be  asked  of  the  individual  and  what  his
             responses are likely to be" (page 12).

15.  Mindful of that concession it is clear that it  is  for  the  Judge  in
    each case, to assess what questions are likely to be asked  and  how  a
    returnee would respond without being required to lie.

16.  Mindful of the above guidance, it was apparent to  me  upon  a  careful
    reading of the panel's determination, that there was in this context, a
    failure to assess the risk to the Appellant on return to  Iran.   There
    was for example, no finding as to whether or  not  the  Appellant  left
    Iran with or without the permission of her husband, a matter  which  in
    itself is in contravention of Iranian law and the  panel's  finding  on
    that issue alone, would have assisted them, mindful of the guidance  in
    SB, in determining the extent to which the Appellant might be  at  real
    risk on return, notwithstanding whether she exited Iran illegally,  and
    whether she "would face difficulties with  the  authorities  for  other
    reasons (in that) such a history could be a factor adding to the  level
    of difficulties he or she is likely to face (and that) being accused of
    anti-Islamic conduct  likewise  also  constitutes  a  significant  risk
    factor".

17.  Thus in my view, it was not enough for the panel to state that  "whilst
    it may be that she left the country illegally we do not accept  it  has
    been shown that that of itself will put her in danger".

18.  I find in any event, that there is, a contradiction in the findings  of
    the panel as between paragraphs 121 and 127 of their determination.   I
    am mindful that at paragraph 121, the  panel  stated  that  there  were
    elements of the Appellant's account "as we have said that are  entirely
    plausible in relation to an  arranged  marriage  and  violence  in  the
    marriage" but they were unable to accept "the other elements  that  she
    has put forward ...."  The panel continued at paragraph  121,  that  it
    was not for them "to be able to give a definitive version of what  must
    have happened".  At paragraph 127 the  panel  stated  inter  alia  that
    "whilst it may be that she left the country illegally we do not  accept
    that it has been shown that that of itself will put her in danger".

19.  In that regard and as Mr Pretzell  rightly  submitted,  one  could  not
    have it both ways.  Either the Appellant illegally exited Iran  or  she
    did not.  These are irreconcilable views and even  if  taken  at  their
    highest, it followed that the panel were not in a position to say  that
    they did not accept that it had been shown that her illegal exit  would
    of itself put her in danger, without taking full and proper account  of
    the guidance in SB to which I have above referred.

20.  I repeat that no finding was made as  to  whether  the  Appellant  left
    Iran with the permission of her husband.  A married woman under Iranian
    law is not allowed to leave the country without the permission  of  her
    husband and as  Mr  Pretzell  submitted,  an  Iranian  court  would  be
    interested and ask questions as to how the Appellant left  the  country
    and why, and what she was doing abroad, and why she was returning. Thus
    in order to make considered findings as to what  would  happen  if  the
    Appellant faced with such  questioning  would  answer  truthfully,  the
    panel were required to make findings as to whether she left the country
    clandestinely and  whether  with  or  without  the  permission  of  her
    husband. The difficulty in this case, is that the panel could not  make
    a finding on  that  or  reach  a  conclusion.   See  IK  above  and  Ms
    Giovannetti's concession to which I have referred.

21.  It was the task of the panel to determine whether the Appellant was  at
    real risk on return to Iran and in  my  view  a  key  element  in  that
    crucial consideration was overlooked.

22. Mr Tarlow having accepted there was "a lacuna" in the panel's reasoning
    at paragraph 121, explained that if I were  minded  to  set  aside  the
    panel's determination, I  should  nonetheless  preserve  their  adverse
    credibility findings in relation  to  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
    converted and become a Jehovah's Witness and that she would continue to
    practise as such, were she to return to Iran.  He  did  however,  agree
    with Mr Pretzell, that in such circumstances, the proper  course  would
    be to remit the case back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

23. Mr Pretzell urged me not to preserve any of the  panel's  findings,  on
    the basis that the material errors of law identified,  clearly  tainted
    the panel's entire reasoning.  I would agree  and my conclusion in that
    regard has been reinforced by the fact that at paragraph 125  of  their
    determination the panel were clear that inter alia:

         "When we weigh all the elements, we do not find  her  credible  and
         ask ourselves whether we can accept even  to  the  lower  standard,
         that the Appellant has shown that she is genuine in her  conversion
         and would if returned to Iran continue as a Jehovah's  Witness  and
         would want to go knocking on people's  doors  to  try  and  convert
         them.  In the light of the above findings we do not  find  that  we
         can accept that either." (Emphasis added)

24.  Clearly therefore the panel had in mind other aspects of their  adverse
    findings in reaching  their  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    converted to a Jehovah's Witness as she claimed.  It follows  that  the
    material errors of law identified have tainted all  of  their  findings
    and none of them in such circumstances can be preserved.

25.  In the circumstances, I agreed with the parties' request,  that  having
    regard to the errors of law found, the length of the hearing  (estimate
    at three hours) and where I was told by Mr Pretzell that there would be
    at least four witnesses to give evidence including the Appellant,  that
    there were highly compelling reasons falling within paragraph 7.2(b) of
    the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  as  to  why  the  decision
    should not be remade by the Upper Tribunal.   It  was  clearly  in  the
    interests of justice that the appeal of the Appellant be  heard  afresh
    in the First-tier Tribunal on all issues at large.

25.  For the reasons I have given and  by  agreement  with  the  parties,  I
    conclude therefore that the appeal should be remitted to  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Easterman  to
    determine the appeal afresh at Hatton Cross Hearing Centre on the first
    available date.  For that purpose I am told that  a  Farsi  interpreter
    would be required.

26.  For this purpose, anonymity is to be preserved.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be  set
aside and none of their findings preserved.   I  remit  the  making  of  the
appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  before  a  First-tier
Tribunal Judge other than the Judge to whom I have above referred and  other
than Sir Geoffrey James - Non-Legal Member.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 30 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
