
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02265/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th August 2014                              |On 4th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     mJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Javed, instructed on behalf of Thompson & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Cockrill and Mr J H Eames) who, in
    a determination promulgated on 22nd May 2014 allowed his appeal against
    the decision of the Respondent  dated  23rd  October  2013  to  make  a
    deportation order by virtue of Section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.  The Respondent stated that Section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 applied upon the ground that the Respondent deemed  it  to  be
    conducive to the public good to make a deportation order against him.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent and  MJ  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  panel.   Unless
    and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court  proceedings.   I
    have made such a direction as the evidence before the  Tribunal  refers
    to confidential medical evidence in respect of the Appellant.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

 4. The background  of  the  Appellant  can  be  briefly  summarised.   The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 10th  December  1996  with  his
    mother.  She sought asylum naming both the Appellant and his sister  as
    her dependants.  That application was refused on 17th November 1998 but
    the Appellant was  granted  exceptional  leave  to  remain  until  16th
    December 2002.   On  10th  February  2003  the  Appellant  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.

 5. On 28th August 2003 the Appellant was convicted  at  Snaresbrook  Crown
    Court of an offence contrary to Section 18 of the Offences against  the
    Person Act of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm.  On 18th
    September 2003 he was sentenced by that  court  to  a  period  of  four
    years' imprisonment.

 6. On 4th February 2005 he was  served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
    deportation and he responded to  this  on  the  basis  that  he  feared
    persecution if returned to Iran.  On 24th March 2006 he  was  given  an
    opportunity to rebut the presumption that he was convicted of a serious
    crime and constituted a danger to the United Kingdom community and  was
    also served with the letter informing him that he should report to  the
    Asylum Screening Unit in order to take forward his  asylum  claim.   An
    application was made by him on 14th September 2007 for a "no time limit
    stamp" to  be  placed  on  his  passport.   That  remains  outstanding.
    Further  representations  were  made  by  a  Member  of  Parliament  in
    September 2010 and on 21st March 2013 he attended an  asylum  interview
    and  further  submissions  were  made  on  5th  April  2013   enclosing
    amendments to the asylum claim that the Appellant made.   The  decision
    to make a deportation order was made on 23rd October 2013.

 7. The Secretary of State set out her reasons for deportation in a  letter
    dated 23rd October 2013.  The first issue related to Section 72 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Secretary  of  State
    took into account the representations made on his behalf that he  would
    not be a danger to the community but took into account at paragraph  12
    the judge's sentencing remarks.  On this basis it was  considered  that
    he  was  convicted  of  an  extremely  violent  crime,  that   he   had
    consistently refused to plead guilty and to recognise  the  seriousness
    of the offence.  This was also a  crime  that  was  a  continuation  of
    behaviour that was not good character and he  received  a  sentence  of
    four years.  Thus the circumstances of the offence  involving  a  knife
    and having taken into  account  the  Appellant's  representations,  the
    Secretary of State considered that it was not sufficient to  rebut  the
    presumption that he was convicted  of  a  serious  crime  or  that  his
    continued presence in the United Kingdom  would  be  a  danger  to  the
    United Kingdom community thus at paragraph 14 of the letter,  in  light
    of the failure to rebut the presumption,  in  accordance  with  Section
    72(9)(b) of the 2002 Act (as amended) the Secretary of State  certified
    the presumption under Section 72.  The effect of  the  certificate  was
    that any appeal under Section 82(1) of the 2002  Act,  the  judge  must
    consider certification first and if the judge  upheld  the  certificate
    then the asylum  aspect  of  the  appeal  would  be  dismissed  without
    consideration of the asylum claim.

 8. The letter went on to  consider  the  basis  of  the  asylum  claim  at
    paragraphs 16 to 38 and gave reasons taking into  account  the  country
    information as to why he had not demonstrated that he would be at  risk
    of serious harm or  of  persecutory  treatment  if  returned  to  Iran.
    Consideration was given to discretionary leave at paragraphs 44 onwards
    and the Appellant's medical condition including his  epilepsy  and  the
    medical evidence was considered in the light of the case of N v The  UK
    and that of Bensaid v The United Kingdom  Number  44599/98  ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State considered the country materials relating to medical
    provision in Iran and reached the conclusion the Secretary of State was
    not satisfied that the Appellant had established a claim under Articles
    2 or 3 on the grounds of his medical condition.

 9.  As to liability to deportation that was considered at paragraph 59 and
    that paragraph 396 provided that  there  was  a  presumption  that  the
    public interest requires the deportation of a person who is  liable  to
    deportation.  Consideration under Article 8 took place at paragraphs 23-
    76 and reached the conclusion that as the Appellant  was  convicted  of
    wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and received a sentence
    of four years' imprisonment the Appellant could not  satisfy  paragraph
    399 or 399A and therefore paragraph 398 applied in that it  would  only
    be  in  "exceptional  circumstances"  that  the  public   interest   in
    deportation will be  outweighed  by  other  factors.   The  exceptional
    circumstances that have been put forward on his behalf were  considered
    at paragraphs 69-76 but took into account his  personal  circumstances.
    The Appellant had stated that his parents resided in the United Kingdom
    who were both British citizens  and  that  he  had  a  sister  who  was
    disabled.  The Secretary of State did not consider that there had  been
    evidence to demonstrate further elements of  dependency  beyond  normal
    emotional ties.  The Secretary of State took into account that  he  had
    entered the United Kingdom in December  1996  at  the  age  of  16  and
    therefore had spent his youth and formative years in Iran and therefore
    would have knowledge of the traditions, customs  and  social  norms  of
    Iran having spent his life there.  It  was  also  considered  that  the
    Appellant had previously stated that he had a maternal grandmother  and
    an uncle in Iran and therefore were able  to  assist  and  support  any
    reintegration to Iranian society.  The conclusion  therefore  was  that
    the presumption of the public interest favoured deportation.

10.  The  Appellant  appealed  this  decision  under  Section  82  of   the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  grounds  were
    submitted on 8th November 2013 and relied upon  his  claim  for  asylum
    based on his political beliefs and also that the decision to remove him
    would be in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.   As  to  the  Section  72
    certificate, it was submitted that the presumption was rebuttable based
    on the fact that he had not been involved in  any  criminal  activities
    since his release and had been a "model citizen" and also that  he  had
    been attacked in 2008 which resulted in him developing epilepsy and had
    been registered as disabled.  There was nothing it was said  since  his
    release which would indicate that he  was  a  danger  to  society.   At
    paragraph 11 of the grounds it pleaded that the Appellant's immigration
    history and that of his family should be taken into account and that he
    is "unable to function without the support of his family members as  he
    is dependent on them."

11. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  panel  (Judge  Cockrill
    and J H Eames) on  16th  May  2014.   It  is  clear  from  reading  the
    determination that the Appellant was not in attendance at the  hearing.
    He was represented by a solicitor who renewed  an  application  for  an
    adjournment.  At paragraphs [60-73] of  the  determination,  the  panel
    considered the basis upon which the application for an adjournment  had
    been based but reached the conclusion that there was no  good  prospect
    of the Appellant attending on any future date and  therefore  the  case
    should proceed.  Thus no oral evidence was given before the Tribunal.

12. In a determination promulgated on 22nd May 2014 the panel  reached  the
    conclusion that there were exceptional circumstances  which  outweighed
    the public interest in deportation and allowed the appeal on Article  8
    grounds.  Within the determination itself they considered  the  Section
    72 certificate but did not uphold it for the reasons that they gave  at
    [88-95].  As a result of not upholding the Section 72 certificate  they
    considered the Appellant's case on protection  grounds  that  had  been
    advanced on the  basis  of  his  political  beliefs  and  also  in  the
    alternative as to "sur place" activity carried out  by  the  Appellant.
    However the panel reached the conclusion that he had not made  out  the
    factual matrix to support his claim for asylum and rejected  his  claim
    in that respect on all grounds.  As to the decision  under  Article  8,
    they considered it on the basis of his  private  life  at  [105].   The
    panel observed that the Appellant's mother was not  present  at  Taylor
    House to assist on any matter and  also  that  she  had  not  made  any
    witness  statement.   At  [107]  they  considered  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances that were sufficient to outweigh  the  public
    interest.  In this context  they  made  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    personal circumstances and his medical condition.   They  had  evidence
    from his general practitioner that he suffered from severe epilepsy and
    that had been the result of a violent attack upon him in 2008 in  which
    he had received a  stab  to  the  head  which  had  later  triggered  a
    condition of epilepsy.  They took into account that he had difficulties
    in the short-term because he had nowhere to live as he had been evicted
    and that he had problems concerning the abuse of alcohol and drugs.  At
    [109] they found that the Appellant had not been involved in  any  sort
    of "serious criminal activity whatsoever" and at [109]  found  that  he
    was -

         "a man who has got a good deal of vulnerability and he  would  find
         it exceptionally hard to try  and  cope  and  survive  in  Iran,  a
         country in which he  has  absolutely  no  meaningful  support  from
         family and friends."

     They took into account that he was registered disabled although he  had
    previously had shown a capacity to work and to study and  that  in  the
    past he had suicidal tendencies and being  suffering  from  depression.
    In looking at the public interest the panel at [111] said this:-

         "111.    What is a factor that carries special weight  with  us  in
             again looking at the matter overall is that this one  offence,
             albeit very serious, was committed a long  time  ago  back  in
             2003.  It undercuts the force  of  the  Respondent's  argument
             that the public interest is to  be  served  by  deporting  the
             Appellant, when it is something over  ten  years  before  this
             matter really reaches the Tribunal.

        112. In the meantime of course  the  Appellant  has  not  committed
             offences and so he has not only displayed that  he  is  not  a
             danger to the community, but  his  particular  combination  of
             personal difficulties means in our judgment that he does  fall
             into this exceptional category.

        113. His health needs are marked.  He has got  a  relationship,  we
             consider with his mother and sister although there was no oral
             evidence of course in this case.  We  accept  the  proposition
             made that the mother had been the Appellant's carer  for  some
             time.

        114. Looking at the matter and overall, the  Appellant's  situation
             falls sufficiently outside the norm in our judgment and  right
             to say that the Appellant's case is an exceptional one."

13. The panel went on to say that he had spent half his life in the country
    and he had come as a teenager and therefore he had  lost  contact  with
    his home country.  Thus they concluded at [117] that whilst  they  were
    mindful of the "seriousness of his crime" but that the -

         "Appellant's case is sufficiently marked and exceptional for us  to
         conclude that the public  interest  is  indeed  outweighed  by  the
         specific personal factors concerning the Appellant that  have  been
         outlined earlier in this determination."

14. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and on
    11th June 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson  granted  permission
    for the following reasons:-

         "It is arguable, as submitted in the grounds of  application,  that
         the  panel  materially  misdirected  themselves  in  law  in  their
         consideration  of  whether  the  Appellant's   circumstances   were
         exceptional and this panel gave special weight  to  the  period  of
         time that had elapsed since the  Appellant's  offence,  which  they
         stated  'undercuts'  the  public  interest  in   deportation.    As
         submitted the public interest in deportation was not diminished  by
         the length of time  that  had  elapsed  because  the  risk  of  re-
         offending represents  a  factor  in  deportation  and  is  not  the
         ultimate aim.  It is also arguable that  inadequate  reasoning  was
         given as to why it was found that the Appellant was living with his
         mother and cared for by her.  All grounds are arguable."

15. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal  and  the  Appellant  was  in
    attendance along with his representative Miss Javed.  The Secretary  of
    State was represented by Miss  Johnstone,  Senior  Presenting  Officer.
    Miss Johnstone  relied  upon  the  written  grounds  submitted  by  the
    Secretary  of  State.   In  addition  she  made  the   following   oral
    submissions.  She submitted that the panel had  erred  in  law  in  its
    consideration of what were "exceptional circumstances".  At  [105]  the
    case was advanced on private life grounds but in reaching  the  finding
    concerning the length of time since he was last convicted at  [111]  it
    did not take into account the public interest properly.   The  Tribunal
    applied too much weight to the length of  time  since  his  conviction.
    The circumstances considered  by  the  panel  to  be  exceptional  were
    summarised as the Appellant's epilepsy, his familial ties to his mother
    and sister and the duration that  had  elapsed  since  the  Appellant's
    offence in 2003.  As regards his personal circumstances, she  submitted
    that they had not been demonstrated to  fall  within  the  "exceptional
    category".  No consideration was given by  the  judge  to  the  country
    materials placed before the Tribunal concerning  medical  provision  in
    Iran.  They  did  not  take  that  into  account  when  reaching  their
    conclusions at [109].  The panel also fell into  error  by  reaching  a
    finding at [113] that his mother had been  the  Appellant's  carer  for
    some time.  The evidence before the Tribunal was that he was not living
    with his family in the United Kingdom and there was  no  evidence  that
    his mother was his carer there being  no  witness  statement  from  the
    Appellant or his mother dealing with this.   Thus  the  assessment  was
    flawed.

16. Miss Javed on behalf of the Appellant relied upon the Rule 24 response.
     She  submitted  that  there  was  evidence  to  support  his  personal
    circumstances and to demonstrate that he suffered from severe  epilepsy
    and also that he suffered from depression and had had suicide  attempts
    in the past.   The  finding  as  to  his  vulnerability  therefore  was
    supported by the evidence.  At K2  there  was  a  reference  to  family
    members and that he had not seen them since he  left  Iran.   Thus  the
    First-tier Tribunal made findings as to the level of  family  life  and
    support the Appellant upon return to Iran.   They  properly  took  into
    account that he was registered disabled and therefore it  was  open  to
    the panel to take into account the Appellant's medical  condition,  his
    lack of links to Iran, his established family in the UK  and  that  the
    offence took place in 2003 to demonstrate that these were  "exceptional
    circumstances".  Miss Javed referred to  the  Appellant's  relationship
    and dependency on his mother.  She accepted that  his  mother  was  not
    present  at  the  hearing  nor  was  there   any   witness   statement.
    Nonetheless she submitted he had family in the UK that were a  form  of
    support and the exceptional circumstances could be seen in the light of
    his medical history, his condition and his dependency  on  his  mother.
    The homelessness was a temporary measure ( see [108] and [109]).   Thus
    the assessment made by the First-tier Tribunal was not in  error.   She
    submitted that if there  had  been  an  error,  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as the Appellant was  now  able  to
    give evidence which he  was  not  able  to  do  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

17. I reserved my determination.

18. I have considered with care as to whether or  not  the  grounds  relied
    upon by the Secretary of State and set out in the written  grounds  and
    also in the oral grounds amount to a disagreement with the decision  of
    the panel or if they demonstrate that the panel erred in law.   I  have
    reached the conclusion after careful consideration that  the  Secretary
    of State has made out her grounds and that there are errors of  law  in
    the determination of the panel.

19.   The  first  error  relates  to  their  consideration  of  the  public
    interest.  There can  be  no  doubt  that  the  offence  of  which  the
    Appellant was convicted of was an extremely serious  offence.   He  was
    convicted of an offence contrary to Section  18  namely  wounding  with
    intent to do grievous bodily harm.  The sentencing judge's remarks  are
    included in the case papers at D1-D4.  The judge makes reference to the
    Appellant having pushed the knife into the victim's stomach and that he
    was fortunate that  he  did  not  kill  him.   The  victim  had  a  two
    centimetre stab wound to the left lower abdomen which extended  to  the
    fatter muscle into the abdominal cavity.  He had spent several days  in
    hospital in intensive care but even after released into the care of his
    family was unable to leave the house for several weeks.  It resulted in
    the separation from his girlfriend and had suffered flashbacks and  was
    very uncomfortable; it being hard for him to be out of the house.   His
    mental health was affected for a period of time although  he  had  been
    perfectly stable before that.  He has been left with a  large  surgical
    scar.  It is also plain from the sentencing remarks that the  Appellant
    had not pleaded guilty and that the issue had been one of intent.   The
    judge made reference to the Appellant having been drinking  excessively
    and took into account that he was not a man of good character but  that
    there was a common assault in May 1998 and criminal damage.   Thus  the
    judge sentenced the Appellant to a term of imprisonment of four  years.
    The panel recognised and paid weight to that index offence of one  that
    was sufficiently serious to justify removal that being  a  sentence  of
    four years for an offence  of  Section  18  of  wounding  with  intent.
    However at [111] the panel said this:-

         "What is a factor that carries special  weight  with  us  in  again
         looking at the matter overall is that this one offence, albeit very
         serious, was committed a long time ago back in 2003.  It  undercuts
         the force of the Respondent's argument that the public interest  is
         to be served by deporting the Appellant, when it is something  over
         ten years before this matter really reaches the Tribunal."

20. The panel at [112] went on to say that he has not committed any further
    offences.

21. This in my judgment dilutes the public  interest  and  leaves  out  the
    count a material consideration whereby the panel did  not  factor  into
    the balance all the  facets  of  the  public  interest  that  are  well
    established (see DS (India) [2009] EWCA Civ 554).  The public  interest
    in deportation of those who commit  serious  crimes  goes  well  beyond
    depriving the offender in question of a chance to re-offend and extends
    to the prevention and deterrence of serious crime and uphold the public
    abhorrence of such offending.  The panel in its  determination  reduced
    the public interest to a one dimensional matter.

22. The panel further fell into error at [112] when they placed  weight  on
    the length of  time  since  his  conviction.   Whilst  the  panel  were
    entitled to give full account to any developments  since  sentence  had
    been passed (relying on the Uner criteria), in this context  the  panel
    did not consider or give any reasons for the length of  time  that  had
    elapsed and the question of delay.  In that sense, they could not  hold
    the delay against the Secretary of State without looking at the reasons
    or causes for that  delay  and  taking  into  account  that  since  the
    Appellant was served with a notice of liability to deportation  on  4th
    February 2005 that the Appellant had been pursing a  claim  for  asylum
    which had caused delay to the process and which  the  panel  ultimately
    found was not justified.  Thus the panel left out of its  consideration
    a further material matter.

23.   The grounds also identify a further error and  that  relates  to  the
    panel's consideration of the elements of his private life.   The  panel
    at [105] went on to consider his case under Article 8 of the  ECHR  and
    found that his case was "better presented in relation  to  a  right  to
    respect for private life."  In this context they took into account  his
    medical condition which had been evidenced by a general  practitioner's
    report.  The panel  went  on  to  state  at  [106]  that  it  had  been
    unfortunate that the Appellant's mother was not present at the  hearing
    nor had she made any witness statement.  At [113] they  considered  the
    relationship with his mother and sister noting that there was  no  oral
    evidence of this but went on to state "We accept the  proposition  made
    that the mother had been the Appellant's carer for  some  time."   This
    also had relevance to their findings at [109] where  they  reached  the
    conclusion that this was a man -

         "who has got a  good  deal  of  vulnerability  and  would  find  it
         exceptionally hard to try and cope and survive in Iran,  a  country
         in which he has got absolutely no meaningful  support  from  family
         and friends."

     The panel's  findings  are  flawed  in  this  respect.   There  was  no
    evidence before the panel that his mother was  the  Appellant's  carer.
    The evidence before the panel was that the  Appellant  was  not  living
    with his mother but was living with a friend in Suffolk.   The  reasons
    for deportation letter made reference to the lack  of  dependence  upon
    his mother and that it did not go beyond normal emotional ties  despite
    his condition.  The panel failed to address that issue  either  on  the
    evidence or by addressing the test set out in Kugathas  v  SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31.  The submissions made by Miss Javed  before  the  Tribunal
    were  that  the  Appellant  was  relying  upon  his  relationship   and
    dependency upon his mother.  Indeed the Grounds  of  Appeal  that  were
    provided  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  reference   to   his
    dependency on his mother.  However that evidence  was  not  before  the
    Tribunal nor did the panel give any  consideration  to  the  issues  of
    dependency given that the Appellant was an adult and thus their finding
    that his relationship with his mother and that this sister should carry
    weight was not based on an objective evaluation of the Appellant or his
    family member's circumstances.

      I also find that the panel erred in law in its finding at [109]  that
    the  Appellant  on  the  grounds  of  vulnerability   would   find   it
    exceptionally hard to cope and survive in Iran which was a  country  in
    which he would have no "meaningful support from  family  and  friends".
    In this context also there was no explanation or reasoning by the panel
    as to why he would not receive any support from family and friends  nor
    was there any consideration of the availability  of  medical  treatment
    for the Appellant's medical condition available in Iran.   The  reasons
    for deportation letter and  also  the  evidence  in  the  form  of  the
    Operational Guidance Note for Iran had been placed before the  Tribunal
    which made specific reference to medical treatment available.  That was
    not considered and thus the findings in this respect were also  flawed.



24. For those reasons, the decision of the panel must be set aside.  As  to
    the re-making of the decision,  Miss  Javed  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal by way of a fresh oral hearing by way of  remittal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  She submitted that the Appellant  was  now
    able to give evidence in support of his appeal and would also  seek  to
    call oral evidence on his  behalf.   There  was  also  further  medical
    evidence available that had not been  provided  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which was of relevance and required further consideration.

25. By reason of the nature of the error of law, none of  the  findings  of
    fact can be preserved and  therefore  a  fresh  oral  hearing  will  be
    required.  I am satisfied that the appropriate course to follow is  the
    one that Miss Javed invited the court to adopt,  namely  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   Whilst  it  is  not  the  ordinary
    practice of the Tribunal to remit cases  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    there are reasons why in this case such a  course  should  be  adopted,
    having given particular regard  to  the  overriding  objective  of  the
    efficient disposal of appeals and also that there are  issues  of  fact
    that require determination which will be required to be assessed in the
    light of the Appellant being able to now give oral  evidence  and  also
    that of his witnesses.

26. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  the
    case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House  for  a
    hearing on a date to be fixed in accordance with  Section  12(2)(b)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act paragraph 7.2 of the Practice
    Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

