
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02433/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17th June 2015 & 20th July 2015   |On 23rd July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              Mr Justice Green
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     WLG
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller & Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officers
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alexander, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence & Co
                    Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal concerns the rights of those convicted of criminal offences
    and sentenced to terms of custody of between 12 months  and  less  than
    four years to avoid deportation by reference to  other  considerations,
    such as the rights of children.  In particular it concerns the approach
    that should be  adopted  to  the  analysis  of  the  position  of  such
    convicted criminal following the coming into force (on 28th July  2014)
    of the modified provisions of paragraphs 388 and 389 of the Immigration
    Rules and the simultaneous commencement of s.117C of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (which  was  inserted  by  Section  19
    Immigration Act 2014).

 2. Because the outcome of this appeal turned upon a consideration  of  the
    new Immigration Rules we directed at  the  oral  hearing  that  further
    submissions should be made by the Secretary of State, with the claimant
    to respond if so advised, on a number of points of  law.   We  received
    helpful written submissions from the Secretary of State and these  were
    expanded upon at a reconvened oral hearing, at which the Respondent  to
    the appeal was represented and made oral submissions.

 3. The points that we raised for consideration were as follows:

       . Is it argued that SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  550  and  OH
         (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694 should continue  to  impact  on
         the Tribunal's decision-making  in  the  context  of  an  appellant
         falling  for  consideration  under  s.117C  (3)  and  (5)  of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and paragraph  399  of
         the Immigration Rules?

       . Is the test of "unduly harsh" under s.117C (5) of the  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  2002  Act  and  paragraph  399   of   the
         Immigration Rules one which simply involves focus on the impact  of
         the deportation on the child or partner or is it one which involves
         a  proportionality  exercise  in  which  the  negative  impact   of
         deportation on them is balanced  against  the  public  interest/the
         extent of crimes the appellant has committed?

       . Does the Secretary of State perform a proportionality exercise when
         considering paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules?

       . Does the Secretary of State consider that the test  at  s.117C  (3)
         and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 differs
         in any way from that at paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules?

The facts

 4. In this appeal the Secretary of State seeks to overturn the judgment of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the "Tribunal") which allowed the appeal of Mr
    WLG (henceforth the claimant) finding that on human rights grounds that
    the Secretary of State was  not  entitled  to  make  a  decision  under
    s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 to deport the claimant.

 5. The claimant first arrived in the United Kingdom in  October  2002  and
    was granted leave to remain as a family visitor for six months. He made
    an unsuccessful application to remain on the basis of a marriage  which
    subsequently broke down. In June 2007 he  made  the  first  of  several
    unsuccessful applications to remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with Ms PN, a British citizen. The claimant  had  met  his
    partner in October 2004 at a point in time when he  was  going  through
    marital problems with his then spouse. The claimant and Ms N  moved  in
    together in May 2005 and have lived together since then. Their child SG
    was born on 29th December 2006. The claimant also  maintains  a  strong
    relationship  with  his  partner's  daughter,  RP,  from   a   previous
    relationship. The couple have also had a son, TG, born on 28th  October
    2012.

 6. The claimant also has two further British citizen children, KG born  on
    8th August 2009 and  DG  born  on  19th  March  2011,  from  short-term
    relationships with Ms  LD-W  and  Ms  SA  respectively.   He  maintains
    contact with both of these children.

 7. On 29th March 2007 the claimant was  stopped  by  the  police.  He  was
    arrested and charged with drug related offences and upon  suspicion  of
    being an overstayer. He was served with the  relevant  papers  and  was
    granted temporary admission. On 26th June 2007 an application was  made
    requesting that he be granted further leave to remain as the  unmarried
    partner of a British citizen.

 8. This application was refused on 4th July 2008. There was no appeal.  In
    February 2009 the  claimant  was  arrested  for  possession  of  drugs.
    However, it appears that this  did  not  lead  to  any  conviction.  In
    consequence of the fact that he was remanded in  custody  the  claimant
    failed to report in May 2009 upon two occasions and he was listed as an
    absconder.

 9. On 21st March  2011  the  claimant  again  applied  to  remain  as  the
    unmarried partner of Ms PN. In  the  course  of  this  application  the
    claimant was convicted of robbery at Harrow Crown Court  on  15th  July
    2011 and sentenced to 12 months imprisonment suspended for  24  months.
    On 1st August 2011 his application for leave to remain as an  unmarried
    partner was refused with no right of appeal. On 5th March 2013  he  was
    arrested and appeared before Leeds Crown Court on 28th May 2013 and was
    convicted of perverting the course of justice. He was sentenced  to  12
    months imprisonment.

10. On 30th August 2013 he was  served  with  a  Notice  of  Liability  for
    automatic deportation. This was re-served on 13th September  2013,  and
    the claimant submitted reasons why he should not be deported based upon
    Article 8 ECHR.

11. His Article 8 application was considered by the Secretary of  State  in
    the light of his family life with his partner and his children but  was
    rejected in a decision letter dated 19th November 2013. The  conclusion
    of the Secretary of State was that  the  claimant's  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would not cause a disproportionate interference with his
    right to continue enjoying family life.

12. The appeal came before the Tribunal at a hearing on 19th June 2014. The
    judgment of the Tribunal was promulgated on 19th August  2014.  In  the
    interim, on 28th July  2014,  amended  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    deportation came  into  effect,  as  did  s.117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 inserted by s.119  of  Immigration  Act
    2014.

13. In the present case the Tribunal allowed the appeal holding that,  when
    all relevant factors were taken into account, whilst he could not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules it would be  disproportionate
    under the general  law  relating  to  Article  8  ECHR  to  deport  the
    claimant. We consider the detailed approach  adopted  by  the  Tribunal
    later in this judgment. It suffices at this juncture to record that the
    Tribunal  applied  the  version  of  paragraphs  398  and  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules which predated the coming into  effect  of  the  new,
    amended, version thereafter introduced on 28th July  2014  and  omitted
    any reference to s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002. This is evident from paragraphs [31ff] of the judgment.

The grounds of appeal advanced by the Secretary of State

14. In this appeal the Secretary  of  State  submits  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in  the  approach  adopted  to  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence and thereby the First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself.

15. A summary of the errors alleged to have been made is as follows. First,
    the Judge failed to make findings or give reasons as to  whether  there
    were exceptional circumstances that existed which outweighed the public
    interest in deportation. Secondly, instead of applying  an  exceptional
    circumstances approach the Judge wrongly applied a "standalone" Article
    8 assessment outside the scope of the Immigration Rules.  Thirdly,  had
    the Judge applied a proper exceptional circumstances test he would have
    found that there were no such circumstances justifying the  overturning
    of the deportation decision. Fourthly, specifically in relation to  the
    Judge's findings that the claimant posed a low risk of re-offending the
    Tribunal erred in concluding that this was the only facet of the public
    interest relevant to criminality which needed to be taken into account.
    The Judge should have continued  to  consider  other  relevant  factors
    which flowed from cases such as OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  694
    which included the risk of re-offending;  the  need  to  deter  foreign
    criminals from committing serious crimes by leading them to  understand
    that  whatever  the  other  circumstances  one  consequence  could   be
    deportation;  the  need  to  express  the  "revulsion"  of  society  by
    enforcing deportation and thereby in building public confidence in  the
    treatment of foreign citizens who have committed  serious  crimes;  and
    the need to respect the primary  responsibility  of  the  Secretary  of
    State  for  assessing  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation   of
    criminals.

16. The Grounds also included a criticism that the Tribunal had  failed  to
    address itself to the Immigration Act 2014 which inserts a new Part  5A
    into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act 2002 and in particular
    a new section 117C.  We have set this out below at paragraph [33].  The
    Secretary of Sate submitted that  the  two  considerations  in  Section
    117C(1) and (2) were of particular significance since these  emphasises
    that deportation of criminals "is" in the public interest; and that the
    more  serious  the  crime  the  "greater  is  the  public  interest  in
    deportation of the criminal".

17. It is notable that the Grounds advanced  (inconsistently)  contained  a
    mixture of arguments based upon the  old  version  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the new s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.

The approach to be adopted to this appeal

18. In our view we need to approach this case in  the  following  way.  Our
    first task is to consider whether the Tribunal erred in law. If it  did
    not, then, upon the basis of the  Grounds  as  drafted  which  are  all
    points of law, the appeal must fail. If, however, we conclude that  the
    Tribunal did err in law then we need to consider whether any error  was
    material, i.e. would  have  made  any  significant  difference  to  the
    outcome and, if it would, whether we should then quash  and  remake  or
    remit the decision.

Error of law

19. In our judgment, the Tribunal did err in law. This is for the following
    core reason.

20. The date of promulgation of the judgment was 19th August 2014. As such,
    it  post-dated  the  coming  into  force  of  the  amendments  to   the
    Immigration Rules brought about by the Immigration Act  2014.  The  new
    amended Rules became effective as of 28th July 2014. It is evident from
    E v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  49  at  paragraph  [27]  that  a  measure  is
    promulgated and becomes effective when  communicated  to  the  parties.
    This accords with a basic principle of administrative law of  fairness:
    See generally in relation to notice and fairness: De Smith's,  Judicial
    Review (7th Ed.) paragraphs  [7-046ff].  It  is  also  clear  from  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292 that the Rules in force from 28th July 2014 apply  in  any  appeal
    hearing on or after that  date,  as  did  s.117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

21. It follows that because the present judgment was promulgated after  the
    coming into effect of the new rules that it is  those  new  rules  that
    should have been applied and not the  preceding  version  thereof,  and
    that the Tribunal was also obliged to have regard to s.117B and  s.117C
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

22. The law that should have been applied to the facts was accordingly, the
    new version  of  paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  is
    materially different to the old version and s.117C of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Secretary of  State  is  therefore
    correct in paragraph [8] of her Grounds to point out that the  Tribunal
    failed to direct itself to the new Rules. We can readily understand why
    the First tier Tribunal applied the old Rules  given  that  the  actual
    hearing of the appeal pre-dated the new Rules  but  promulgation  post-
    dated them. In these unusual  circumstances  the  Tribunal  could  have
    sought  either  at  the  hearing  or   subsequently,   but   prior   to
    promulgation, submissions upon the application of the  new  Rules,  but
    regrettably it did not.  The principle that the relevant date  for  the
    application of the law is the date of promulgation  makes  sense  since
    even after an oral hearing has finished the Tribunal may still  receive
    new written submissions or evidence  (as  indeed  occurred  before  the
    First tier Tribunal) and  as  such  the  "hearing"  in  a  broad  sense
    continues.  The date upon which it can be said with certainty that  the
    judgment is definitive is the date upon  which  the  final  version  is
    communicated to the parties i.e. promulgation.

23. The consequence of this error is that the wrong test was applied to the
    facts and this means that we must move to the next stage  which  is  to
    consider the consequences thereof.

Materiality

24. We turn to consider whether the error, which we  have  identified,  was
    material to the outcome.

25. As a matter of elementary principle, an error of law does not,  in  and
    of itself, lead to an appeal being granted. We have to consider whether
    that error either was or may have  been  material  to  the  outcome.  A
    Tribunal judgment will be upheld  if  the  final  outcome  was  correct
    notwithstanding an error. It would, to  take  an  extreme  example,  be
    absurd if the Upper Tribunal was required to quash a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  which  was  manifestly  correct  in  its  ultimate
    conclusion simply because the First-tier Tribunal made a minor error as
    to a matter which was collateral or a mere side wind to  the  substance
    of the appeal. Each case will turn upon its own facts. Whether an error
    is material will depend upon such matters  as  the  centrality  of  the
    error to the logic of the reasoning set out in the judgment.  It  might
    also depend upon whether  the  facts  found  and  relied  upon  by  the
    Tribunal are relevant to the correct test to be  applied  so  that  the
    Upper Tribunal can, relying upon those facts, apply the new test to the
    facts as found to assess for itself whether they would or might lead to
    a different outcome.  In the present case the error of law went to  the
    core of the legal reasoning in  the  judgment.  However,  none  of  the
    findings of fact are challenged and we can apply the new rules to those
    facts in order to see whether the outcome changes.

The new regime post July 2014: Immigration Rules 398 and 399,  and,  section
117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

26. We start by setting out the law which the Tribunal should have  applied
    to the facts of the present case.

27. The new paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules ("IR") are  set
    out below with those parts of greatest relevance to  the  present  case
    emphasised in the italicised text:

         "Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
             deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
             against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because, in the
             view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
             particular disregard for the law,

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
             other factors where there are very compelling circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
             the UK, and

                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                      the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                      or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported".

28. The Secretary of State has  expressed  her  view  that  the  new  rules
    represent a comprehensive guide and that "old" case law under the "old"
    rules no longer pertains.

29. In McDonald's  "Immigration  Law  and  Practice"  (2014)  at  paragraph
    [16.84] the following is stated:

         "16.84. In the IDIs on Criminality Guidance, the Secretary of State
         explicitly  instructs  her  caseworkers  that  there  is   now   no
         obligation to  assess  Article  8  proportionality  issues  against
         authority preceding the implementation of the new Immigration Rules
         and the changes wrought by the Immigration Act 2014 in  respect  of
         decisions made after 28th July 2014:

             "Decision-makers must not make decisions on the basis of  case
             law established before  commencement  of  Section  19  of  the
             Immigration Act 2014 (28 July 2014) or refer to such case  law
             in decision letters. Decisions must be  taken  solely  on  the
             basis of the Immigration Rules, which Part 5A of the 2002  Act
             underpins. The Courts will develop new case law in relation to
             the public interest statements".

         That bold assertion may be seen as  having  been  endorsed  by  the
         Court of Appeal decision in LC (China) v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1310 at paragraph [26], in which it
         was suggested, in respect of the  preceding  rules,  that  previous
         case law of the ECtHR has been subsumed into the Immigration  Rules
         with the effect that a decision maker does not  therefore  need  to
         give further thought. Consequently there is no error of law by  the
         UT in failing to consider in explicit terms the factors  identified
         in Uner. It should be noted that LC (China), SS  (Nigeria)  and  MF
         (Nigeria) are very specific to deportation. They all emphasise  the
         great  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign criminals and the importance of  the  policy
         in that regard to which effect has been given by Parliament in  the
         UK  Borders  Act  2007  concerning  automatic  deportation.  In  LC
         (China),  Moore-Bick  LJ  distinguished  deportation   of   foreign
         criminals with those cases concerned with the removal of person who
         were in the UK country illegally (Para. 25)".

30. We agree broadly  with  this  general  statement.  The  new  rules  are
    different in significant respects so cases decided on their facts under
    the old rules will not be relevant. However, this does  not  mean  that
    certain broader  statements  of  principle,  for  example  set  out  in
    judgments of the Court of Appeal, do not continue to resonate. We  have
    set out below our conclusion that certain such "high level"  statements
    of principle from "old cases" are still relevant.

31. The new Immigration Rules differ  from  the  pre-existing  Rules  in  a
    number of respects. The logic of the ruling of the Court of  Appeal  in
    MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ makes clear that the IR  provide  a
    comprehensive regime for those subject  to  deportation  by  virtue  of
    their criminal record. They make clear that for certain types of person
    guilty of less serious crimes, that the "very compelling circumstances"
    test (previously the "exceptional circumstances test") does not  apply.
    Instead, the Secretary of State must apply  the  criteria  relating  to
    family rights  and  rights  of  the  child  in  paragraph  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The criteria at paragraph 399  differ  significantly
    in the new version of the Rules, and at paragraph 399(a) they place  at
    the heart of the analysis the rights of the child and in  particular  a
    test as to whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the child  either  to
    live in the country to which the person is to be deported or to require
    the child to remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.



32. It was thus common ground between all parties before us that the new IR
    are materially different to the old Rules.

33.  The  Secretary  of  State  relies  also  upon  section  117C  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   This  addresses  the
    application of Article 8 ECHR. It is given effect to in the new IR.  It
    provides:

         '117C. Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
         foreign criminals

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.



         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
             Kingdom, and

             (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
             integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
             deported.

         (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.'

34. There are a number of significant points to note about this  provision.
    First, the section is found in Part VA of the Act. Under  section  117A
    this part applies where a "court or tribunal" is required to  determine
    the legality of a decision under Article 8 or section  6  Human  Rights
    Act 1998. It is not an instruction to the Secretary of State.  This  is
    because it is intended to be protective of the Secretary of state  when
    she adopts what may appear, during an appellate or judicial process, to
    be a harsh, deportation orientated, decision. Nonetheless, we  consider
    that the principles in section 117C and  in  the  IR  must,  logically,
    reflect the same core principles else the Secretary of  State  and  the
    courts and tribunals  would  be  applying  different  rules.  Both  the
    Secretary of State  and  the  courts  and  tribunals  are,  after  all,
    applying the same Article 8 so there is no reason for section 117C  not
    to reflect principles applicable to decisions  makers  and  courts  and
    tribunals  alike.  Secondly,  the  concept  of  a  sliding   scale   of
    criminality (in section  117C(2))  and  that  of  undue  harshness  (in
    section 117C(5)) are in the same list of Article 8  considerations  set
    out in section 117C and no ranking of prioritisation is given to one or
    more of the considerations listed therein. This, it  seems  to  us,  is
    relevant to the important issue we address below which is  whether  the
    undue harshness test in the IR waters  down  and  weakens  the  sliding
    scale test.

Analysis: The structure and reasoning in the  judgment  of  the  First  tier
Tribunal

35. We turn now to consider the reasoning set out in the  judgment  of  the
    Tribunal in order to  decide  whether  the  ultimate  determination  is
    consistent with the new test.

36. The starting point is to record the  acceptance  by  the  Secretary  of
    State of all of the findings of fact set  out  in  the  judgment.  This
    being so the issue, therefore, for us is whether applying the  new  law
    to these facts the end result is different.  For  reasons  we  set  out
    later in this judgment we conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal  would
    have arrived at exactly the same result even had it  applied  only  the
    new law.

37. The reasoning of the judgment of the Tribunal proceeds in the following
    way. First (from paragraphs [29ff]), the Tribunal sets out the old law.
    Under the old paragraph 399 test was not whether it was "unduly  harsh"
    to expect a child to leave the UK but whether it was "unreasonable"  to
    expect that child to leave the UK. Further, the position of  the  child
    became essentially irrelevant if there was a family member who was able
    to care for the child in the  UK.  This  latter  requirement  has  been
    removed from the new Rules. It means that  a  person  with  a  criminal
    record is not susceptible to deportation simply because there  is  some
    other family member able to care for the child in the  UK.  Whilst  the
    claimant had four British citizen children in the UK it  was  clear  in
    the present case that all had mothers who could care for them  were  he
    deported.  It  was  for  this  reason,  which  was  clearly  no  longer
    applicable  and  erroneous,  that  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  this
    claimant could not succeed  under  paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

38. Looking at the appeal outside of the  Immigration  Rules  the  Tribunal
    addressed itself to the claimant's family life rights  (cf.  paragraphs
    [41ff]). The Tribunal  considered  the  duration  of  the  relationship
    between the claimant and his partner, and the number  of  children  who
    were British citizens. The Tribunal also recorded that the claimant had
    two other children who were British citizens by  another  partner  with
    whom he maintained contact and in whose lives he played an active role.
    The Tribunal concluded:

         "...we find that family life exists between the Appellant, Ms N and
         the children. Were the Appellant to  be  removed  from  the  United
         Kingdom there would be an interference with this family life".

39. In paragraph [46] the Tribunal considered the broad objectives  of  the
    immigration  system  and  the  facts   relevant   to   the   claimant's
    criminality. The right of the Secretary of State in law to maintain  an
    effective immigration system of control and to ensure the protection of
    the general public was acknowledged. This led the Tribunal to  examine,
    in considerable detail, the criminality  of  the  claimant  in  detail.
    Between paragraphs [46] - [52] the Tribunal considered  the  claimant's
    antecedents and the specific offences for which he had  been  convicted
    and it made an assessment as to their overall seriousness. The Tribunal
    identified and reviewed the sentences imposed.  The  Tribunal  accepted
    updated information by way of a NOMS report dated 25th  September  2013
    from the claimant's Offender Manager which  described  the  pattern  of
    offending. The report: "...gives the general re-offending predictor and
    the violence predictor over one to two years as low". The Tribunal took
    account of the Judge's sentencing  remarks  in  relation  to  the  last
    offence of perverting the course of justice. They record  the  view  of
    the Crown Court Judge that the claimant  reacted  after  panicking  and
    that he pleaded guilty at the first available opportunity. The Tribunal
    reviewed the conduct of the claimant on licence following  the  serving
    of the custodial part of his sentence  for  perverting  the  course  of
    justice and recorded that there was no evidence  of  further  offending
    and a history of compliance with the licence conditions.  In  paragraph
    [50] the Tribunal recorded that it had received  up  to  date  evidence
    which post dated the oral  hearing  but  pre-dated  promulgation.   The
    First tier Tribunal stated:

         "Following the hearing and in accordance  with  our  directions  we
         received an updated report dated 2 July 2014 from...the Appellant's
         former Offender Manager. In this report the Appellant was  assessed
         as posing a low risk of re-offending in  all  areas.  Further  [the
         report]  noted  that  since  the  Appellant's  release  he  had  no
         knowledge of any continued contact with unsuitable associates".

40. In paragraph [52] the Tribunal records:

         "The evidence submitted by the respondent  confirms  that  although
         the Appellant has been found guilty of an offence which attracted a
         sentence of 12 months there has been no  evidence  of  further  re-
         offending and the risk to the general public has been described  as
         low".

41. The Tribunal thereafter proceeded to consider the best interests of the
    children, in particular they applied the reasonableness test set out in
    the Immigration Rules and stated:

         "58. The question therefore is whether it would  be  reasonable  to
         expect the four children in the appeal before us to go  to  Jamaica
         where they have never been and where they would have no security in
         relation to accommodation. They have always lived  in  the  UK  and
         have no other family ties [t]here. They would be returning  with  a
         father who had been out of that country for over 10 years and  with
         a mother (in the case of S and T) who is a British citizen with  no
         employment prospects.

         59. It is clear that the other two children will not accompany  the
         Appellant to Jamaica and to all practical ends the involvement that
         they have with their father in their lives would almost  inevitably
         diminish if not end altogether. To expect  family  life  between  a
         parent and a child to be maintained by electronic means  would  not
         be in the interests of the two children left behind.  The  children
         benefit from the involvement in their  lives  of  both  parents  at
         present. As we have noted the Appellant has an active role in  both
         their lives.

         60.  In  the  particular  circumstances  it  is  clear   that   the
         Appellant's partner,  Ms  N,  would  not  willingly  accompany  her
         partner to Jamaica with their  two  children.  There  is  also  the
         question of her daughter R who is part of this  household.  She  is
         supported by her mother and is as yet not independent. She  retains
         close ties with her own  father.  This  young  person  would  quite
         clearly not be able to accompany the family".

42. In paragraphs [61] - [63]  the  Tribunal  pulled  the  threads  of  its
    analysis together and arrived at a final conclusion.   In  essence  the
    Tribunal found that the claimant  had  strong  family  links  with  his
    children such that his removal would be a disproportionate interference
    with "his right to continue to enjoy family life with them"  (paragraph
    [61]).  The Tribunal bore in mind the interest that the general  public
    had in the deportation of foreign criminals and  that  the  burden  lay
    upon the claimant to show that the need for deportation was "outweighed
    by the fact that  he  has  developed  both  family  and  private  life"
    (paragraph [62]).  The Tribunal  then  assessed  the  actual  level  of
    criminality revealed  by  the  claimant's  specific  record  (paragraph
    [63]). Ultimately the  Tribunal  applied  a  proportionality  balancing
    exercise (paragraph [63]).

Discussion: Application of new rules to facts as found

43. In this section we: set out why the new rules apply  to  the  claimant;
    set out our view on the relevant principles  to  be  applied  following
    28th Just 2014; and, we then apply those principles  to  the  facts  as
    found.

    (a)  The position of the Claimant under the new rules.

44. The new Immigration Rules apply because (on the basis of the  facts  as
    found): (a) the claimant claims that his deportation would be  contrary
    to Article 8; (b) he was subject to a sentence between  12  months  and
    less than 4 years imprisonment (paragraph 398(b);  and  (c)  he  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  children  under  the
    age of 18 who are British citizens (paragraph 399(a)(i)).

45. The claimant's family rights with a partner do not arise in  this  case
    because he is entitled to rely upon these only where  the  relationship
    in question was formed at a time when he was in the UK lawfully and his
    immigration status was not precarious, which is not the case.

46. The net effect is that the claimant is due to be deported save  insofar
    as it can be established that the rights of the  children  need  to  be
    protected pursuant to paragraph 399(a)(i)(a) and (b).

    (b)  General observations on the rules

47. A number of points or principle flow  from  the  new  rules  which  are
    relevant to our decision in this appeal. There are six points  we  wish
    to make.

48. The three categories of seriousness: First,  paragraphs  398(a)-(c)  IR
    identify three different categories of criminality and  as  such  these
    new rules are intended to reflect and implement section  117C(2)  which
    states that the more serious the crime the greater the public  interest
    in deportation.  By identifying three categories of varying seriousness
    and attaching different rules to  them,  this  statutory  principle  is
    given effect to. The first two categories (paragraphs 398(a)  and  (b))
    differentiate between different  levels  of  seriousness  of  crime  by
    reference to the sentence imposed (above or below 4 years custody). The
    third category  (paragraph  398(c))  relates  to  persistent  offenders
    showing a particular disregard for the law.

49. Gradations of seriousness within the 12 months  to  up  to  four  years
    sentence range: Secondly, a difficult question arises which is  whether
    the new IR represent the complete and definitive implementation of  the
    principles in Section 117C such that if (say) the impact of deportation
    on a child is unduly harsh the  criminal  may  not  be  deported  quite
    regardless of how serious the  criminality  was  within  the  range  of
    offences leading to a sentence of between 12 months and up to 4  years.
    In other words the IR, in identifying different categories of  criminal
    behaviour, must be taken to have fully implemented Section 117C leaving
    no further room for degrees of criminality to be  taken  into  account.
    The alternative view is that even  within  the  category  of  criminals
    sentenced to between 12 months and less than 4 years there is  still  a
    further balancing exercise to be performed based upon the facts of  the
    individual criminal subject to threatened deportation. In our  judgment
    this  latter  view  is  the  correct  interpretation.  The  range   and
    seriousness of criminality reflected in sentences of between 12  months
    up to less than 4 years  may  be  enormous,  especially  given  that  a
    sentence of just below 4 years may reflect an early guilty plea  to  an
    offence with a starting point of circa 6 years (i.e. where a one  third
    credit is given for the early plea). If no  account  is  taken  of  the
    gradations of the  seriousness  of  the  criminality  when  determining
    whether a person is to be deported then IR  398  would  not  adequately
    reflect Parliament's clear instruction in Section 117C  that  the  more
    serious the offence the greater the public interest in deportation. The
    IR are subordinate measures; they should be construed purposively so as
    to be consistent with Section 117C and they  may  be  so  construed  by
    concluding that inherent within the concept of undue harshness ("unduly
    harsh") in Paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a) and  (b),  is  an  instruction  from
    Parliament to balance in a case specific manner the impact on the child
    or partner with the impact on the public  interest.  We  also  consider
    that this is consistent with  Article  8  which  Section  117C  and  IR
    Paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a) purport to apply. That Article is subject to  a
    proportionality test. In our view it is proportionate  to  balance  the
    public interest (in favour of deportation) with  private  rights  in  a
    fact sensitive and case specific manner.

50. If we were  wrong  in  these  conclusions  IR  398  would  be  a  blunt
    instrument whereby spousal or child rights prevailed regardless of  the
    seriousness of the offence, unless  the  sentence  reached  four  years
    (when the "compelling circumstances"  test  kicked  in).  It  could  be
    argued that this, in actual fact, is the correct interpretation because
    in any case where the welfare rights of children are involved they  are
    to be treated as a primary concern (as emphasised by the Supreme  Court
    in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  ("ZH  (Tanzania)")  [2011]  UKSC  4   ("ZH
    (Tanzania)")) such that it is proper to refrain from  overly  balancing
    individual criminality with children's rights.  We do not subscribe  to
    this view. In LC (China) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1310 ("LC (China)") the
    Court of Appeal was concerned with the old version of IR 398 and with a
    criminal sentenced to  more  than  4  years,  and  due  allowance  must
    therefore be given to these facts. However, the Court made an important
    point about the balance  of  rights  between  the  public  interest  in
    deportation of criminals and children's rights. The Court held that  ZH
    (Tanzania)  concerned  the  view  of  the  Supreme  Court   about   the
    deportation of persons present illegally; not about the deportation  of
    criminals. Cases involving the latter engaged the very important public
    interest in the removal of criminals and, whilst in no way underplaying
    the importance of the rights of children, there  was  a  different  and
    more nuanced balancing exercise to be performed  in  such  cases  which
    placed  a  greater  degree  of  weigh  on  the   pubic   interest   (in
    deportation): see paragraphs [23] - [24]. This supports our conclusions
    that there is a proportionality, balancing, exercise inherent in  cases
    of sentences of less than 4 years which entails examining the  specific
    facts related to the criminality in issue.

51. The role of "compelling circumstance": A third point  to  emphasise  is
    that the "compelling circumstances" proviso does  not  apply  to  cases
    such as the present.  In the case of the two least  serious  categories
    of crime i.e. sentence of 4 years or  less  (paragraph  398(b))  and/or
    persistent  offenders  showing  a  particular  disregard  for  the  law
    (paragraph 398(c)) the test is based upon the undue harshness criteria.
    It is evident that it is intended to be materially more difficult for a
    foreign criminal who has been subject to a 4 years or more sentence  to
    avoid deportation  by  reference  to  family  rights.   In  such  cases
    something "over and above" such family rights must exist  before  there
    can be compelling circumstances which  trump  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.

52. Article 8  considerations  are  taken  account  of  within  the  rules:
    Fourthly, in our view because we consider that properly  construed  the
    statutory framework permits Article 8 to be fully  taken  into  account
    within the rules there is little if any scope for it  to  play  a  role
    outsider of the IR in a case such as the present. This is also the view
    of  the  Home  Office.  Chapter  13  of  the  Home  Office  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions ("IDI") in relation to  "Criminality  Guidance
    in Article 8 ECHR cases" provides as follows:

         "1.2.3  Paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out  the
         criminality thresholds. An Article 8 claim from a foreign  criminal
         who has not been sentenced to at least 4  years  imprisonment  will
         succeed if the requirements of an exception to deportation are met.
         The exceptions to deportation on the basis of family life  are  set
         out at paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules, and the exception on
         the basis of private life is at paragraph 399A.

         1.2.4 An Article 8 claim from  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
         sentenced to at least 4 years imprisonment will only succeed  where
         there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   the
         circumstances  described  in  the  exceptions  to  deportation   at
         paragraphs 399 and 399A".

53. The IR govern the  consequences  of  a  successful  Article  8  ground:
    Fifthly, if an Article 8 claim succeeds, within the confines of the IR,
    then paragraphs 399B and 399C set out the provisions for granting leave
    to remain. The view of the Home Office, which accords with that of this
    Tribunal, is that there is no provision to grant leave to remain on the
    basis of Article 8 to a foreign criminal  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (unless the foreign criminal is an EEA national or deportation is
    pursued solely upon the basis  of  an  overseas  conviction):  see  IDI
    paragraphs 1.2.5, 2.6 and 2.7.

54. The weight to be attached to the rights  of  children:   Sixthly,  even
    though we consider that there is a balancing exercise to  be  performed
    within the 12 months to up to 4 years sentence category that  does  not
    mean  that  the  children's  interests  are  to  be  given  less   than
    considerable  weight.  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 imposes a statutory obligation to have  regard  to
    the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  who  are  in
    the UK and this means that the best interests of  a  child  will  be  a
    "primary consideration in deportation cases":  See IDI paragraph 1.3.1.
     IDI paragraph 1.3.2 constitutes an instruction to decision  makers  to
    take account of all of the information and evidence provided in respect
    of the best interests of a child in  the  UK  in  the  context  of  the
    application of the private and family life exceptions  to  deportation.
    Further, section 71 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  states:  "For  the
    avoidance of doubt, this Act does not limit any  duty  imposed  on  the
    Secretary of State or any other person by section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (duty  regarding  the  welfare  of
    children)". The placing of the interests of the child at  the  head  of
    the list of relevant considerations, albeit that it does not always out-
    trump other considerations, was emphasised by the Supreme Court  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) (ibid.) and in particular at paragraphs [25], [26] and [46].
    The net effect of our construction of the IR is not  intended  to  down
    play the importance of children's right; it is simply  to  ensure  that
    they are nonetheless placed into the balancing scales, along  with  the
    also strong public interest in deportation. This  seems  to  us  to  be
    consistent with the principle in LC  (China)  (ibid.)  referred  to  at
    paragraph [50].

    (c)  The application of the rules to the facts as found: balancing  the
    public interest in deportation against the rights of the children

55. With  these  observations  in  mind  we  turn  to  apply  the  relevant
    principles to the facts as found. We have  already  observed  that  the
    facts of this case are not  in  dispute.  We  have  paid  very  careful
    attention to these facts and we have also reviewed the  file  carefully
    to identify the more detailed  basis  which  underpins  the  First-tier
    Tribunal findings.

56. In the present case it follows from the above that the claimant  is  to
    be deported unless the rights of the children trump the  strong  public
    interest consideration  reflected  in  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in
    section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  that
    deportation is conducive to  the  public  interest.  We  must  consider
    whether it would be "unduly harsh"  to  require  the  children  of  the
    claimant to live in the country to which  he  is  to  be  deported  and
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without him.

57. We have explained above that the concept of undue harshness involves  a
    fact sensitive balancing of  the  child's  interests  with  the  public
    interest in deportation.

58. The Home Office in the IDI gives a number of examples of factors  which
    may be relevant to the balancing exercise: whether the  criminal  is  a
    repeat  offender;  the  criminal's  ability  to  speak   English;   the
    criminal's financial independence; and whether any relationship  formed
    with a partner occurred at a  point  in  time  when  the  criminal  was
    present  unlawfully  or  with  a  precarious  immigration  status.   An
    additional, and  indeed  important,  factor  in  our  judgment  is  the
    seriousness of the offending within the 4 year sentence  bracket  since
    this range reflects a wide range  of  offending  and  might  very  well
    reflect significant differences in the risk  posed  by  the  individual
    concerned to society at large. Pre-sentence  reports  routinely  assess
    the risk posed by individuals to the public and it is clear that within
    this sentencing range there  may  be  individuals  who  present  vastly
    different levels of threat.

59. Section 2.5 IDI provides as follows:

         "2.5 Unduly harsh

         2.5.1 This section should be read in conjunction with the child
         guidance at section 3 and the partner guidance at section 4.

         2.5.2 When considering the public interest statements, words must
         be given their ordinary meanings. The Oxford English Dictionary
         defines "unduly" as "excessively" and "harsh" as "severe, cruel".

         2.5.3 The effect of deportation on a qualifying partner or a
         qualifying child must be considered in the context of the foreign
         criminal's immigration and criminal history. The greater the public
         interest in deportation, the stronger the countervailing factors
         need to be to succeed. The impact of deportation on a partner or
         child can be harsh, even very harsh, without being unduly harsh,
         depending on the extent of the public interest in deportation and
         of the family life affected.

         2.5.4 For example, it will usually be more difficult for a foreign
         criminal who has been sentenced more than once to a period of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months but less than four years to
         demonstrate that the effect of deportation would be unduly harsh
         than for a foreign criminal who has been convicted of a single
         offence, because repeat offending increases the public interest in
         deportation and so requires a stronger claim to respect for family
         life in order to outweigh it.

         2.5.5 It will usually be more difficult for a foreign criminal to
         show that the effect of deportation on a partner will be unduly
         harsh if the relationship was formed while the foreign criminal was
         in the UK unlawfully or with precarious immigration status because
         his family life will be less capable of outweighing the public
         interest than if he was in the UK with lawful, settled immigration
         status.

         2.5.6 Section 117B(2) of the 2002 Act states that it is in the
         public interest that those who seek to remain in the UK are able to
         speak English. If a foreign criminal cannot demonstrate that he is
         able to speak English, it will be more difficult for him to show
         that the effect of deportation on his qualifying partner or
         qualifying child will be unduly harsh. There is no prescribed
         standard of English which must be met here and no prescribed
         evidence which must be submitted. Decision-makers should consider
         all available information, though less weight will be given to
         claims unsubstantiated by original, independent and verifiable
         documentary evidence. Indications that a foreign criminal can speak
         English may include:

         -    evidence of citizenship (e.g. a passport) of a country where
         English is the (or a) main or official language;

         -    evidence of an academic qualification that was taught in
         English;

         evidence of passing an English language test;

         -    evidence that he has been interviewed (e.g. in connection with
         an asylum claim) or given evidence at an appeal hearing in English.



         2.5.7 Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act states that it is in the
         public interest that those who seek to remain in the UK are
         financially independent. If a foreign criminal cannot demonstrate
         that he is financially independent, it will be more difficult for
         him to show that the effect of deportation on his qualifying
         partner or qualifying child will be unduly harsh. Financial
         independence here means not being a burden on the taxpayer. It
         includes not having access to income-related benefits or tax
         credits, on the basis of the foreign criminal's income or savings
         or those of his partner, but not those of a third party. There is
         no prescribed financial threshold which must be met and no
         prescribed evidence which must be submitted. Decision-makers should
         consider all available information, though less weight will be
         given to claims unsubstantiated by original, independent and
         verifiable documentary evidence, e.g. from an employer or regulated
         financial institution."

60. We note that in paragraph 2.5.2 the Secretary of State  has  prayed  in
    aid the Oxford English Dictionary and she has cherry  picked  from  the
    list of cognate expressions therein those at the most severe end of the
    scale. The dictionary also defines "harsh" as "unpleasant", "jarring to
    the senses", "grim" and "unpalatable". During the reconvened hearing it
    was submitted to  us  that  this  cherry  picking  was  deliberate  and
    intended to convey the Secretary of State's view that in the  statutory
    context "harsh" was to assume its most extreme meaning. On the facts of
    this case we are not called upon to express a view on the question: how
    harsh is "harsh"? We flag it, however,  as  a  potentially  significant
    issue for another case on more marginal facts. We are not therefore  in
    this case either  endorsing  or  rejecting  the  Secretary  of  State's
    interpretation of "harsh" as set out in paragraph 2.5.2 (supra).

61. The following reflects our assessment of the facts.

62. First, so far as the children  are  concerned  the  claimant  has  four
    children  with  British  citizenship.  He   has   a   strong   parental
    relationship with those children. If he were to be deported to  Jamaica
    the children would, in all practical reality, lose contact with him. It
    has been found that they would not travel with  him  as  their  mothers
    have work, secure accommodation and other family commitments in the  UK
    (including  in  the  case  of  his  partner  a  child  by  a   previous
    relationship who remains a dependent part of her household  whilst  she
    continues her studies but also has contact with her birth  father)  and
    that they would lose the benefit of his significant presence  in  their
    lives as a parent if he were deported. It would clearly  therefore  not
    be in their best interests.

63. It would clearly therefore not be in the children's best  interests  if
    the Claimant were removed. He is actively and regularly involved in all
    of their lives as a hands-on father  who  provides  care  whilst  their
    mothers work and study and is a key part of their lives at other times.
    The children are  aged  two,  four,  five  and  eight  years  old,  and
    therefore very young, making the physical relationship between them and
    the Claimant all the more essential. All three mothers have experienced
    time when the Claimant was not able to have this physical contact  with
    their mutual children whilst he was imprisoned and have given  evidence
    of negative impact on their children, and how they struggled to provide
    the love and attention of two parents during this period of  time.  The
    mother of KG sets out in her  letter  that  K  directly  expressed  his
    father's physical absence as rejection of him  saying:  "Mummy  have  I
    been naughty, is that why daddy doesn't want to see me?" He feared that
    he had been abandoned, and his nursery  expressed  concerns  about  his
    behaviour. The Claimant's deportation would reduce the  income  of  his
    partner and the other mothers of his  children  by  removing  the  free
    child-care he currently provides, and thus  negatively  impact  on  the
    children's well-being in this way. The children  could  not  travel  to
    have contact via visits without their mothers who would  not  have  the
    funds  for  the  flights,  and  given  the  Claimant's  own   lack   of
    qualifications it is most unlikely he would be in a  position  to  find
    well paid work to fund multiple flights  for  the  children  and  their
    three mothers.

64. Secondly, this brings us to  the  next  question.  The  test  of  undue
    harshness involves a wider, more rounded, assessment which  takes  into
    account the degree and nature of the criminality. As to this the  level
    of criminality engaged in by the claimant is at the lowest end  of  the
    least serious category. He was sentenced to 12 months  custody.  He  is
    assessed as of low risk and is not a proven recidivist. He demonstrated
    remorse. He appears to have responded positively to his punishment.  We
    can see nothing  in  these  particular  facts  which  would  warrant  a
    conclusion that the Tribunals end result was  wrong.  The  Claimant  is
    also able to speak fluent English as this is his first language and  is
    financially independent as his wife is  in  full-time  employment  with
    Ealing Adult Social Services as a Senior Day Care Worker, and  supports
    him whilst he provides care for their two young children. He  therefore
    can demonstrate that the matters to  which  it  is  necessary  to  have
    regard under section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 are favourable to him.

65. It follows from the facts as found by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that,
    upon the application of the new Immigration Rules, the decision of  the
    Tribunal should be maintained as the claimant was entitled  to  succeed
    under the exception paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration  Rules  and  in
    accordance with s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

66. We add one final rider: The Claimant prevails on the facts as they have
    presently been found. If further  criminal  acts  are  perpetrated  the
    balance could change. A consequence of this judgment is that a criminal
    with a strong familial relationship does not acquire permanent immunity
    from deportation.

67. For all these reasons the appeal is refused.

Postscript

68. By way of postscript we wish to emphasise that  our  analysis  in  this
    judgment relates only to cases of criminality  falling  within  the  12
    months to up to 4 years sentencing  category.  We  are  conscious  that
    there are difficult questions of both law and practice which  arise  in
    other circumstances and we therefore do not purport to express  a  view
    on other types of case.

69. By way of example  we  identify  two  types  of  case  where  different
    considerations might apply. First, cases of lesser criminality that  do
    not lead to a 12 month custodial sentence.  IR 398 does not cover  this
    situation. However, that does not mean that Article 8 does  not  apply.
    Logic would suggest that the balancing exercise might  (depending  upon
    the facts) be more favourable to the criminal since this is  consistent
    with the overarching section 117C(2) the corollary of which is that the
    less  serious  the  offence  the  weaker  is  the  public  interest  in
    deportation. Quite how  this  would  work  in  practice  when  balanced
    against family rights is, however, beyond the remit of  this  judgment.
    Secondly, in the case of criminals who received sentences of 4 years or
    more, where the compelling circumstances test applies,  there  will  in
    future cases be complicated questions balancing the  strong(er)  public
    interest in deportation with the (still  important)  interests  of  the
    welfare of the child which Parliament  has  (through  section  55:  see
    paragraph [54] above) instructed the Secretary of State and the  courts
    and tribunals to pay particular  regard  to.  Balancing  all  of  these
    interests under the rubric of  "compelling  circumstances"  will  be  a
    different exercise to that we have undertaken in this case. Again, this
    exercise is not for us.



Signed   Date 22/07/2015

Mr Justice Green
