
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02550/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2014                          |On 19 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          TOMASZ KAZIMIERZ MICHALIK
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person, assisted by Miss Matras (McKenzie friend)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is  an  appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  a
    determination by the First-tier Tribunal (a Panel comprising First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Digney and Dr De Barros) ("the Panel") promulgated on  4
    June 2014.  The Panel allowed the appeal of the claimant, a 33 year old
    Polish citizen, against a decision by the Secretary of State to make  a
    deportation order against him. To avoid confusion we shall refer to the
    parties in this determination as "the  Secretary  of  State"  and  "the
    appellant".

 2. That decision was set out in a letter dated 3 December  2013  following
    the appellant's conviction at St Alban's Crown Court on 21 June 2013 of
    the offences of abstracting electricity and production  of  a  Class  B
    controlled drug, namely cannabis. He  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    twelve months' imprisonment. Having pleaded guilty to these charges  at
    the earliest opportunity, he obtained the maximum credit of  one-third,
    bringing the starting point down from eighteen months to twelve months.
    He served only six months of that sentence in  custody  in  the  normal
    way. That, we should observe, is too short a period for  the  appellant
    to have undertaken any form of course whilst  he  was  in  prison  that
    might have addressed his offending behaviour. In any event it is  quite
    clear from the sentencing remarks of the Crown Court  judge  that  this
    was not somebody who was involved in the trafficking  of  drugs  or  in
    consuming them himself, which is often the case  with  people  who  are
    convicted of drugs offences.

 3. The judge explained that there was a commercial operation being run  in
    effect from two bedrooms in the house that the appellant  was  renting.
    It had all the usual paraphernalia to grow the  cannabis.   There  were
    some 117 cannabis plants found in those rooms.  The appellant's account
    of his offending, which was not challenged by the prosecution, was that
    he had rented the rooms out to a man called  Raj  who  was  the  person
    growing the cannabis.  The appellant of course knew what was going  on.
    He was doing this in order to subsidise his rent and possibly to  make,
    as the judge put it, a "bit of profit on top".

 4. The judge assessed the role in the offending played by the appellant as
    somewhere between a significant  and  lesser  role  in  the  sentencing
    guidelines, and that is why it clearly passed the custody threshold.  A
    factor that  counted  in  his  favour  was  that  he  had  no  previous
    convictions. There was also a very positive pre-sentence report by  the
    probation service.  That report assessed his  risk  of  reoffending  as
    extremely low. The prospect  of  reoffending  in  the  first  year  was
    assessed at 3%,  and  6%  over  two  years.  That  should  probably  be
    understood as meaning 3% in each of those years,  rather  than  as  the
    Panel suggested, 3% in the first year and 6% in the  second.   But  for
    present purposes that really does not matter.  Whether it is 3%  or  6%
    it is obviously a minimal risk of reoffending.

 5. The grounds of appeal take issue with the  adequacy  of  the  reasoning
    given by the Panel for overturning the decision to deport.  It is  fair
    to say that the determination is a very short one and the reasoning  is
    really contained in paragraph 9 in which the Panel said this:

         "We do not think that a 3 to 6 percent risk of reoffending  can  be
         seen  as  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious   threat
         affecting one of the fundamental interests of society  with  regard
         to this offence.  In  relation  to  this  offence  it  is  for  the
         respondent to satisfy us on a balance  of  probabilities  that  the
         Regulation  is  engaged,  that  is  Regulation  21(5)(a)   of   the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, and she  has
         not done so.  There is no argument as to how there can be the  sort
         of needed risk when the chance of it happening is so  low  and  the
         letter does not address this point.   The  letter  deals  with  the
         harmful effects of  drug  offences  but  does  not  deal  with  the
         question of what risk is raised here.  Bearing in mind the level of
         the risk, we also do not accept that the decision complied with the
         principle of proportionality; see Regulation 21(5)(a)."

 6. Regulation 21(5)(c) requires the personal conduct  of  the  prospective
    deportee to "represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society".  A
    "threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society"  simply
    means a threat to do something  prohibited  by  law:  GW  (Netherlands)
    [2009] UKAIT  00050.  Whether  the  threat  is  "sufficiently  serious"
    depends on the assessment of how likely it is that the offender will re-
    offend and on the nature and seriousness of the offences he  is  likely
    to commit. The less strong the  ties between the individual and the UK,
    the less serious the level of risk that needs to be shown. In one case,
    LG  and  CC  [2009]  UKAIT  00024,  Carnwath  LJ  spoke  of  a  "serial
    shoplifter" being properly removable if he  fell  within  the  category
    with the weakest ties to the UK - as this appellant does,  having  only
    entered the jurisdiction in 2010.

 7. On a first reading the Panel might have seemed to be a little unfair to
    the Secretary of State when they said that the decision letter did  not
    deal with the question of what  risk  was  raised.   Certainly  in  the
    decision letter it is said on a number of occasions that  the  offender
    manager had found that the appellant posed a low risk of  harm  to  the
    public, in particular at paragraphs 18 and 22. However it seems  to  us
    that what the Panel was really complaining about was the fact that  the
    decision maker never truly engaged with how that low risk  impacted  on
    the legal test in regulation 21(5)(c).

 8. Paragraph 23 of the decision by the Secretary of State says this:

         "It is clear that you committed your  offence  for  monetary  gain.
         The offence of which you have been convicted is a serious  one  and
         the sentence that you received reflects this.  Whilst this is  your
         first criminal conviction in the UK and your offender  manager  has
         calculated your risk of reconviction as low, the Home Office  takes
         the view that the serious harm which would be caused as a result of
         any  similar  instances  of  offending  is  such  that  it  is  not
         considered  reasonable  to  leave  the  public  vulnerable  to  the
         potential for you to reoffend."

    Notwithstanding the fact that the prospect of re-offending was so  low,
    the decision-maker had concluded that it was outweighed by  the  nature
    of the offending and the serious harm that was perceived to  result  in
    consequence of any similar instances of offending; but it is  difficult
    to see how that conclusion could have  been  reached  if  the  decision
    maker  had  properly  applied  his  mind  to  the  test.  What  he  was
    considering was whether a 3% chance of the  appellant  sub-letting  his
    premises to a cannabis grower in  future  was  a  sufficiently  serious
    threat to commit a criminal offence to justify his being  removed  from
    the UK.

 9. On behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Miss  Kenny  submitted  that
    paragraph 9 of the determination nowhere  addresses  a  number  of  the
    points adverse to the appellant that were  made  in  the  determination
    letter.  In  particular  she  pointed  to  the  deterrent  effect  that
    deportation of the appellant would have on others who might be  tempted
    to come over to this country from another EEA state,  and  allow  their
    residences to be used for growing cannabis.  She also pointed out  that
    all drugs offences are very serious, as  was  stated  in  the  decision
    letter.  Drug addiction affects not only the drug users themselves, but
    their families.  It can have a knock-on effect in terms of  encouraging
    addicts to commit other types of crimes of  an  acquisitive  nature  in
    order to finance their habit.  It can have a  very  serious  impact  on
    society as a whole. But the appellant is not a drug addict, and  he  is
    not himself a drug distributor. His offence was one of facilitation  of
    the production by others of Class B drugs.

10. Miss Kenny said that in paragraph 9 the only factor of relevance  which
    appears to have been addressed at all by the Panel is the one of  risk.
    There is nothing on the face of the  determination  to  show  that  the
    other relevant factors have been taken into consideration or weighed in
    the balance, or to explain why the  Panel  thought  that  the  decision
    should be overturned.

11. It is clear that in making a determination of this  nature  it  is  not
    incumbent upon a Tribunal to set out every single argument that it  has
    heard or every single factor that it has taken into account.   All  the
    Tribunal must do is to set out sufficient reasons to explain why it has
    reached the decision that it has.  In our judgment the reasons given in
    this determination are sufficient.  The Secretary of State's appeal  on
    this ground in reality amounts to little more  than  disagreement  with
    them; and whilst the grounds of appeal also contend that the Panel fell
    into error in treating this  case  as  subject  to  the  elevated  test
    applicable to those EEA nationals who have acquired rights of permanent
    residence, that is plainly not the case, and the point was rightly  not
    pursued in oral argument by Miss Kenny.

12. Paragraph 9 is really focusing upon the one factor  which  countervails
    all the other factors referred to in the reasons for deportation letter
    - which the Panel plainly had in mind because they refer to that letter
    specifically in paragraph 8. Clearly they  were  considering  what  was
    said in it when they looked at the risks in paragraph 9.  Indeed  there
    is specific reference to the fact that the decision letter  deals  with
    the harmful effects of drug offences and it does so in terms which make
    it very clear that it was a serious offence, and  that  drugs  offences
    can have the harmful consequences and knock-on effect to which we  have
    already referred.

13. However, notwithstanding that it was an offence  which  may  have  been
    committed for financial gain and notwithstanding that  any  reoffending
    of a similar nature could (indirectly) have harmful effects on  others,
    one comes back, as the Panel did, to the fact that the risk of any such
    reoffending  is  extremely  low.  So  the  financial  motivation  which
    prompted the commission of these offences was unlikely to do so  again.
    That evaluation of the risk of repetition was accepted.

14. In the light of that, the Panel was faced with the position of a man of
    previous good character who has  committed  one  serious  offence,  who
    pleaded guilty to it at the earliest opportunity, who did not  maintain
    a central role in the offending, who was not himself a  drug  user  and
    who had a  wife  and  family  who  were  well  established  within  the
    jurisdiction. Those considerations and the considerations under Section
    55 also came into play in the underlying decision letter, although  the
    decision  maker  came  to  the  conclusion  that  any  impact  on   the
    appellant's son of his deportation would be "minimal". Given  his  very
    low risk of re-offending, could it really  be  said  that  he  posed  a
    "sufficiently serious" risk  to  justify  his  deportation?  The  Panel
    concluded that when the risk was  properly  evaluated  the  answer  was
    plainly no, but the decision maker had not properly evaluated the risk.

15. The real question for this Tribunal  is  whether  or  not  there  is  a
    material error of law in the determination. The sole issue  is  whether
    or not the reasoning in this case falls short of what was  required  in
    order to inform the Secretary of State why it  was  that  the  decision
    that had been made by her officer  was  overturned.   In  our  judgment
    paragraph 9 of the  determination  satisfies  these  requirements.   It
    makes it very clear that it was felt by the Panel that there  had  been
    an inadequate consideration  and  weighing  of  the  low  risk  in  the
    balancing exercise and that when that  risk  was  properly  taken  into
    account the threshold of a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to the fundamental interests of society had not been crossed.

16. In those circumstances the requirements of the Regulation were not met,
    and therefore there was no need, as the Panel said, for it to go on and
    consider any of the other points that could be raised on behalf of  the
    appellant.

17. For those  reasons  we  take  the  view  that  this  appeal  should  be
    dismissed. There was no material error of law in the  determination  by
    the Panel.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed        Date 18 November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews


