
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
DA/02319/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 July 2016                        |     On 20 July 2016                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Haruna, of Mandy Peters Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, a national of Guinea, date of birth 01  March  1975,
         appeals against the Respondent's decision of 04 November 2013  that
         s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies to him (the making of an
         automatic deportation order). The Appellant's appeal  against  this
         decision was initially allowed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel,
         consisting of Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt and Mr  A.E.  Armitage  (non-
         legal member), in a determination promulgated on 25 September 2014.
         The  Respondent  sought  permission  to   appeal   the   First-Tier
         Tribunal's decision and, following a hearing on 12 August 2015, the
         Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal's  decision
         contained material errors of law.


      2. The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  focusing  entirely  on
         sections 117A to 117D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 whereas  it  should  have  first  considered  whether  the
         Appellant met the requirement of paragraph 399 of  the  immigration
         rules. the First-tier Tribunal additionally erred in law by failing
         to sufficiently appreciate the nature  of  the  'unduly  harshness'
         test and failing to assess or  explain  why  the  break-up  of  the
         Appellant's  immediate  family  unit  would   have   unduly   harsh
         consequences on the children if they remained in the United Kingdom
         and  their  father  was  deported.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  also
         concluded that, if the  Appellant  were  removed,  there  would  be
         'little hope of contact' with him,  but  it  was  unclear  on  what
         evidential basis this conclusion was reached.  The  Upper  Tribunal
         additionally found that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
         taking into account public interest factors in its assessment under
         paragraph 399. The  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM  (Uganda)  &  Anor  v
         Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450
         however resolved conflicting case law on this issue and it  is  now
         clear that any assessment of the  term  'unduly  harsh'  under  the
         immigration rules must import public interest considerations.


      3. Although the matter was initially listed for a resumed  hearing  on
         17 December 2015 to enable further evidence to be provided  by  the
         parties, for various reasons that  hearing  had  to  be  adjourned.
         There was a Case Management Review Hearing on 11 May 2016 at  which
         the Appellant indicated that he did not have a legal representative
         but was hoping to instruct a representative.  It  was  additionally
         brought to the Tribunal's attention that the Appellant was facing a
         further criminal matter and had a trial in  a  Crown  Court  warned
         list for 31 May 2016. The Appellant was  convicted  of  a  criminal
         offence relating to burglary and received a three-year sentence  at
         Blackfriars Crown Court on 3 June 2016.


      4. Mandy Peters Solicitors were instructed by the Appellant on 7  July
         2016 and made an adjournment request  on  that  day  (although  the
         request was only received by the Tribunal on 12 July 2016) in order
         to take proper instructions from the  Appellant.  This  adjournment
         application was refused on 12 July  2016.  No  further  adjournment
         application has been made.

Background and preserved factual findings

      5. In the error of law decision promulgated in August 2015  the  Upper
         Tribunal held that the primary factual findings made by the  First-
         Tier Tribunal were to be maintained.

      6. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant has a  daughter
         born in the  United  Kingdom  on  29  November  2006,  and  another
         daughter born in the United Kingdom on  09  January  2013.  He  now
         claims to have a son born after the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
         Although no evidence was adduced in relation to his son the  First-
         tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant's  partner  was  pregnant
         and no issue has been raised by Ms Isherwood  in  respect  of  this
         assertion. I therefore accept that the Appellant does  have  a  son
         born sometime in late 2014. The oldest daughter is now 9 years old.
         She has Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain.  Her  siblings  are  British
         citizen.


      7. The First-tier Tribunal  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with  MS,  the  mother  of  his
         children. She is a national of Guinea who  was  granted  Indefinite
         Leave to Remain on 09 December 2009 on the basis, according to  the
         decision letter, of her 'strength  of  connections  in  the  United
         Kingdom,  length  of  residence  in  the  United   Kingdom   and/or
         compassionate circumstances.' The  Appellant  and  MS  underwent  a
         marriage by proxy in Ghana on 25 August 2008.


      8. The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied the Appellant  was  a  caring
         and loving partner and  father  to  his  children.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal accepted evidence from his  daughter's  school  confirming
         that he dropped her off and picked her up at school. The First-tier
         Tribunal accepted that the Appellant took  his  children  to  their
         GP/hospital appointments, that he took  them  to  playgrounds,  and
         that he cooked at home for everyone. It was accepted that he was  a
         loving father who cooked, cleaned and  maintained  the  house.  The
         First-tier Tribunal was consequently satisfied that  the  Appellant
         was in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  Qualifying
         Partner and Qualifying Children as defined in section 117D  of  the
         Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal found the best interests of the children required that the
         Appellant remain in the United Kingdom.


      9. The First-tier Tribunal additionally recorded a concession  by  the
         Home Office Presenting Officer that  the  Appellant's  partner  and
         children would not be able to go to  Guinea  with  him.  The  Upper
         Tribunal rejected an attempt by the Respondent to  go  behind  this
         concession at the error of law hearing as it was  validly  made  by
         the Presenting Officer in the First-tier Tribunal and had not  been
         part of the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal. No attempt was made  by
         Ms Isherwood to revoke the concession at the resumed hearing.


     10. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  the  Appellant  had  an  appalling
         immigration history and  that  he  had  told  many  untruths.  This
         included the use of difference  aliases  with  different  dates  of
         birth  and  the  making  asylum  claims  in  respect  of  different
         countries. On 14 May 1999 the Appellant first came to the notice of
         the Respondent under an assumed name (LM)  and  using  a  different
         date of birth and claimed to be from Gambia. He claimed  asylum  in
         that  name,  was  granted  temporary   admission   with   reporting
         restrictions, but failed to  report  after  October  1999  and  was
         recorded as an absconder. On 18 May 2003 the Appellant was arrested
         by the police for motoring offences and gave an entirely  different
         name (MC) and date of birth on this occasion, claiming to  be  from
         Sierra Leone. The Appellant subsequently claimed  asylum  again  in
         the identity of MC. This asylum application  was  refused  and  the
         Appellant lodged an appeal against the  refusal,  still  under  the
         assumed name. On 15 June 2004 the Immigration Fingerprint Bureau at
         Lunar House received  a  letter  from  the  Federal  Department  of
         Justice and Police in Switzerland, dated 10  June  2004,  in  which
         they informed the United Kingdom authorities that the Appellant was
         currently staying in Switzerland. The Appellant  then  returned  to
         the United Kingdom. His asylum appeal  was  dismissed  on  29  July
         2004. His appeal rights became exhausted on 21 December 2004 and he
         then failed to report as required  under  his  temporary  admission
         conditions.


     11. On 10 August  2006  the  Respondent  received  a  letter  from  the
         immigration Fingerprint Bureau of the Swiss  authorities  informing
         them that the  Appellant  was  staying  in  Switzerland  under  the
         assumed name LM and claiming to be from Gambia. On 3 April 2007 the
         Appellant claimed asylum under his current identity  and  providing
         his current date of birth. He claimed to be at a  Guinean  national
         and said that his wife and daughter remained in  the  Ivory  Coast.
         Following a fingerprint check which revealed that the Appellant had
         previously claimed asylum in the identity of  MC  he  withdrew  his
         asylum claim and stated that he  wished  to  return  to  the  Ivory
         Coast. He subsequently absconded. On  22  May  2007  the  Appellant
         claimed  asylum  in  Ireland  using  his   current   identity   and
         nationality. The Appellant was returned to the UK pursuant  to  the
         Dublin Convention.


     12. On 24 June 2009 the Appellant was convicted of conspiracy to commit
         fraud by false representation and sentenced, on 13 July 2009, to 15
         months imprisonment. The Respondent subsequently set in motion  the
         machinery leading to the decision that the Appellant was a  foreign
         criminal who was subject to the automatic deportation provisions.

     13. The First-tier Tribunal noted the Appellant's offence  was  serious
         but that he had not re-offended since his release  on  02  December
         2009. The First-tier Tribunal noted the content of  a  pre-sentence
         report indicating the Appellant was at low risk of offending,  that
         he had lawfully worked in the United Kingdom, and that he had  been
         cohabiting with his partner and children since 2012.

The resumed hearing

     14. At the start of the resumed hearing Ms Isherwood handed to me a PNC
         report indicating that the Appellant received a three year sentence
         on 3 June 2016 for an offence of burglary with intent to steal at a
         non-dwelling, committed on 6 April 2014. The PNC document indicated
         that the Appellant pleaded guilty to the offence. Mr Haruna however
         indicated that the Appellant did not plead guilty,  that  he  still
         maintained  his  innocence  and  that  he   was   challenging   his
         conviction.  Other  than  the  PNC  printout  there  was  no  other
         documentation relating to this offence or the alleged challenge  to
         the conviction. Mr Haruna informed the Tribunal that the  Appellant
         was not present because  he  was  a  serving  prisoner.  Mr  Haruna
         confirmed that  the  Appellant  was  not  relying  on  any  further
         documentary evidence.


     15. The Appellant's partner, MS, adopted her 2014 statement. She  began
         to give evidence relating to the circumstances of  the  Appellant's
         most recent offence.  I  informed  both  her  and  the  Appellant's
         representative that there was no basis for  me  to  go  behind  the
         Appellant's conviction. MS confirmed that the Appellant pleaded not
         guilty and was found guilty after trial.  She  explained  that  she
         almost paid �1000 for an independent social worker, money  obtained
         through her job as a sole trader selling jewellery and makeup in  a
         market. But when the social worker first  came  to  her  house  the
         Appellant was already detained. After explaining the  situation  to
         the independent social worker, who told MS that she  did  not  know
         what to do as it was her job to consider the  relationship  between
         the Appellant and her children,  MS  asked  for  the  money  to  be
         returned and indicated that she would instead look for a  solicitor
         for her husband.


     16. The Appellant's partner  indicated  that,  in  order  to  be  in  a
         marriage, she had to be with her husband. She  would  not  consider
         returning to Guinea for fear that her daughters would be  subjected
         to FGM. She said she was depressed and had  not  yet  informed  her
         oldest  daughter  of  the  Appellant's  incarceration.  The  oldest
         daughter believed her father was in Ireland. The partner said  that
         she took the children to school  now  that  the  Appellant  was  in
         prison. Because of this the partner could  not  go  to  the  market
         during weekdays as she had to be there at 5am in  order  to  get  a
         space for her stall. The Appellant was the one who used to take the
         children everywhere. When asked what she thought the effect on  her
         children would be if the Appellant never came home MS  became  very
         upset and said that this would greatly  affect  her  children.  She
         described how her youngest used to fall  asleep  playing  with  the
         Appellant's ears, how  she  took  her  three-year-old  to  see  the
         Appellant in prison, and that her oldest would suffer the most.  MS
         described how the Appellant cooked food that her children preferred
         to eat. She claimed she would have to claim benefits if  unable  to
         work.


     17. In cross-examination, when asked  whether  she  was  aware  of  the
         Appellant's abuse of the immigration system, MS said that she  knew
         many Africans come to the UK with different names in order  to  run
         away from problems. When asked  whether  she  was  aware  that  the
         Appellant used names and claimed to come from  different  countries
         she said she had not been aware. With respect to his first criminal
         offence the Appellant's partner claimed that he had made a mistake,
         possibly because his English was not good and he had  been  in  the
         wrong place. She knew he was innocent in respect of his most recent
         conviction. She maintained that the Appellant  had  never  been  to
         Switzerland and that the Home Office had not produced a  photograph
         of the person who claimed asylum in Switzerland using  an  identity
         previously used by the Appellant. The Appellant's partner confirmed
         that she received child tax credits, working tax credits and  child
         benefit. She said that she had to  manage  with  the  Appellant  in
         prison. Their oldest daughter had not seen the Appellant  but  they
         had spoken to each  other  on  the  telephone.  MS  had  taken  the
         youngest two children a couple of times to see  the  Appellant.  MS
         had spoken to her oldest child's teacher and informed  the  teacher
         that the child did not know of her father's incarceration.


     18. Although she  accepted  that  she  had  not  provided  any  further
         documentary evidence to show the impact of the deportation decision
         on her or her children MS said that she knew what the impact  would
         be and no document was capable of showing how she  felt.  She  made
         reference to a supportive letter obtained from a neighbour but this
         was not produced. There were no letters from the school as  MS  had
         not asked them to provide any letters. When  questioned  about  the
         absence  of  any  medical  evidence  supporting  her  claim  to  be
         suffering from depression the Appellant's partner said that she did
         not need to be on pills to be depressed. She claimed that only  G-d
         knew how she suffers at home. She  did  not  want  to  discuss  the
         possibility of the family relocating to Guinea because she did  not
         want to put her children in the same position that she  had  faced.
         She described the effect  of  FGM  on  her  relationship  with  her
         husband. Although she had taken her middle child to Guinea in  2014
         to see her aunt on her return she had been questioned for two hours
         by an immigration officer who did not believe that the photo in the
         child's passport was that of the child. On prompting  from  me  she
         then stated that when she was in Guinea in 2014  "they"  wanted  to
         circumcise her daughter. It was suggested to MS that  if  she  were
         visiting only her husband her children would not be  at  risk  from
         any other family member. In reply MS  claimed  that  someone  would
         just come and try to circumcise her daughters and  that  she  could
         not keep an eye on them 24 hours a day.


     19. When asked what family the Appellant had in Guinea MS  stated  that
         he had a daughter living in the country,  who  lived  in  a  border
         area. She said that the Appellant and his daughter in  Guinea  talk
         on the telephone. Her own children had spoken  to  the  Appellant's
         daughter in Guinea,  although  there  was  a  significant  language
         barrier. When asked whether the  Appellant  was  likely  to  obtain
         employment in Guinea MS said that getting a job depends  on  having
         relationships with people. Her parents were dead and she  only  had
         an aunt in Guinea. She had returned to Guinea twice,  in  2011  and
         2014. The person she described as an aunt was not actually a  blood
         relative but somebody who took care of  her  when  MS  was  in  the
         country. MS said that she had a sister in the UK who  was  mentally
         unbalanced, suffered from sickle-cell, and had another illness.  MS
         had cared for  the  sister  from  2002  until  2007  when  she  was
         transferred to Manchester. MS returned to London in 2012.


     20. In response to questions from me the Appellant's partner said  that
         her three children were in good health although her oldest  may  be
         suffering from asthma. When asked how her oldest daughter was doing
         at school MS said that her daughter was good at maths. The daughter
         enjoyed school but was sometimes bullied a little by  her  friends.
         MS confirmed that she herself had friends in the UK.


     21. Both representatives agreed that the focus of the appeal  would  be
         the application of the undue harshness test. Ms  Isherwood  invited
         me to find MS an incredible witness as she was fully aware  of  the
         Appellant's  abuse  of  the  immigration  system  and  because  she
         attempted to minimise his criminality. The previous  opinion  in  a
         pre-sentence report indicating the Appellant was  at  low  risk  of
         repeat  offences  was,  in  light  of  his  most  recent   offence,
         inaccurate. I was reminded of the absence of any evidence that  the
         most recent conviction was being challenged. Applying MM (Uganda) I
         was asked to note the seriousness of the Appellant's offending, his
         immigration history, and the absence of documentary evidence vis-a-
         vis the impact on the children. Undue harshness was said  to  be  a
         high threshold and I was referred to MAB (USA) [2015] UKUT  435  in
         support. Whether reference to  the  authority  of  SS  (Nigeria)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550  the
         possession of children, although a primary consideration, could  be
         outweighed by other public interest factors.


     22. Mr Haruna submitted that the Appellant's partner was credible,  her
         evidence had not wavered and she provided truthful answers. It  was
         accepted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was
         challenging eviction. It was submitted that  a  three-year  offence
         was not the most serious of offences. It was not disputed that  the
         Appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
         partner and children. I was referred  to  the  evidence  of  MS  in
         respect of the impact on the children. I was invited to  find  that
         the Appellant's partner was depressed. When assessing  whether  the
         Appellant's deportation had an unduly harsh impact his children and
         his  partner  I  was  urged  to  consider  all   relevant   factors
         holistically, applying MM (Uganda).

Discussion

     23. It is not in dispute that the Appellant  is  a  "foreign  criminal"
         within the definition in s.117D(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002. It is submitted on the Appellant's behalf that
         paragraph 399(a) applies to him as he has a genuine and  subsisting
         parental relationship with children under the age of 18 who are  in
         the UK and who are either British citizens, or who has lived in the
         UK for at least seven years immediately preceding the date  of  the
         immigration decision, and because it would be unduly harsh for  any
         of the children to remain in the UK without the Appellant.


     24. In light of the preserved findings described in paragraphs 6  to  8
         of this  decision  I  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant
         continues to have a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his
         qualifying  children  (although  his  physical  contact  with   his
         children is currently much more restricted as he is now serving a 3
         year sentence) and that it is in his children's best interests  for
         him to remain in the UK.


     25. I am guided by the authority of MM (Uganda) where, at [26], Laws LJ
         stated, "The expression "unduly harsh" in section 117C(5) and  Rule
         399(a) and (b) requires regard to be had to all  the  circumstances
         including the criminal's immigration and criminal history."

     26. In assessing the public interest I  have  taken  into  account  the
         seriousness of the  Appellant's  two  offences.  Whilst  his  first
         offence could be categorised as being towards the lower end of  the
         spectrum, the same cannot be said of his  most  recent  offence.  A
         sentence of three  years  imprisonment,  although  lower  than  the
         threshold required in both the immigration rules and  section  117C
         for the application of the "very compelling circumstances" test, is
         still indicative of a serious offence. I take into account that the
         public interest in deporting the Appellant acts as an expression of
         society's revulsion at his offence, and that it acts as a deterrent
         to  other  foreign  nationals  against   committing   offences.   I
         additionally take into account  the  public  interest  in  ensuring
         public confidence in the integrity of  the  immigration  system.  I
         note the absence of any evidence  that  the  Appellant  is  in  the
         process of challenging his conviction. Even were there to  be  such
         evidence, the conviction currently stands. I have also  taken  into
         account the Appellant's  quite  appalling  immigration  history  as
         outlined in paragraphs 10 to 12 of this decision.


     27. I take into account the Appellant's claim to be full of remorse for
         being involved in criminal activity, and his assertion that he will
         never do anything illegal again in this country. The genuineness of
         this assertion  is  significantly  undermined  by  the  Appellant's
         recent criminal conviction. The First-tier Tribunal noted that  the
         Appellant had not re-offended since his release on 02 December 2009
         and took account of the content of a pre-sentence report indicating
         the Appellant was at low risk of offending. The PNC report  however
         indicated that the burglary offence was committed on 06 April 2014,
         some 4 months before the Appellant's First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
         In light of the Appellant's recent criminal conviction I can attach
         little weight to the pre-sentence report. I have not been  provided
         with a pre-sentence report relating to the Appellant's most  recent
         offence.


     28. I note that the Appellant does not  appear  to  have  ever  resided
         lawfully in the UK (his grant of Temporary Admission does not  mean
         that  the  Appellant  was  lawfully  admitted  into  the  UK).  His
         relationship with his partner was established  when  the  Appellant
         was not lawfully present. Both he and his partner were aware of his
         precarious immigration position.


     29. In her statement dated  18  August  2014  the  Appellant's  partner
         claimed she felt extremely stressed and depressed. She claimed  she
         could not function as  a  human  being  and  saw  her  whole  world
         collapsing. She was having constant nightmares but  tried  to  pull
         herself together for the sake of their children.  She  claimed  she
         was put on antidepressants at the time.  No  medical  evidence  was
         however  provided  to  the  first-tier  Tribunal  to  support   the
         partner's  claimed  depression  and  her  claim  to  be   receiving
         antidepressants. At the resumed hearing the partner  again  claimed
         that she was depressed but was able to manage for the sake  of  the
         children. No medical evidence  to  support  the  partner's  alleged
         depression has been provided, despite the passing of almost 2 years
         since the first-tier Tribunal hearing. Whilst  I  accept  that  the
         partner is stressed, both as a result of the incarceration  of  her
         husband, the need to care for three children on her  own,  and  the
         uncertainty surrounding her husband's immigration status, I am  not
         prepared to accept, in the absence of any  medical  evidence,  that
         she is incapable of functioning as a human being. In reaching  this
         conclusion I take account of the fact that she continues to work as
         a market trader, albeit that this  is  now  restricted  to  weekend
         work. I  accept  also  that  the  partner  may  experience  greater
         difficulty in continuing her employment as a  sole  trader  in  the
         absence of the Appellant, who undertook a great deal of  childcare.
         The partner however is in receipt of child tax credits, working tax
         credits  and  child  benefit.  No  doubt  if  unable  to  undertake
         employment as a result of an absence of childcare support  she  and
         the family would be entitled  to  benefits  on  the  basis  of  her
         unemployment, although I appreciate that this would  place  greater
         financial strain on the government and is therefore a  factor  that
         carries in the Appellant's favour. The Appellant's partner  is  not
         alone as she has a sister in the UK, although her sister appears to
         have care needs of her own, and friends  in  the  UK.  It  was  not
         suggested that the Appellant's deportation would render his  family
         destitute, or that their safety and welfare would be compromised.

     30. I am satisfied that it would be in the  children's  best  interests
         for the Appellant to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  Despite  the
         Appellant being a poor role model he has  acted  as  a  loving  and
         devoted  father.  Although  not  a  paramount  consideration,   the
         children's best interests are a primary consideration  to  which  I
         attach significant weight. This is a very relevant factor  weighing
         in the Appellant's favour when assessing the proportionality of the
         decision in respect  of  the  relationships  between  him  and  his
         children and the manner in which they are affected.


     31. There is however very limited information relating  to  the  actual
         impact of the  Appellant's  deportation  on  the  children.  It  is
         surprising that no further  evidence  from  the  oldest  daughter's
         school has been provided.  There  is  consequently  no  independent
         evidence describing the likely impact on the child of her  father's
         removal from this country. The children are  all  healthy  although
         the oldest daughter may be suffering from asthma. The youngest  two
         children are not yet in school. The Appellant's partner  said  that
         her oldest daughter likes school, although she was subject to  some
         bullying from her friends. Once again, there is  no  evidence  from
         the school itself. The Appellant's partner indicated that  she  had
         commissioned an independent social worker to write a report on  the
         interaction between the various family members and  to  comment  on
         the likely impact of the  deportation  decision  on  the  children.
         Following the Appellant's arrest and incarceration  no  report  has
         been commissioned. There is no medical evidence, such as  a  letter
         or report from a GP, indicating that the  children  either  require
         particular assistance or support, or that they are experiencing any
         medical or mental health issues. I fully accept that  the  decision
         to deport the Appellant has already had an adverse  impact  on  the
         children's generally happiness, particularly with  respect  to  the
         oldest child. It is only natural for the children to  feel  anguish
         and heartache at the prospect of being separated from their father.




     32. I fully accept that normal family relationships between spouses and
         between a parent  and  his  minor  children  cannot  be  maintained
         through remote or  periodic  forms  of  communication  or  contact.
         Although separating the Appellant from  his  partner  and  children
         will clearly undermine the strength and nature  of  these  familial
         relationships  there  is  no  evidence   to   indicate   that   all
         communication  between  the  Appellant  and  his  family  would  be
         severed.  No  evidence  was  produced  suggesting   that   Internet
         communication was not available in Guinea. There is no  reason  why
         the Appellant could not continue to speak to his children  and  his
         partner by telephone, as he already  does  with  his  oldest  child
         living in Guinea. Contact could, alternatively, also be  maintained
         through periodic visits by the partner and her children to  Guinea.
         She has already returned to Guinea twice, in 2011 and 2014.  Whilst
         I accept that  the  partner  has  a  genuine  fear  of  permanently
         residing in Guinea due to the possibility that her daughters  could
         be subjected to FGM, I am not satisfied that they would be  exposed
         to any real risk of this occurring in the context of a short  visit
         to the Appellant. The partner has not offered any  rational  reason
         as to how her children would come to be  targeted  during  a  short
         visit to see only the Appellant.

     33. Having holistic regard to the evidence before me I am not satisfied
         that the Appellant has shown that, on the balance of probabilities,
         it would be 'unduly harsh' for the children to  remain  in  the  UK
         without him, having regard to the seriousness  of  the  Appellant's
         offending and his appalling immigration history. In  reaching  this
         conclusion I take account of the fact that the Appellant's  partner
         is able to care for and provide for her children, that the children
         are all in good health, and that the  Appellant  would  still  have
         some, albeit much more limited form of contact with  his  children.
         The  serious  impact  on   the   family   life   relationships   is
         unfortunately a consequence of the Appellant's criminal  behaviour,
         set against his appalling immigration history.


     34. Under paragraph 399(b)(i) the relationship  between  the  Appellant
         and his partner must have been formed at a time when the  Appellant
         was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and  his  immigration  status  was  not
         precarious. The Appellant has never been in the UK lawfully and his
         immigration status has always been precarious.  For  these  reasons
         the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 399. In any
         event, and for the reasons already given, I  am  not  satisfied  it
         would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner to remain in  the
         United Kingdom without him. There is very limited evidence  of  her
         claim to  depression,  and  although  life  may  well  become  more
         difficult  in  the  Appellant's  absence,  there  is   insufficient
         evidence before me to suggest that MS would be  unable  to  provide
         for her and her children's safety and welfare.


     35. In assessing whether there are "very compelling circumstances" over
         and above those described in paragraph 399 and 399A  I  have  taken
         into account the relevant considerations  in  section  117B.  I  am
         satisfied that the Appellant is fluent  in  English  and,  were  he
         given permission to work, he would be able to do so.  I  take  into
         account that the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is
         in the public  interest.  The  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
         partner was formed at a time when he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
         unlawfully  and  I  therefore  attach   little   weight   to   that
         relationship,  as  required  by  s.117B(4).  In  relation  to   the
         considerations in s.117C, I take into account that  deportation  of
         foreign criminals is in the public  interest,  and  that  the  more
         serious the offence committed by the foreign criminal, the  greater
         is the public interest in his deportation. I have already indicated
         that the Appellant's two offences  are  serious.  With  respect  to
         s.117C(5) I have already found that the effect of  the  Appellant's
         deportation on his partner and children not be unduly harsh. Having
         regard to all these factors cumulatively, I find there are no  very
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         paragraph 399 and 399A.


     36. I consequently dismiss the appeal.




Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law. The decision has  been
remade, and the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date 19 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

