
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02402/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18th July, 2014                            |On 19th August, 2014         |
|Signed 4th August 214                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                               carlos De paula

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel instructed by Morgan Pearse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Brazil who was born on 28th  June,  1968.




Immigration History

2.   The appellant claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  22nd
    July, 2008 and claims to have  spoken  to  an  Immigration  Officer  on
    arrival who stamped his passport.

3.   On 12th October, 2008, the appellant applied for a residence card as  a
    family member of an EEA national along with his  family  members.   The
    application was refused on 16th December, 2009, since  the  appellant's
    wife had failed to provide evidence that she had  been  exercising  her
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom and failed  to  provide  children's
    passports.  The decision to  refuse  the  appellant's  application  was
    dispatched by Royal Mail on 16th December, 2009 but the documents  were
    returned by Royal Mail on 19th February, 2010 as the appellant was  not
    deemed to be residing at  his  last  known  address.   The  appellant's
    application was therefore considered  and  eventually  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 7th February, 2012.

4.   The appellant first came to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities
    on 28th March, 2011, when  he  was  arrested  by  Immigration  Officers
    working as part of an undercover operation investigating fraud.

The Appellant's Conviction

5.   On  26th  August,  2011,  at  Harrow  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
    convicted of making and supplying article(s) for use in fraud.  He  was
    subsequently sentenced to 64 months' imprisonment  on  16th  September,
    2011.  He did not appeal against either his conviction or sentence.

Notice of Intention to Deport

6.   On 31st October, 2011, the appellant was served  with  a  liability  to
    deport questionnaire which he completed and returned on  4th  November,
    2011.  On 22nd November, 2013 the respondent made a deportation  order.
    She was satisfied that the  appellant  posed  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the interests  of  public  policy/public
    security if he were allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  that
    his deportation was justified under Regulation 21.  She  decided  under
    Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations, 2006 ("the Regulations")  that  the  appellant  should  be
    removed and an order was  made  in  accordance  with  Regulation  24(3)
    requiring him to leave the United  Kingdom  and  prohibiting  from  re-
    entering whilst in force.  The appellant appealed that decision and his
    appeal was heard by a Panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Perry sitting with Dr C J Winstanley.

7.   The panel of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    and dismissed his human rights appeal.

8.   Succinct grounds of appeal were submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant
    alleging errors in the  determination  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cheales granted permission.

9.   The first challenge points out that the offender manager  assessed  the
    appellant's  risk  of  re-offending  as  low.   No  OASys'  Report  was
    submitted to the Tribunal.  The  panel,  however,  concluded  that  the
    offender manager was simply wrong in assessing the appellant's risk  of
    re-offending as being low.  However they did not put Counsel on  notice
    that they were concerned  at  the  offender  manager's  assessment  and
    neither  did  they  indicate  that  they  would  be  making  their  own
    assessment.  The first three grounds deal with this and assert that the
    panel erred in law.  The fourth ground highlights the fact that in  the
    respondent's Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  it  is  accepted  that  the
    appellant's children cannot be expected to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    Notwithstanding this the panel concluded that the  decision  to  deport
    the appellant was proportionate.  At paragraph 66 of the  determination
    the panel find that the decision to deport is  proportionate  and  only
    then later do they give  any  consideration  to  the  question  of  the
    appellant's children and  their  best  interests.   That,  the  grounds
    assert is also an error of law.   The  last  challenge  relied  on  the
    decision of the Supreme Court  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Maneshwaram [2002]  EWCA  Civ  173.   The  judge  gave  no
    indication that  he  would  be  going  behind  the  concession  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The children themselves are EU nationals (citizens
    of Italy) and the judge has made no proper assessment of the children's
    best interests.

10.  At the hearing before me Mr Murphy relied on his  grounds.   Responding
    briefly,  Mr  Tufan  relied  on  Vasconcelos  (risk  -  rehabilitation)
    Portugal [2013] UKUT  378  (IAC).   Insofar  as  the  OASys  Report  is
    concerned, if the appellant had wanted to rely  on  it  he  would  have
    submitted it to the Tribunal.  The Home Office have no access to  these
    reports which are made available to appellants.

11.  As to the "so-called" concession, the appellant is a Brazilian  citizen
    and so is his wife (even though she may be Italian).  The children  may
    well be Italian and they are probably also Brazilian.   In  any  event,
    they are young enough to adapt to life in Brazil.

12.  He reminded  me  that  consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children is the primary consideration but it is not a trump card.

13.  I have concluded that the Tribunal did err in law.  If the  panel  were
    concerned about the offender manager's assessment of the risk posed  by
    this appellant then they should have invited Counsel to address them on
    it.  They were of course entitled to  examine  the  sentencing  judge's
    remarks and to consider accommodation issues since they were linked  to
    offending behaviour.  The panel demonstrate at paragraph 66  that  they
    appear to have considered the question of proportionality first  before
    they considered the best interests of the children and that too was  an
    error of law.

14.  I believe that this is a case which falls squarely within  paragraph  7
    of the Senior President's Practice Statement and  have  concluded  that
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Perry.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

















