
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02564/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 June 2017                           |On 10 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          MRS JUSTICE CHEEMA-GRUBB
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                Adebayo abdul
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Knafler QC and Mr A Grigg, instructed by
Wilsons, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Blundell, instructed by The Government Legal
Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who was born on 29 August 1974 is a national of Nigeria.
     He has been present in the UK since 1990.  He was an  overstayer  from
    31 October 1997 and had no lawful status in the UK until he was granted
    an EEA residence card on 8 February 2011, following a successful appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision,  made  on
    17 September 2010, to refuse his application which had  been  submitted
    in February of that year.  For present purposes, it  is  common  ground
    that the appellant has a derived EEA right of residence,  but  that  he
    does not have a permanent right of residence  under  EEA  law,  because
    such periods of residence as could be said to be pursuant  to  EEA  law
    were interrupted by prison sentences, such that  he  never  resided  in
    this  country  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  under   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations  ("the 2006 Regulations").

 2. In addition to having a poor immigration history,  the  appellant  also
    has a substantial criminal record.  He has  amassed  a  total  of  nine
    convictions for 21 offences,  which  include  serious  convictions  for
    fraud of which the last was a conviction for conspiracy to  defraud  on
    27 January 2012 for which he was sentenced to 54 months'  imprisonment.
    Although the appellant pleaded guilty to this  offence,  he  originally
    claimed that his involvement had been less  than  the  prosecution  had
    alleged, but following  a  Newton  trial,  the  judge  disbelieved  his
    account.  As a result of making  what  the  judge  had  regarded  as  a
    dishonest plea, he received only a 10% reduction on his sentence rather
    than the reduction of one third he would otherwise have received.

 3. The appellant has two daughters in this country, A,  who  was  born  in
    2002 and M, who was born in 2004.  Before us, it was accepted on behalf
    of the respondent that it would be in the best interests of both  these
    children that the appellant should remain in the United Kingdom.

Chronology, to include Immigration History and History of Offending

 4. We set out below a detailed  summary  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history, to include the history of his offending.

 5. The appellant first arrived in this country in July 1981,  just  before
    his 7th birthday and remained here with leave  for  about  three  years
    until he returned to Nigeria in 1984.  He  remained  there  until  1990
    when he returned to the UK and was granted  leave  to  remain  for  six
    months.  He returned to Nigeria and in  December  1990  was  granted  a
    further period of leave for another six months, re-entering the UK  for
    a third time in December 1990.  He was granted further periods of leave
    until October 1997.

 6. In 1996 the appellant married Ms O, a British national, but on 25  June
    of that year he was cautioned  for  assault.   Just  before  his  leave
    expired, on 20 October 1997 he was convicted  of  driving  with  excess
    alcohol, in respect of which he was fined and disqualified from driving
    for eighteen months.  He became an overstayer on 31 October 1997.

 7. The appellant apparently  ignored  his  disqualification  from  driving
    because just three months later, on 15 January 1998 (while  he  was  an
    overstayer) he was convicted of driving while disqualified and with  no
    insurance, for which he was placed on probation and  disqualified  from
    driving for a further twelve months.

 8. Then, on 1 March 1999, he  was  again  convicted  of  driving  with  no
    insurance, and of other driving offences for which he was sentenced  to
    community service and disqualified from driving  for  a  further  three
    years.

 9. In 2001, he commenced a relationship with Ms T, a Swedish national, but
    in September of that year he also applied for leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of his marriage  to  Ms  O,  which  application  was  refused  in
    November 2001.

10. In May 2002  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  attempting  to  obtain
    services by deception, for which he was fined �100, and in July of that
    year he had a daughter, A, with Ms T.  In October of that year  he  was
    convicted of another offence of obtaining services  by  deception,  for
    which he was sentenced to 100 hours community rehabilitation.

11. In January 2003 he divorced Ms O, and in April of that year he  married
    Ms T.  A month  previously,  he  had  been  convicted  of  assault  and
    resisting arrest, together with three counts of obtaining  property  by
    deception, for which he was sentenced to a  further  twelve  months  of
    community rehabilitation.

12. The same year, in December, he was again  convicted  of  attempting  to
    obtain services by deception, and on this occasion he was sentenced  to
    six months' imprisonment.

13. While in prison, in January 2004, his daughter M was born; she was  the
    daughter of Ms W, a British national.

14. The appellant had appealed against the refusal of his  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his marriage to Ms O, and  this  appeal
    was heard in July 2004 (by which time  he  and  Ms  O  were  divorced).
    Unsurprisingly, this appeal was dismissed the following month  and  the
    appellant was appeal rights exhausted on 7 September 2004.  He had  not
    had any lawful leave to remain during the period when  his  appeal  was
    pending, because the application had been made at a time when he was an
    overstayer.

15. In May 2005 the appellant submitted an application for leave to  remain
    on the basis of his marriage to Ms T, the  Swedish  national,  who  was
    said  to  be  exercising  treaty  rights  in  this  country,  but  that
    application was refused  in  November  2005.   The  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of this application was made on 17 May 2005,  heard
    on 3 February 2006 and dismissed on 4 March 2006.  He was appeal rights
    exhausted in respect of this appeal (again made at a time when  he  had
    no lawful right to remain in the UK) in May 2006.

16. On 6 December 2006 the appellant was convicted of two serious counts of
    conspiracy to defraud for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  three  years'
    imprisonment.

17. In July 2008, the appellant was served with notice of the  respondent's
    intention to make a  deportation  order,  and  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to make this order was  dismissed  on  30  January
    2009.  His appeal rights were exhausted in April 2009.

18. In September 2009 the appellant applied to revoke the deportation order
    which had been made, which application was refused on 16 October  2009.
    The appellant appealed against this decision also.

19. On 10 December 2009 this appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Greasley, following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 1 December.

20. It is clear from  reading  Judge  Greasley's  determination  that  even
    though at this stage the appellant had not  been  granted  a  residence
    card, his claim was considered under the EEA Regulations.  At paragraph
    60 of his determination, Judge Greasley stated as follows:

         "60. In an EEA case such  as  this,  Mr  Roberts  [the  appellant's
             Counsel] submitted that the  starting  point  had  to  be  the
             nature of the threat and the deportation as last resort."

21. Judge Greasley founded his decision on his finding that  the  appellant
    did not present "a genuine and sufficiently serious threat"  (the  test
    he applied - see paragraph 66).  He took into  account,  (at  paragraph
    70), that notwithstanding the appellant's  past  record,  "It  is  also
    relevant the appellant has not committed any  offences  recently",  and
    further that "Based on the professional evidence before me, I find that
    there is no evidence now of a propensity to do so".  At  paragraph  68,
    the judge had stated, somewhat questionably, that "I cannot  go  behind
    what is, in effect, professional evidence in relation to propensity  to
    commit further offences".  We would comment in this regard  that  while
    professional evidence is of course relevant, it must be  considered  in
    light of  all  the  evidence.   Essentially,  the  judge  accepted  the
    appellant's   claim  that  he   was   a   reformed   character,   whose
    circumstances had  changed  and  who  had  not  reoffended  during  his
    supervision period, and found further that because of his  relationship
    with his children it would not be proportionate to deport him.

22. Eleven days after this decision had been promulgated,  on  21  December
    2009 the deportation order was revoked.

23. On 18 February 2010 the appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The  respondent  refused  this  application  because  the
    appellant had not provided evidence to show that his  marriage  to  his
    EEA national spouse (Ms T) had been dissolved, although  the  appellant
    does not appear to have applied for the residence  card  on  the  basis
    that that marriage  had  been  dissolved.   He  appealed  against  this
    decision and in  a  determination  promulgated  on  16  November  2010,
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 11 November 2010 his appeal  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Flynn, who relied upon  some  of
    the findings previously made by Judge  Greasley.  Judge  O'Flynn  found
    that the appellant was still  married  to  Ms  T,  who  was  a  Swedish
    national exercising treaty rights, and accordingly unless and until the
    marriage was dissolved, he was still a family member entitled  as  such
    to a residence  card.   Following  that  decision,  the  appellant  was
    eventually granted a  residence  card  on  8  February  2011,  and  the
    appellant's passport was endorsed to this effect.

24. During the period while the appellant was waiting for the  grant  of  a
    residence card (which would confirm his right not only to  be  in  this
    country but to work here) and for some months thereafter  (the  precise
    dates will be discussed below) the appellant was engaged  in  the  very
    serious criminal conspiracy to defraud referred to above for  which  he
    was eventually arrested and on 27 January 2012 convicted and  sentenced
    to 54 months' imprisonment.  We set out below extracts from the judge's
    sentencing remarks which are relevant to our decision in this appeal:

         "The fraud involved was a fraud on railway operating companies  and
         it covered a period of something more than  a  year  between  about
         summer 2010 and September 2011 when you were  arrested.   What  the
         prosecution case has always been is that you conspired with  others
         unknown to defraud the railway operating companies of money by what
         they say was a sophisticated,  professionally  organised  and  pre-
         planned, large-scale fraud and that the aim up to the date of  your
         arrest was to cheat them  of  a  total  amount  in  the  region  of
         �60,000.  That was the loss which had you succeeded altogether  you
         would have caused them.  ...

         When your flat was  raided  for  the  purpose  of  your  arrest  in
         September 2011 a search of your computer showed no  less  than  247
         stolen credit card details, many of which had not up to  that  date
         apparently been used for the purpose of the conspiracy, so that  it
         is suggested by the prosecution, not unreasonably, that had you not
         been arrested in due course those credit cards too would have  been
         used.

         The method used for  this  conspiracy  was  largely  to  use  these
         compromised credit or debit card  details  over  the  telephone  to
         order tickets for delivery  to  you  using  different  aliases,  or
         sometimes to people  that  were  nominated,  normally  by  you,  at
         different addresses,  very  frequently  addresses  associated  with
         places that you had been living in.  ...

         So this was, I am  satisfied,  a  professional  planned  and  well-
         organised conspiracy.  You entered a basis of plea when you pleaded
         guilty  in  January  this  year  which  sought  to  minimise   your
         involvement in the conspiracy.  Essentially, you were blaming  your
         brother and you were saying that he was  using  your  premises  and
         your equipment for the purposes of the fraud.  As I understand  the
         basis of  plea,  you  were  essentially  simply  saying  that  your
         involvement and your guilt flowed from the fact that you knew  what
         he was doing and were providing  him  with  your  address  for  the
         purpose of carrying out the fraud.  The prosecution did not  accept
         that minimal level of involvement that you were putting forward and
         as a result a Newton hearing was ordered, which began this morning.

         I say straight away that the Newton hearing  involved  an  enormous
         amount of preparation on the part of the  prosecution.   More  than
         100 additional pages of evidence were served following your plea of
         guilty.  ... You have put the prosecution team to a great  deal  of
         additional work by putting  forward  this  basis  of  plea.   After
         [prosecution Counsel] had begun to open the case to me,  it  became
         apparent that you were very deeply  involved  in  this  conspiracy.
         The evidence in that regard was plainly overwhelming.   The  result
         of the search of your premises had  been  to  produce  a  veritable
         goldmine of material that showed how deeply involved  you  were  in
         this conspiracy.  At the end of the day [your Counsel]  was  driven
         to accept, on your instructions, that at the very least you were an
         equal principal in the conspiracy, if not, as the  Crown  suggests,
         the moving spirit of the conspiracy.  ...

         As to your personal gain, it is difficult to know the  full  extent
         of your gain.  What [prosecuting  Counsel]  says,  relying  on  the
         documentation, is that in addition to all the jobseeker's allowance
         and whatever other benefits you were drawing from the state,  there
         are about �20,000 worth of  unexplained  cash  payments  into  your
         account, which he invites the court to suppose were  cash  payments
         from your customers.  On top of that, he submits that  there  would
         have been cash received by you which  you  spent  directly  without
         paying it into your bank account, and I accept that submission.  So
         there was a considerable amount of  personal  gain  in  this  case,
         quite apart from the loss you caused the railway companies ...".

25. The judge then went on to state as follows:

         "Aggravating  features  identified   as   potentially   aggravating
         features in  the  guidelines,  which  are  present  here,  are  the
         planning of the offence, the obvious intention to go on  committing
         the offences had you not been arrested, the fact that this  was  an
         offence involving others  together  with  yourself.   That  is  the
         conspiracy   element.    Finally,   and   most   importantly,   the
         antecedents.  It is those that take this  case  right  outside  the
         normal bracket for a case of this kind".

26. When considering  the  appellant's  antecedents,  the  judge  made  the
    following observations:

         "I have before me your antecedents and I also have a  note  of  the
         sentencing remarks of the judge at Middlesex Guildhall Crown  Court
         on 6 December 2006 when you were last sentenced for an  offence  of
         this kind, on which occasion you were  sentenced  to  three  years'
         imprisonment for conspiracy to  defraud,  having  been  given  full
         credit to your plea of guilty, thus suggesting that  had  you  been
         sentenced after trial the sentence would have been  four-and-a-half
         years' imprisonment.

         Looking at your  record,  you  are  a  Nigerian  by  origin.   Your
         offending involving railway fraud started as long ago as 2002.  You
         were convicted of various attempts and actual obtaining of property
         by  deception  involving  railway  fraud  by  the  Magistrates   in
         Doncaster on 22 May 2002.  There was a further conviction not  long
         afterwards  in  Newcastle-upon-Tyne  Crown  Court  in  March  2003.
         Again, in December 2003 at Horseferry Road Magistrates' Court,  the
         same kind of offending.  Then the matter to which I have  referred,
         Middlesex  Guildhall  Crown  Court  on   6   December   2006,   two
         conspiracies to defraud, treated by  the  judge  as  effectively  a
         single conspiracy, three years' imprisonment after being given full
         credit for your plea of guilty.  In  the  note  of  the  sentencing
         remarks, your offending history in relation to using  credit  cards
         fraudulently in order to obtain railway tickets is set out fully by
         the learned judge."

27. The judge  then  summed  up  his  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    antecedents, as follows:

         "It  is  a  deplorable  history,  showing  constant  and   repeated
         offending of exactly  the  same  type.   The  judge  said  on  that
         occasion that the pre-sentence report that he had before him showed
         that you are a well-educated man and he said it  is  all  the  more
         regrettable that you have misused your education and  your  obvious
         intelligence to engage in what he could only describe as an act  of
         dishonesty.  He sentenced you on the basis  of  being  involved  in
         something like about �45,000 worth of transactions.  It seems  that
         you cannot stop yourself  from  committing  this  kind  of  railway
         ticket fraud.  It goes on and on and all the court  can  do  is  to
         attempt to discourage you by passing  increasingly  long  sentences
         and by so doing it can to some extent protect the railway companies
         from your depredations."

28. When giving reasons for  only  discounting  the  sentence  which  would
    otherwise have been applicable on a not guilty plea  (which  the  judge
    considered was five years' imprisonment) by only 10%, the judge  stated
    as follows:

         "You were plainly a prime mover in this conspiracy.  The  evidence,
         as I have said, was overwhelming and it is difficult to  understand
         why you caused so much work to the prosecution, potentially a  two-
         day Newton hearing, reduced now to one  day,  by  your  taking  the
         position you did".

29.  Finally,  the  judge  remarks  as  follows,  regarding  the  potential
    deportation of this appellant:

         "I very much hope this is the last time that you will be  troubling
         these courts.  Apparently it was intended that you be deported on a
         previous occasion.  That did not happen.  I suppose you are  likely
         to be deported following this latest conviction".

30. Subsequently, on 17 December 2013, the respondent made a decision under
    the 2006 EEA Regulations and Section 5(1) of the Immigration  Act  1971
    to make a deportation  order.   The  appellant  appealed  against  this
    decision, which appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Talbot, sitting at Hendon Magistrates' Court on 16 February 2015.  In a
    determination promulgated on 3 March 2015, Judge Talbot  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal, both under the EEA Regulations and under Article 8.



31. The appellant appealed against this decision,  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, and in a decision  promulgated
    on 13 January 2015,  following  a  hearing  on  9  December  2015,  the
    President, The  Honourable  Mr  Justice  McCloskey,  found  that  Judge
    Talbot's decision was infected by two material errors of law, such that
    it needed to be set aside.  The President  considered  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal was "fully equipped to remake the decision" and the appeal was
    accordingly retained in the Upper Tribunal for rehearing.

32. The President was particularly concerned that it was not clear from the
    Decision of Judge Talbot that he had given  adequate  consideration  to
    the interests of the appellant's children.  In particular he  expressed
    concern that Judge Talbot had  found  that  "the  family  life  of  the
    appellant and that of his children will be placed in some  jeopardy  by
    his removal".  As the President rightly stated at paragraph 15  of  his
    Decision:

         "The conclusions of the Tribunal that the removal of the  appellant
         from the United  Kingdom  would  (merely)  place  the  family  life
         enjoyed by the children  and  him  'in  some  jeopardy'  is  simply
         unsustainable.  Their family life, as enjoyed  and  experienced  by
         the three persons involved, would be decimated, left hanging by the
         thread of occasional long distance communications".

33. The President was also concerned that Judge Talbot had not  appreciated
    the importance of the  EU Charter of Fundamental  Rights,  pursuant  to
    which very great weight had to be given to the  fundamental  rights  of
    the appellant's children.  We set out  the  President's  exposition  of
    these rights,  and the great weight which has to be given to them:

    "

   26. The Charter entered into force, in tandem with the Lisbon Treaty, on
       01 November 2009.  Constitutionally, it is one of the three dominant
       instruments of governance of the EU. Notably, one of the recitals in
       its preamble proclaims the necessity of strengthening the protection
       of fundamental rights.  This is reflected  in  its  contents.   Thus
       while many of its provisions approximate  closely  to  the  European
       Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms  (the  "ECHR"),
       the reach of the  Charter  is  more  expansive.   In  some  specific
       instances, it goes demonstrably further than the ECHR.  Furthermore,
       it enshrines rights  which  the  ECHR  does  not  contain,  such  as
       economic and social rights, cultural rights and others belonging  to
       the realms of the  environment,  consumer  protection  and  criminal
       justice.  The adoption of the Charter is, by some measure, the  most
       important development in human rights protection in Europe since the
       introduction of the ECHR over 60 years ago.




   27. Article 24 of the Charter bears the title "The Rights of the Child".
        Under this banner, it provides:



        "(1) Children shall have the right to such protection and  care  as
        is necessary for their well-being. They  may  express  their  views
        freely.  Such views shall be taken into  consideration  on  matters
        which concern them in accordance with their age and maturity.




        (2)  In all actions relating to children, whether taken  by  public
        authorities or private institutions,  the  child's  best  interests
        must be a primary consideration.




        (3)  Every child shall have the right  to  maintain  on  a  regular
        basis a personal relationship and direct contact with both  his  or
        her parents, unless this is contrary to his or her interests."




        I have highlighted paragraph (3),  as  this  is  the  provision  of
        Article 24 which the  Appellant  invokes.   Having  regard  to  the
        gateway provisions of Article 51, it is clear that,  by  virtue  of
        the EU law context, Article  24  applied  to  both  the  underlying
        decision of the Secretary of State and that of the FtT  on  appeal.
        This was not in dispute.  The parties were also agreed that Article
        24(3) extends beyond the narrow context of disputes relating to the
        residence of and contact with children.




    28. Article 24 has been considered by the  CJEU.   In  Deticek  -  v  -
        Sgueglia [2009] EUECJ C-403/09 the Court gave consideration to  the
        interpretation of Council Regulation (EC) 2201/2003.  This concerns
        jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement  of  judgments  in
        matrimonial matters and, specifically, the question of whether this
        permits  a   provisional   child   custody   measure   in   certain
        circumstances.  The Court, having noted that the  Charter  features
        in the preamble to the Regulation,  described  the  rights  of  the
        child  contained  in  Article  24  as   "fundamental",   at   [53],
        continuing:




        "[54]     One of those fundamental  rights  of  the  child  is  the
        right, set out in Article 24(3) of the Charter, to  maintain  on  a
        regular basis a personal relationship and direct contact with  both
        parents, respect for that right undeniably merging  into  the  best
        interests of any child.




        [55] Article 20 of Regulation No 2201/2003 cannot be interpreted in
        such a way that it disregards that fundamental right.




        [56] In this respect, it is clear that the wrongful  removal  of  a
        child, following a  decision  taken  unilaterally  by  one  of  the
        parents, more often than not deprives the child of the  possibility
        of maintaining on a  regular  basis  a  personal  relationship  and
        direct contact with the other parent.




        [57] Article 20 of Regulation  No  2201/2003  cannot  therefore  be
        interpreted in such a way that it can be used by the parent who has
        wrongfully removed the child as an instrument  for  prolonging  the
        factual situation caused by his or  her  wrongful  conduct  or  for
        legitimating the consequences of that conduct.




        [58] It is true that,  under  Article  24(3)  of  the  Charter,  an
        exception may be made to the child's fundamental right to  maintain
        on a regular basis a personal relationship and direct contact  with
        both parents if that interest proves  to  be  contrary  to  another
        interest of the child.



         This analysis gave rise to the following conclusion:



        "[59]     It follows that a measure which prevents the  maintenance
        on a regular basis of a personal relationship  and  direct  contact
        with both parents can be justified only by another interest of  the
        child of such importance that it takes priority over  the  interest
        underlying that fundamental right."




   29. In a later decision, McB - v - El E [2010] EUECJ  C-400/10,  a  case
       which had a Hague Convention context involving the  disputed  return
       of a child from the United Kingdom to the Republic of  Ireland,  the
       CJEU said the following, at [60]:



       "It must also be borne in  mind  that  Article  7  of  the  Charter,
       mentioned by the referring court in its question, must be read in  a
       way which respects the obligation to  take  into  consideration  the
       child's best interests, recognised in Article 24(2) of that Charter,
       and taking into account the fundamental right of a child to maintain
       on a regular basis personal relationships and  direct  contact  with
       both of his or her parents, stated in Article 24(3)  (see,  to  that
       effect, Case  C-540/03  Parliament  v  Council  [2006]  ECR  I-5769,
       paragraph 58). Moreover, it is  apparent  from  recital  33  in  the
       preamble to Regulation No 2201/2003 that that regulation recognises
       the fundamental rights and observes the principles of  the  Charter,
       while, in particular, seeking to ensure respect for the  fundamental
       rights of the child as  set  out  in  Article  24  of  the  Charter.
       Accordingly, the provisions of that regulation cannot be interpreted
       in such a way that they disregard  that  fundamental  right  of  the
       child, the  respect  for  which  undeniably  merges  into  the  best
       interests of the child (see,  to  that  effect,  Case  C-403/09 PPU
       Deti?ek [2009] ECR I-0000, paragraphs 53 to 55)."




       There was some focus in the arguments of counsel on the  "undeniably
       merges into" part of the above passage.  In my judgment, taking into
       account its approach in Deticek,  to  which  explicit  reference  is
       made, the Court was not suggesting that Article 24(3)  adds  nothing
       of substance to Article 24(2).



   30. I am of the opinion that  Article  24(3)  creates  a  free  standing
       right.  It may, of course, be viewed as the unequivocal articulation
       of a concrete "best interests" right and, on  this  analysis,  is  a
       development, or elaboration, of Article 24(2).   Furthermore,  given
       the exception formulated in the final clause of Article  24(3),  the
       nexus with Article 24(2) is unmistakable.  However,  I  consider  it
       clear that Article 24(3) was designed to create a discrete right, an
       analysis which is harmonious with  general  principles  of  EU  law.
       These include the well known principle that every part of a  measure
       of EU law is presumed to have a separate and individual  effect  and
       impact.  Article 24(3) may also be viewed through the prism  of  the
       principle that where one has an  amalgam  of  specific  and  general
       provisions, the former should normally be considered in  advance  of
       the  latter.   This  construction  is  further  fortified   by   the
       Commentary of the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European
       Union (published  by  the  EU  Network  of  Independent  Experts  on
       Fundamental Rights), at p207:



       ".....  Children are no longer  considered  as  mere  recipients  of
       services or beneficiaries  of  protective  measures  but  rather  as
       rights holders and participants in actions affecting them."




   31. Notwithstanding that Article 24(3) of the Charter was  canvassed  in
       the Appellant's written argument at first instance, the decision  of
       the FtT is silent on this issue.  This failure is reflected  in  the
       submissions of Mr Blundell which, reduced to their  essential  core,
       advanced the contention that no  material  error  of  law  had  been
       committed.  The outworkings of this argument were that the  FtT  was
       clearly aware of the issue of separation of the Appellant  from  his
       children, something which is,  in  Mr  Blundell's  words,  an  "ever
       present" in cases of this kind.



   32. The main flaw in this argument, in my view, is that it overlooks the
       profound nature of the flaw in the decision of the FtT.   In  short,
       the Judge failed to acknowledge the existence of a  right  conferred
       on both children by one of the constitutional measures  of  EU  law.
       Ipso facto,  he  also  failed  to  appreciate  that  this  has  been
       characterised a "fundamental" right  in  the  jurisprudence  of  the
       CJEU.  If this error had been avoided, it is as a minimum  possible,
       as Mr Knafler argued, that the Judge's analysis in the  passages  to
       quoted in [13] above would have been quite different. In particular,
       it seems to me inconceivable that the vague "a relationship" and the
       limp "in some jeopardy" assessments would have featured. I conclude,
       accordingly, that the FtT's error of law on  this  issue  cannot  be
       dismissed as immaterial."

34. The remitted appeal  was  originally  listed  for  13  April  2016  but
    adjourned  on  the  respondent's  application.   Another  hearing   was
    subsequently listed for 22 February 2017 but had to be vacated  due  to
    judicial unavailability.  Eventually, the appeal was listed  before  us
    on 14 June 2017.

The Hearing

35. We heard evidence from the appellant and also the mother of one of  his
    children (not his wife) and his current partner, all of whom were cross-
    examined.  We also heard submissions from Counsel to both  parties  and
    were assisted by their respective skeleton arguments.

The Law

36. The parties had between them prepared an authorities bundle  consisting
    of no less than 81 items, but following discussion  with  the  Tribunal
    the parties' respective Counsel between them only referred the Tribunal
    to four of  these  authorities,  and  none  of  these  were  more  than
    peripheral, as essentially the parties were agreed as to  the  relevant
    legal principles which applied.

37. As already noted above, it is common ground between  the  parties  that
    the appellant has a derived EEA right of residence, but  that  he  does
    not have a permanent right of residence under  EEA  law,  because  such
    periods of residence as could be said to be pursuant to  EEA  law  were
    interrupted by prison sentences such that he has never resided in  this
    country  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  under  the   2006
    Regulations.  Accordingly, the conditions which apply to the making  of
    a deportation decision, and the lawfulness of such decision  are  those
    set out within Regulations 19 and  21  of  the  2006  Regulations,  the
    relevant parts of which are as follow:

         "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         19.-  ...

         (3) Subject to paragraphs (4)  and  (5),  a  person  who  has  been
         admitted to, or acquired a right to reside in, the  United  Kingdom
         under these Regulations may be removed from the United Kingdom if-

         ...

         (b) he would otherwise be entitled to reside in the United  Kingdom
         under these Regulations but the Secretary of State has decided that
         his removal is justified on the grounds of  public  policy,  public
         security or public health in accordance with regulation 21.

         Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
         grounds

         21.-(1) In this regulation  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in  respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.

         (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

         (a)has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

         (b)is under  the  age  of  18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
         necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the  Convention
         on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly  of  the
         United Nations on 20th November 1989(1).

         (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-




         (a)the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c)the personal conduct of the person concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;

         (d)matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;

         (e)a person's previous criminal convictions do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin. ..."

38. The way in which the case was argued on behalf  of  the  appellant  was
    that the respondent first had  to  establish  (pursuant  to  Regulation
    21(5)(c)) that the personal conduct of  this  appellant  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society such as to  justify  his  deportation.
    If this was not established, then the appeal  must  succeed.   Further,
    this requirement was only a "gateway"; because, even if  the  appellant
    represented such a risk, the respondent still had to establish that his
    removal  would  be  proportionate,  weighing  this  risk  against   the
    composite rights of the appellant and his daughters and other family.

39. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Blundell did not seek to  suggest  that
    this was not a fair analysis of the  legal  principles  involved.   The
    issues between the parties were first, whether or not the threshold was
    met; and secondly, even if it was, whether assessing such risk as there
    was to society by reason of the appellant's continued presence in  this
    country, when weighed against the interests of the  appellant  and  his
    family,  in  particular   his   daughters,   his   removal   would   be
    proportionate.  It was common ground that the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's daughters was a primary consideration, but not paramount.

40. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Blundell, in his skeleton argument  and
    also in his  oral  submissions  accepted  that  "it  would  be  in  the
    appellant's daughters' best interests for him to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom" (at paragraph 15 of the respondent's skeleton  argument).   Mr
    Blundell's submissions within paragraph 15 of  that  skeleton  argument
    continued as follows:

         "The Secretary of State  does  not  suggest  that  A  or  M  should
         relocate with the appellant to Nigeria.  She accepts that they  can
         and would remain in the United Kingdom with their  primary  carers,
         their mothers.  The assessment in this case should, therefore, take
         place on the basis that:

         (1)  it is in A and M's best interests for their father  to  remain
             in the United Kingdom;

         (2)  they will remain here if he is deported;

         (3)  the physical contact which currently takes place in the United
             Kingdom will be lost; and

         (4)  the frequency of telephone and social media contact may reduce
             from current levels".

41. The primary issue between the parties (which  the  appellant's  Counsel
    rightly stated would be dispositive of the appeal if the Tribunal found
    in favour of the appellant) was  whether  or  not  the  respondent  had
    established that there was a serious  risk  that  unless  deported  the
    appellant would continue to commit offences such as those of  which  he
    had been convicted.  During argument, it was  accepted  on  his  behalf
    that the fraud offences of which the appellant had been convicted  were
    offences which cause serious harm to society, and that if the  Tribunal
    found that there was a serious present risk of the appellant continuing
    to commit such offences if not deported, then the respondent would have
    passed through the "gateway".  However, it  was  the  appellant's  case
    that his deportation would still not be  proportionate,  in  particular
    because of the effect this would have on the lives of his children.

The Evidence

42. In addition to the oral  evidence  referred  to  above,  we  were  also
    referred to expert evidence, including  supplementary  reports.   These
    reports were filed very late (despite directions  previously  given  by
    this Tribunal) and the respondent had not had an  adequate  opportunity
    to consider whether or not she  wished  to  cross-examine  any  of  the
    experts.  Mr Blundell did not seek to cross-examine any of  the  expert
    witnesses,  and  in  particular  Dr  Katherine  Boucher,   a   clinical
    psychologist, whose report was dated 2  June  2017  and  had  not  been
    served until later, because this would have  required  an  adjournment.
    However, he did challenge the methodology used by this expert  and  did
    not accept that her report had any substantive status or weight.   With
    these caveats in mind, we admitted this evidence.

43. Although we will not set out within  this  Decision  all  the  evidence
    which was before us, we have considered  all  the  evidence  which  was
    given, together with all the material contained  within  the  file,  as
    well as the submissions which were made, whether or  not  the  same  is
    specifically referred to below.

The Appellant's Evidence

44. The appellant relied upon the five witness statements which he had made
    in  connection  with  these  proceedings  and   confirmed   that   they
    represented his true evidence.

45. In cross-examination, the appellant was taken through  his  history  of
    offending, and it was put to him that at times when  he  was  offending
    earlier in his life, he  already  had  a  stable  relationship  with  a
    partner and one of his daughters, but he still  offended  and  went  to
    prison.  The appellant accepted that the  stability  he  got  from  his
    children was not new, but claimed that it had "greater depth" now.   He
    accepted however that despite being in a strong  relationship  when  he
    was 29, this had not stopped him committing the  fraud  offences  which
    led to his going to prison in 2003.  He was also obliged to accept that
    his commission of the offences in 2006 which led to his being in prison
    for three years had also been committed at a time when he had enjoyed a
    stable relationship with both daughters.

46. When it was put to him that having come out of prison from  the  second
    offence of fraud he must have appreciated that if he offended again  he
    would be likely to get a heavier sentence, the appellant said  that  he
    appreciated this "in hindsight, yes, but not at the time".

47. The appellant was also obliged to accept that at the time when  he  had
    committed the offences for which he was imprisoned in  2012  he  had  a
    strong relationship with his daughters.  When asked what  it  was  that
    was "different" now such that he would not offend again, the  appellant
    replied that he simply could not afford to offend  again  "for  several
    reasons.  My daughters, their mothers, the book would be thrown at me".
     He also suggested that his relationship with his daughters  was  "more
    meaningful now because they are more mature".   He  asserted  that  his
    relationship with both his daughters was "now stronger".

48. In light of this reply, and against the background that  the  appellant
    had set out, he was asked questions about  his  relationship  with  his
    daughter A and admitted that he had last seen her on  11/12  March  and
    had not see her since.  In light of  this  current  difficulty  in  his
    relationship with A, his earlier evidence that  his  relationship  with
    both his daughters was now stronger than it had been in the past was we
    find an overstatement.

49. The appellant was then asked about his early  conviction  for  assault,
    and whether he had told his wife and children of this conviction.   His
    initial reply was that he had, but he then added that the first assault
    was "a caution".  When it was pointed out  to  him  that  he  had  been
    convicted of assault in March 2003 (a conviction and not a caution)  he
    then said that he was "not sure I've discussed  it  with  them".   When
    asked again whether he had  discussed  it  with  his  children  (having
    initially said that he had) his  answer  changed  to  "No.   It  was  a
    technical assault" claiming that it was "not something I  think  about,
    because in my eyes I didn't attack anyone".  When asked again how  much
    his partners knew about his convictions, his reply was "All of it", but
    when asked again about the assault, he  claimed  that  he  had  pleaded
    guilty "because it was a technical assault - there was  touching".   He
    then claimed that "I have held my hands up to all my offences".

50. He was asked whether Ms Hanson, his current partner, knew he  had  been
    in prison three times, to which he replied that she knew he had been in
    prison "at least twice".  He was asked whether his partners  had  known
    about his other fraud convictions, to which he said  that  he  believed
    so, but when asked again about the assault  he  then  replied  that  "I
    definitely did not tell them".

51. In light of the appellant's earlier statement that  he  had  "held  his
    hands up to all his offences", the Tribunal invited Mr Blundell to  ask
    the appellant how this assertion was consistent with  the  trial  judge
    having rejected the case he had advanced during his Newton trial.   The
    sentencing remarks of the judge were put to him (which included that he
    had in effect put forward a false mitigation) and he was asked  whether
    he accepted these remarks, to which the appellant replied that he  did.
    However, when then asked whether it followed that the basis of the plea
    which he had attempted to advance had been false, the appellant replied
    that it was "false now" but that "at the time I didn't  understand  the
    legal specifics".  He went on to say that  he  was  "more  arguing  the
    specifics of what happened" but that "I now realise  that  any  part  I
    played made me equally guilty".

52. When he was asked by the Tribunal whether it was right  that  that  did
    not seem to be what he was saying  then,  the  appellant  responded  by
    saying that "I was trying to say  that  he  [the  appellant's  brother]
    played a more major part".

53. The appellant was then asked by the Tribunal whether he had been saying
    at the time that his involvement was simply to provide an  address  for
    his brother, because that is what the judge in his  sentencing  remarks
    was saying, to which, after a short pause, the appellant replied "Yes".
     He was then asked whether that was untrue then,  to  which  again  the
    appellant replied that it was.

54. After some more questions about his criminal history, the appellant was
    then asked about the application for an EEA  residence  card  which  he
    made  in  February  2010,  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  that
    application eventually being allowed in November 2010, following  which
    he was granted a residence card in February 2011.  It was  put  to  him
    that his last bout of  offending  had  been  between  summer  2010  and
    September 2011 (as referred to by the judge in his sentencing  remarks)
    and that it followed that he had not been subject  to  deportation  and
    had established EEA rights but still  continued  offending,  which  the
    appellant initially accepted had been the position.  He  also  accepted
    that his EEA rights had been established before he stopped offending.

55. It was then put to the appellant that the judge had said  that  if  the
    appellant had not been caught he would have carried  on  offending,  to
    which the appellant replied that "That is what he said".   It  was  put
    again to him that if he had not been arrested he would have carried  on
    offending, to which he replied "Possibly yes".

56. Mr Blundell then put to the appellant that it followed that he had been
    committing serious offences during a time when he had been in a  stable
    relationship, enjoyed a close relationship with his  children  and  had
    had leave to be in this country and the right to work.  The  appellant,
    rather than accepting this, replied instead  that  there  had  "been  a
    period between 2007 and 2010 when I didn't have the right".  It was put
    again to him that he would probably have continued offending in 2010/11
    if he had not been arrested, to which the appellant  replied  "Possibly
    yes".  He was asked again whether it was correct that he had had a full
    right to work during that time, to which  the  appellant  then  replied
    that it had taken "a year for them to send the card"  (which  does  not
    appear to have been correct).

57. The appellant was referred to the chronology from which it was apparent
    that he had been granted a residence card on 8 February  2011,  whereas
    he had been sentenced on the basis that he had gone on offending  until
    September of that year, when he was arrested.

58. The appellant's response was to repeat that he had  "only  just  got  a
    residence card at that time" and he then said that there was "No way  I
    can explain this without having the confiscation transcript"  which  he
    said had said three months.  He then said that  although  he  had  been
    arrested in September "the actual offence stopped  in  March".   As  Mr
    Blundell then noted, this does not seem to have been suggested anywhere
    else within the papers, and the appellant was asked by the Tribunal  as
    to whether he had lodged an appeal against his sentence  on  the  basis
    that the judge had got this wrong, to which the appellant replied  that
    "That was what I argued in the Newton hearing".

59. Mr Blundell reminded the appellant that he had not been believed in the
    Newton hearing and that he had been sentenced on the basis that he  had
    carried on offending until September of that year,  and  there  was  no
    reference within the sentencing remarks (or anywhere  else  within  the
    papers) to his only having offended for a period of three months.   The
    appellant replied to  this  question  by  saying  that  "My  solicitors
    advised me".

60. The appellant was then asked by the Tribunal whether the judge had been
    wrong when he had said that his offending had  continued  between  2010
    and September 2011, to which the respondent replied that the judge  had
    not been wrong, because he had  gone  on  the  evidence  he  had.   The
    question was repeated and  the  appellant  was  asked  whether  if  the
    offences had stopped in March how it was that the judge could be  right
    when he stated in his sentencing remarks that the  offending  continued
    until September, to which the appellant replied that  he  had  had  the
    paraphernalia which was still in his home.

61. The appellant was then asked by the Tribunal whether  it  was  now  his
    case that he only continued  offending  for  one  month  after  he  had
    received his EEA residence card, to which he replied that it was.

62. In light of this answer the appellant was asked what caused him to stop
    this offending, to  which  he  responded  that  "The  procedure  wasn't
    successful.  The rail tickets couldn't be acquired".  He was asked what
    he had meant when he had said earlier that he would have carried on  if
    he had not been arrested, to which  he  replied  that  he  had  stopped
    because he was not successful.

63. The appellant was then asked questions about the brother he had claimed
    had been heavily involved in the frauds and asked which brother it was,
    to which he replied that that brother was dead  now,  he  had  died  he
    thought in 2016.  He had eventually  been  found  and  had  received  a
    sentence of three years' imprisonment.  When he was asked  why  it  was
    that he had received a lower sentence than the appellant, the appellant
    replied that this was because it was his first offence.

64. The appellant was then asked whether he had kept in contact with him in
    Nigeria, to which he replied that he had not.  He was then asked how he
    had found out he had died, to which he  replied  that  he  had  sixteen
    siblings.  The impression which we understood the  appellant  had  been
    intending to give was that because he had so many siblings obviously he
    was kept abreast with what was happening to his family within  Nigeria.
    However, following further questioning, when asked with how many of his
    siblings within Nigeria he had any contact at all, he replied  that  it
    was just two of them, adding that their brother's death "has brought us
    closer".

65. We have set out some of the answers given by the  appellant  in  cross-
    examination in such detail because they have informed our  decision  as
    to the confidence we can place in  his  assertion  that  he  is  now  a
    reformed person who does not represent a serious risk of reoffending.

66. In re-examination, Mr Knafler put to the appellant that without further
    explanation his  statements  that  unless  apprehended  he  would  have
    continued offending but also that he had stopped because the fraud  was
    not working appeared contradictory, to which  the  appellant  responded
    that he could only suggest that "the companies were seeing what we were
    doing and were putting in security measures".

67. The appellant was then asked by the Tribunal  whether  it  was  correct
    that when he had appealed against  the  previous  deportation  decision
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  (after  his  previous  conviction  for
    fraud) following  which  Judge  Greasley  had  found  that  he  had  no
    propensity to offend, he had told the judge on that  occasion  that  he
    knew this was his last chance and that he would never offend again,  to
    which the appellant replied that he believed  that  he  had.   He  also
    accepted that he had then offended again.

68. When asked why the Tribunal should believe him now he replied that  the
    children were older and they had "more meaningful discussions" and that
    he did now realise that his actions were morally wrong.  He had done  a
    lot of work with his character with different support groups,  learning
    about society and crime.  He wanted to get back into society, and  once
    he overcame the medical issues he was going through,  become  a  better
    role model for his children.

69. The Tribunal then heard evidence  from  M's  mother  who  had  gone  to
    considerable lengths to come down from her home  in  South  Shields  in
    order to give evidence.  She had had to leave her home at  around  5.00
    a.m. and had had to bring her children with her, but she felt  she  had
    to because, as she put it, she was "M's voice".

70. This witness was asked in cross-examination what she had been  told  by
    the appellant about his previous offending, and in particular what  she
    knew about the  offences  he  had  committed.   When  asked  about  any
    convictions for assault, she said she  had  heard  about  this  through
    other people, someone she knew in Newcastle had told her about  it  and
    the appellant had confirmed that it was a fight.  He had only told  her
    about one assault.  The witness when asked said that the appellant  had
    not told her about any driving offences, and nor had he  told  her  the
    details about any  frauds,  even  the  period  in  which  he  had  been
    offending.  Although M had a stepfather (he was also the father of  her
    younger sibling) he could not replace the appellant.  He was  "a  rock"
    but M deserved to have her father in her life.

71. In re-examination the witness said that she did not wish M  to  be  the
    victim of  the  appellant's  criminal  activity,  which  she  was  very
    against.  M was at the worst time of her life, as a teenager and had  a
    natural bond with her father.

72. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, the witness  said  that  the
    appellant saw M about every six weeks  in  term  time,  they  tried  to
    arrange weekends, but M would spend  more  time  with  him  during  the
    holidays.

73. The Tribunal then  heard  evidence  from  Ms  Hanson,  an  air  hostess
    employed by British Airways, who has been in a  relationship  with  the
    appellant for about two years, and has a 5 year old son who lives  with
    her.  She has met both of the appellant's daughters, A and  M,  and  in
    her statement, upon which she relied, had stated that the appellant was
    close to both of them.

74. In cross-examination, she referred to the help that the appellant  (who
    stayed with her four or five times a week when she was  not  working  -
    she worked two weeks on and two weeks off) provided by taking  her  son
    to school.

75. Ms Hanson was asked about her knowledge of his criminal convictions and
    whether, for example, she knew how often he  had  been  to  prison,  to
    which she replied that she knew it was more than once but did not  know
    how often.  She was asked whether she knew why he had gone  to  prison,
    to which she answered it was for fraud, but he had not told her any  of
    the details, he had just said it was fraud.  She was asked whether  the
    appellant had told her that he had convictions for a range of  offences
    for fraud for which he had received community sentences, to  which  she
    said that he had but she did not know how many.

76. Ms Hanson was then asked whether he had mentioned assault to which  she
    replied that he had, but when asked what he  had  told  her  about  any
    assault she just replied that he had said he  had  "been  in  trouble".
    She had just wanted to know the outlines but had not gone into details.
     When asked about whether she knew about his conviction for assault she
    then replied that she did not, and when asked by the  Tribunal  whether
    she knew what assault was, she replied that she did not really.

77. When it was explained to Ms Hanson that assault usually  means  that  a
    person had been to court because he or she had unlawfully hit  someone,
    and she was asked whether he  had  ever  told  her  that  he  had  been
    involved in an assault on a police officer, Ms Hanson replied  that  he
    had told her a bit but that he had not gone  into  it  in  any  detail.
    This was in the context of a shooting  in  America.   When  then  asked
    whether it was right that he had not told her that he had been arrested
    for assault and had been found guilty by the court,  she  replied  that
    that was correct.

78. Ms Hanson was asked whether the fact that he had that conviction raised
    any concern as to his continuing  to  spend  time  with  her  son;  she
    replied that it did not, but that she would ask about it.  However  she
    does not regard him as a threat to anyone.

79. When asked whether she knew about his  driving  convictions,  she  said
    that she did, but she did not know how many there had been,  but  there
    must have been a few.

80. In re-examination Ms Hanson said that she did not consider she had been
    misled by the appellant.





Submissions

81. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Blundell submitted that there was  very
    little between the parties  with  regard  to  the  law.   The  relevant
    Regulations were the 2006 Regulations by  virtue  of  the  transitional
    Regulations in Schedule 4.  Regulation 21 codified the Luxembourg  case
    law over many years.

82. At this point, Mr Knafler, on behalf of the appellant,  interrupted  to
    agree with Mr Blundell that the case law indicated  that  the  Tribunal
    should consider this application in two stages.   First,  consideration
    should be given as  to  whether  there  was  a  "genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interest
    of society" and only if the answer to that was that there was, did  the
    Tribunal have to consider proportionality.

83. With regard to the appellant, the respondent submitted that he was  not
    a reliable witness.  He was evasive, failed to answer questions and was
    revealed to have lied to those closest to him.  He was not a witness of
    truth.  So far as M's mother was concerned, it was accepted  on  behalf
    of the respondent that she had attempted to give honest  evidence.   In
    respect of Ms Hanson,  her  evidence  was  of  very  limited  use;  her
    evidence was very vague, perhaps understandably.

84. With regard to M's mother, although her evidence was that she had heard
    about the assault "on the grapevine from a friend", she  did  not  know
    the details, and when she had asked the appellant, he had not told  her
    that it was an assault on a police officer who was  in  the  course  of
    arresting him.

85. Although Mr Blundell referred the Tribunal to  two  authorities,  these
    were clearly peripheral to the issues in this case, and need not be set
    out within this decision.

86. With regard to the risk of the appellant reoffending, Mr Blundell asked
    the court to take account of five particular factors.  First, there was
    a long line of similar offending, one only had  to  look  back  to  the
    relatively recent past to see that the appellant had "form", with  more
    than a decade of convictions for  serious  fraud.   His  offending  was
    rightly referred to as "deplorable" by the sentencing judge.

87. Secondly, the appellant  plainly  did  not  accept  his  true  criminal
    responsibility, especially with regard to his last  offence.   Although
    there had been a clear finding that the fraud had  lasted  for  over  a
    year and there had never  previously  been  any  suggestion  that  that
    finding was not correct, when challenged, he said  that  the  offending
    had either been three months or, later, five months.  His evidence  was
    inconsistent, evasive and  he  had  to  be  asked  the  same  questions
    repeatedly.  There was a clear distinction now between the  basis  upon
    which  he  had  been  sentenced  (in  respect  of  which  he  did   not
    successfully appeal against his sentence) and  what  he  now  said  the
    duration of his offence was.

88. The second element within this heading was his failure to  accept  full
    responsibility for what he had done.  At the outset he had set out what
    he said was his brother's role, but that had been found  to  be  false.
    His explanation now was as false as it was then.

89. Accordingly, the Tribunal should appreciate  that  when  the  appellant
    says effectively that he is a "leopard  who  has  changed  his  spots",
    there is no basis upon which the Tribunal can believe  him  because  he
    still denies the extent of his guilt.  The fact that in  words  he  has
    accepted, in re-examination, the judge's description of his conduct  as
    "deplorable" really does not help.

90. Thirdly, it became clear from the evidence given in this  hearing  that
    he had lied or not  been  wholly  truthful  about  the  extent  of  his
    offending to those closest to him.   His  evidence  on  this  point  as
    regards the assault conviction was in some ways the most striking;  his
    evidence was that he did not think he had told them  about  it,  but  a
    rather more complex picture emerged from the evidence of the witnesses.
     M's mother had "heard on the grapevine from friends"; she had  thought
    it was a fight and the appellant had seemed to confirm this.  Certainly
    he did not tell her that he had  assaulted  a  police  officer  in  the
    course of his arrest.  So he had lied to her.  Also, she did  not  know
    about his driving  convictions,  although  she  did  know  about  other
    frauds.

91. Ms Hanson's evidence on this was vague.  It might be understandable  in
    the  circumstances;  certainly  she  was  aware  of  some  incident  of
    aggression, but she did not know that he had been arrested for  assault
    on a police officer in the course of  his  arrest.   She  only  knew  a
    fraction of his other offending.

92. Fourthly, and this was  the  crux  of  the  case,  nothing  really  had
    changed.  Every time the appellant had gone to  prison  he  had  had  a
    strong relationship with his children and some  relationship  with  his
    partner.  His case was that there had been a big change in his life and
    that he has a wholly different relationship with his children now since
    his release from prison in 2014, which is how he put his  case  at  the
    hearing.  He knew he was in the "last chance saloon", but the  Tribunal
    must know that this is not a tenable argument.  The appellant has  been
    in that saloon once before, and the Tribunal had referred  him  to  his
    appeal against the earlier deportation decision.

93. The appellant's relationship with his children had always been  strong,
    but this had had  no  influence  on  him  and  had  not  prevented  his
    offending.  This was very relevant to the likelihood of his reoffending
    now, because the Tribunal could have no confidence that  these  factors
    would have the necessary and desired effect.  They would not.

94. The same points could be made with regard to his immigration status  as
    well.  His offending began when he had status.  Whatever he  says  now,
    it was clear that his offending continued after he had  been  given  an
    EEA residence card.

95. Accordingly, when considering the essentials of his case, he says  that
    he does not present a sufficiently serious threat that he  will  offend
    again because of his daughters.  His history tells us otherwise;  every
    time when he has been to prison he has had that relationship.

96. The appellant also says he  was  drawn  to  offending  because  of  his
    precarious immigration status and inability to work, but that again  is
    demonstrably untrue.

97. Fifthly, the appellant told the Tribunal at this hearing that  he  only
    stopped offending because his scam was not working.  This  was  another
    area where he was evasive; he accepted first probably and then secondly
    possibly, that he would have continued offending if  he  had  not  been
    arrested.  That deals with his point about not offending for three-and-
    a-half years.  He only stopped in the first place because of his arrest
    and now he lives under the shadow of deportation proceedings.   He  has
    had lengthy periods when he has not been arrested for offending in  the
    past, but that has not stopped his continuing  to  offend  after  these
    periods.

98. Mr Blundell then made submissions regarding the  expert  evidence  upon
    which the appellant was relying.  He  first  dealt  with  the  clinical
    psychology report produced by Dr Katherine Boucher dated 2  June  2017.
    He submitted that it was very unusual  to  rely  on  a  report  from  a
    clinical psychologist to establish a lack of propensity to offend,  and
    noted that this was anyway a matter for the Tribunal to decide.  It was
    far from obvious how a psychologist could speak  to  issues  like  this
    because her conclusions would be based upon what she had been  told  by
    the appellant.  There was very little reference within this  report  to
    any control test to establish whether or not the appellant was in  fact
    telling the truth.

99. With regard to the methodology used, Dr Boucher referred to this at 5.1
    of her Report under "Risk Assessment".  However, it was clear from this
    part of her report that the  methodology  that  she  was  adopting  was
    designed to consider a different issue, which was the risk  of  violent
    offending.  She explained her approach as follows:

         "Though the HCR.-20 is designed  to  assess  the  risk  of  violent
         offending, it is being used in this assessment to also consider the
         risk of general re-offending, as  many  risk  factors  for  violent
         offending are also relevant when considering general recidivism".

100. Although Dr Boucher considered that  many  of  the  risk  factors  were
    relevant, there was no assessment  of  how  many  or  which  ones  were
    relevant and there was no assessment of the degree of relevance.  So Dr
    Boucher was  applying  a  test  which  was  relevant  for  a  different
    assessment and one could not just assume  that  one  can  transfer  the
    results across.  If Dr Boucher had been present, this would  have  been
    put to her in cross-examination.

101. Mr Blundell also noted that Dr Boucher appreciated  that  "ideally  the
    HCR-20 should be completed by a  multi-disciplinary  team",  which  was
    another factor which could not be applied in this case.

102. In summary therefore, Mr Blundell suggested that  Dr  Boucher's  Report
    was of no assistance whatsoever in this case.

103. Mr Blundell then made submissions with regard to the two reports of  Dr
    Mahomed, who is a consultant psychiatrist, and whose most recent report
    was dated 29 March 2016.  Both reports depended entirely on  the  truth
    of what the appellant had told him,  which  was  often  the  case  with
    psychiatric reports, but in this  case,  the  Tribunal  had  heard  the
    answers given by the appellant when he was cross-examined and was  able
    to form its own judgement.  The best evidence, relevant  to  assessment
    of future risk, was what had been given by the appellant from  his  own
    lips.  The Tribunal would also be  aware  of  previous  findings  where
    Judge Greasley had said that he could not go behind  the  experts,  and
    yet he was back in prison within two years.  The appellant had  clearly
    fooled Judge Greasley (and the experts) which was very serious, because
    they were all wrong.  The fact that there had been no offences recently
    was not different  from  the  circumstances  which  existed  when  that
    previous decision had been made.

104. In these circumstances, there was clearly a sufficiently  serious  risk
    that the respondent had, in the words of Mr Knafler "passed through the
    gateway" such that the Tribunal  then  needed  to  assess  whether  the
    deportation of this appellant was proportionate.

Proportionality

105. So  far  as  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  children  were
    concerned, the respondent accepted that the  appellant  had  a  genuine
    relationship with both his daughters,  neither  of  whom  realistically
    could be expected to  live  in  Nigeria.   There  would  be  a  serious
    disruption in their lives and being realistic, this  was  a  separation
    case.  However, when looking at the effect of separation, this would be
    for a lesser period in their childhood than if they were 6  or  7  year
    olds.  A would soon be 15 and M was 13.   Also,  when  looking  at  the
    effect of separation, of course the appellant had been a  part  of  the
    lives of  both  his  daughters  since  birth,  but  he  was  not  there
    throughout their childhood, having spent various periods in prison.  He
    sees M every six weeks or  so  and  during  school  holidays,  but  the
    starting point was that he did not have contact every day.

106. Mr Blundell accepted that the President had  been  right  to  criticise
    the First-tier Judge for  not  considering  this  aspect  of  the  case
    properly, but, in the words of Lord Justice Sedley in A.D.  Lee  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 348 "that is what deportation does".

107. The appellant did have some contacts within Nigeria, with his  siblings
    and others, and the reasons why  the  respondent  considered  that  the
    decision was proportionate was because the  removal  was  necessary  to
    protect this society from the very serious risk of  his  continuing  to
    offend and this outweighed the interests of his daughters.   The threat
    that  he  posed  by  his  continued  presence  in  this   country   was
    sufficiently serious to outweigh the best interests of his daughters.

108. So far as these best interests are concerned, the  respondent  accepted
    that it is in the best interests of both the appellant's daughters that
    he should remain here.  This is uncontroversial and unexceptional,  but
    these best interests  were  outweighed  by  the  need  to  remove  this
    appellant.  Both daughters had  very  supportive  families.   M  had  a
    supportive stepfather, who was a "rock" in her life, and  was  doing  a
    lot of things that a  father  does.   A  was  a  difficult  child,  and
    although teenage children had fall-outs with parents from time to time,
    it was hard to have a reconciliation when the child and her father were
    not living together.  It was a factor that A and her  father  were  not
    seeing each  other  at  the  moment,  and  it  was  relevant  that  the
    appellant's  relationship  with  A's  mother  had  broken  down.   When
    considering the level of disruption there would be to  the  appellant's
    daughters' lives by his removal, it was relevant that he was not a full-
    time living-in father; in reality he saw M only every six weeks  or  so
    and currently did not see A at all.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

109. Mr Knafler submitted that the risk that  this  appellant  would  commit
    further serious offences was "very  low  indeed".   He  relied  on  the
    expert evidence, and  his  starting  point  was  the  OASys  assessment
    compiled by the Probation Service after  the  appellant's  most  recent
    offence.  In particular reliance was placed on the  assessment  of  the
    "risk of serious harm full analysis" starting at page 150, tab 1 of the
    bundle.   Mr  Knafler  referred  to  the  predictor  scores  and   risk
    categories set out within pages 164 to 165 of tab 1 of the bundle which
    showed that the "likelihood of serious harm to others" was assessed  as
    "low and low" (it was however noted by the Tribunal at this stage  that
    this part of the report appeared to be dealing with the risk of serious
    harm posed by this appellant while in custody).

110. Mr Knafler noted that the report was very out-of-date by now  and  that
    although there had been a prediction that it was 50%  likely  that  the
    appellant would commit a non-violent crime within two  years  following
    the report, that did not happen.  Also there  was  a  great  deal  more
    evidence which had been adduced on behalf of the  appellant  which  had
    not been considered within this assessment.  Notwithstanding this,  the
    risk of serious harm was assessed  as  low,  and  while  this  was  not
    precisely the same test as whether the appellant would pose  a  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society,  it  was
    nonetheless close enough to make this relevant.

111. Mr Knafler then referred  the  Tribunal  to  the  first  report  of  Dr
    Mahomed, the consultant psychiatrist, at tab 1, page 80 of the  bundle.
    His conclusions are at page 87, where at "V.   Please  comment  on  the
    likelihood of Mr Abdul re-offending", Dr Mahomed  had  noted  that  the
    appellant "comes from a stable and initially supportive background with
    strong religious values" and  that  "he  reconnected  to  these  values
    whilst in prison" and "seems to have  a  better  understanding  of  the
    effects of his criminal behaviour on others and himself".  He continued
    by noting that  "he  values  his  relationship  with  his  partner  and
    children and seems determined that he would not want to jeopardise 'all
    he has' by  his  criminal  past".   Having  taken  these  factors  into
    account, Dr Mahomed's conclusion, within this report, which was written
    on 9 April 2014, following an "examination" on 3 April 2014 was that "I
    am of the opinion that in all probabilities,  [the  appellant's]  'new-
    found' vision as well as his ingrained values  and  current  supportive
    relationship will keep him away from re-offending".

112. While Mr Knafler accepted that the Tribunal's hands  were  "not  tied",
    he nonetheless submitted that the expert  evidence  was  "relevant  and
    consistent" and that  the  experts  had  a  legitimate  role  to  play.
    Although the Tribunal had had the advantage of seeing the appellant  in
    cross-examination, the Tribunal could be assisted by taking account  of
    the views of experts who "we can presume are not easily fooled".

113. Mr Knafler then referred the Tribunal to Dr  Mahomed's  second  report,
    dated 29 March 2016, following his  "examination"  on  24  March  2016,
    which begins at page 1 of tab 5 of the bundle.  It  was  apparent  from
    pages 2 and 3  of  this  report  that  Dr  Mahomed  was  aware  of  the
    appellant's offending history, but then at page 4, at 10.1, when  asked
    whether he continued to  stand  by  the  conclusions  set  out  in  his
    previous report, his conclusion was that "I can confirm that I continue
    to stand by the conclusions I outlined  in  my  original  report".   He
    considered that the appellant  had  "good  insight  into  his  criminal
    behaviour in the past and is resolved to keep away  from  breaking  the
    law".  The overall tenor, according to Mr Knafler, was that Dr  Mahomed
    had seen a degree of maturity and change in the appellant.  This report
    was important because it was written having seen the  appellant  twice,
    over a period of time, and took account of his history of offending.

114. While Mr Knafler accepted the basic appeal of the  submission  made  on
    behalf of the respondent, that the appellant had "pulled the wool  over
    the eyes of professionals" before and so could not be  trusted  in  the
    future, there was still no  substitute  for  a  proper  examination  of
    future risk, informed by experts.

115. Mr Knafler then referred the Tribunal to the very recent report  of  Dr
    Boucher, a clinical psychologist, whose report is at tab 5, page 145 of
    the bundle.  Dr Boucher considered that the  risk  of  reoffending  was
    low, and whether or not it was usual for applicants to rely on  reports
    from psychiatrists or psychologists, it was clear from her CV that  she
    was qualified as an  expert  in  this  field,  and  had  experience  of
    assessing the risk posed by prisoners.

116. The methodology which Dr Boucher employed is set out at pages  147  and
    148 (pages 3 and 4 of her report) and while it was accepted  that  this
    methodology had primarily been designed for use  in  cases  of  violent
    offending, she gave her reasons as to why it  was  appropriate  to  use
    this methodology in this case,   having  considered  every  factor  and
    guideline for her interim conclusions and for her final conclusion.  So
    her  conclusion  (that  the  appellant  represented  a  low   risk   of
    reoffending) was the considered view of an expert in her field who  had
    applied  methodology  which  while  not  custom-made  was   nonetheless
    appropriate.  Also, her evidence was of a  piece  with  other  evidence
    relied upon and this was an appellant also who had  not  reoffended  in
    the three-and-a-half years since his release from prison.

117. Mr Knafler then answered some of the submissions made on behalf of  the
    respondent.   He  accepted  that  Mr  Blundell  had  made  his   points
    concerning  the  appellant's  evidence  "robustly   and   fairly"   but
    nonetheless submitted that he had been "unduly harsh".  So far  as  the
    disclosure by the appellant of his offences to  his  partners,  he  had
    disclosed the "big picture", which were the fraud offences for which he
    had been imprisoned and other fraud offences.   The  real  point  taken
    against him was that he had failed to disclose other  convictions,  but
    rightly or wrongly he felt somewhat hard done by in respect of some  of
    his convictions and it was not possible  to  say  that  he  had  misled
    either of his partners positively.  Certainly neither of the women  who
    gave evidence thought that they had been misled.

118. As far as concerns the period of offending, it was said  on  behalf  of
    the respondent that the appellant was not a reliable witness because he
    did not accept the period of offending.  With this one  exception,  the
    appellant was completely frank, accepting everything without  demur  or
    query.  It was accepted that the sentencing judge  had  said  that  the
    period of offending had been from the summer of 2010 to September  2011
    and not some shorter period, and the appellant may have been  right  or
    wrong in his evidence on this point, but Mr Knafler said on his  behalf
    that he had not been evasive or dishonest.  He had got something in his
    head, it is not clear what, that in the forfeiture proceedings  it  had
    been found that his offending had been for a shorter  period.   However
    he accepted that  he  was  involved  with  his  brother  and  that  his
    offending had been "deplorable".

119. So the question was, what had changed?  On behalf of the appellant,  it
    was submitted that what had changed was apparent from the reports of Dr
    Boucher and Mrs Pearce (an  independent  social  worker,  whose  report
    dated 10 April 2016 is at tab 5, page 9 of the bundle).  His  daughters
    were now more mature and his relationship with them  was  deeper.   The
    time had come when they judged him.  Obviously a lot more had  changed.
    He had said to everyone that he felt ashamed and the brother with  whom
    he had been involved had since died.  He was older and somewhat  wiser,
    and really did know now that "his whole life is at stake".

120. It was said on behalf of the respondent that his  not  offending  since
    his last release from prison was because he was  under  the  threat  of
    deportation, but he would always be under this threat, he would not  be
    any more free to commit offences when his daughters were 18.

121. These arguments were advanced in support of the appellant's claim  that
    the "threshold" had not  been  reached.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    respondent had not established that he now posed a  serious  threat  to
    one of the fundamental interests of society.

122. With regard to proportionality, even if the threat level was such  that
    it could be said that the appellant posed a serious threat  to  one  of
    the fundamental interests of society, when considering proportionality,
    the Tribunal should nonetheless when weighing this risk in the  balance
    accept that the risk of fraud was at the lower end.  So far as fraud is
    concerned, it is what it is, but the risk would  only  just  cross  the
    threshold of seriousness.

123. Whatever the risk might be, when considering proportionality, this  had
    to be set against the effect on the children of his removal.

124. Mr Knafler then reminded the Tribunal of the summary  of  Mrs  Pearce's
    first report contained at paragraph 12 of the President's  decision  in
    which the Tribunal  had  found  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, which is contained at paragraph  12,  and  was  as
    follows:

"12.  There is one piece of evidence which has a particular bearing on  this
ground of appeal, namely the report of the  independent  social  worker,  to
which I now turn.  This report was received in paper form by the FtT.  Based
on interviews of all of the protagonists  and  the  consideration  of  other
materials, the report focuses particularly on the relationship  between  the
Appellant and  his  younger  daughter,  aged  11  years.   It  contains  the
following material assessments and conclusions:

         (a)  While children form attachments to any consistent  care  giver
             who is sensitive and responsive in their  social  interactions
             with them, the  quality  of  the  social  engagement  is  more
             influential in developing that attachment than the  amount  of
             time spent.  In the  Appellant's  case,  the  quality  of  his
             interaction with his daughter when they  are  together  is  so
             positive and involves such a high degree of  involvement  that
             their relationship has grown and flourished in consequence.

       b) The Appellant has taken positive steps to initiate a  relationship
          between his daughter and her half-sister  (the  Appellant's  older
          daughter, aged 13).

       c)  The  Appellant  and  this  daughter   have   "a   strong,   close
          relationships and (that) their relationship is both meaningful and
          valuable to both of them".

       d) This  relationship  is  extremely  important  to  the  Appellant's
          daughter who ".... sees what he offers her in terms  of  emotional
          and psychological support  as  being  essential  to  her  positive
          functioning and complementing, not duplicating,  what  her  mother
          offers".

       e) The Appellant "....  has consciously thought about the  manner  of
          his interaction with [his daughter] as she  has  grown  older  and
          more mature .... [she] is  very  emotionally  and  psychologically
          dependent on her father presently, because of all he  is  able  to
          offer her".

       f) The loss of the Appellant from his daughter's life would be  "very
          psychologically difficult to manage and  ....  would  be  like  an
          abandonment to her".

       g) Research establishes the importance of the continued presence of a
          person  contributing  substantially   to   a   child's   emotional
          stability, security and self-esteem.

       h)  Research  further  demonstrates  that  the  deportation  of   the
          Appellant would render his daughter more likely to show  signs  of
          depression and experience  feelings  of  loss  and  sadness.  Long
          distance contact would be no substitute.

       i)  Research  also  establishes  the   phenomenon   of   "significant
          behavioural changes amongst  most  children  who  had  experienced
          parental deportation ..."

       j) Such children have "a consistently lower score  on  a  variety  of
          moral indexes."

       k) Moreover, such children "...  are, on average, more likely  to  be
          academic under-achievers .... more likely to experience  behaviour
          problems at school such as having difficulty paying  attention  or
          being disobedient ...."

       l) The extreme distress which the Appellant's daughter is  likely  to
          suffer in consequence of his deportation "... will endure in  some
          form beyond the immediate and medium term" and is unlikely  to  be
          adequately managed by her mother, giving  rise  to  a  deleterious
          impact on this relationship also.

         This report was not challenged by any other  evidence."

125. This Tribunal would now have to calibrate as precisely as  possible  in
    real terms what this meant.  What was important to have in mind was the
    strength of the appellant's relationships with his daughters.

126. In this regard, Mrs Pearce's  second  and  most  recent  report,  which
    starts at page 115 of tab 5 of the bundle was a most important piece of
    evidence.   This  report  was  dated  15  February  2017.   Mrs  Pearce
    considered the relationship with his daughters was  "very  strong"  and
    the effect of his removal on them would be "crushing".

127. The effect on both children would be  very  serious  indeed;  the  fact
    that the appellant had been such a good father to A generally reflected
    very well on him.

128. Mrs Pearce's conclusions with regard to M, that the effect of the  loss
    of direct contact and reaction with her father "would  be  immense  and
    would impact emotionally,  psychologically,  physically,  socially  and
    educationally" (see page 141) was borne out by her  mother's  evidence.
    M was getting very upset.

129. Finally, Mr Knafler referred the Tribunal to just two of the very  many
    authorities contained within the authorities bundle, B  v  SSHD  [2000]
    EWCA Civ 158 (and in particular to the judgment of  Sedley  LJ  in  the
    Court of Appeal) and LG and  CC  (EEA  Regs:  residence;  imprisonment;
    removal) Italy [2009]  UKAIT  00024,  a  decision  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal, presided over by Carnwath LJ,  Senior  President.
    Decisions such as these illustrated that for the  purpose  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, even though previous offending might  have  been  serious,
    removal by deportation still had to be a proportionate response.  In  B
    in particular, this was held to be  disproportionate  even  though  the
    offending had been very serious indeed.

Discussion

130. We have set out the relevant parts of the evidence and the  submissions
    which were made at some length because it is in  the  context  of  this
    evidence and having considered very  carefully  the  submissions  which
    were made that our conclusions have been reached.

131. At the outset we accept that our task is first to consider  whether  or
    not  the  respondent  has  established  that  the  risk  posed  by  the
    appellant's continued presence in this country is sufficiently  serious
    to one of the fundamental interests of society such as to pass  through
    the "gateway".  If this has not been established,  we  must  allow  the
    appellant's appeal.  Secondly, even if this  risk  is  established,  we
    must still consider whether this  threat  to  society  is  sufficiently
    grave as to outweigh in  particular  the  consequences  which  will  be
    suffered by the appellant's children as a result of  his  removal  from
    this country.   Unless this risk does outweigh the  detrimental  effect
    on the appellant's children, the decision would not  be  proportionate.
    When  considering  the  interests  (and  rights)  of  the   appellant's
    children, we have of course had regard to the EU Charter of Fundamental
    Rights, the  President's  comprehensive  analysis  of  which  has  been
    referred to (and cited) above.

Does this appellant represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, based  on  his
personal conduct?

132. We appreciate that considerations of deterrence or  revulsion  are  not
    relevant, and nor are economic considerations.  The  sole  issue  which
    must be considered under this head is whether or not there  is  a  real
    risk that this appellant will continue to commit offences of  the  type
    he has been convicted of, it having been accepted on  his  behalf  that
    the types of fraud for which he has been convicted are serious.  As the
    sentencing judge noted with regard to his history  of  offending,  this
    was "deplorable".

133. We turn first to consider the various reports relied upon on behalf  of
    the appellant.  The first is the OASys assessment, which  was  prepared
    in order to assess what management  this  appellant  would  need  after
    release.

134. The first point which must be made with regard to the OASys  assessment
    is that, as is apparent from tab 1 page 138, the primary  consideration
    was the risk posed by the appellant while in custody.  As stated:

         "The purpose is to identify whether the offender is likely to cause
         serious harm to others, cause serious harm to staff  or  prisoners,
         cause harm to himself, be a  risk  in  respect  of  escape/abscond,
         control or breach  of  trust  [or]  be  a  risk  because  of  their
         vulnerability".

    It is also clear that the risk of "serious harm"  which  is  considered
    within this assessment (should  the  appellant  be  released  into  the
    community) was not the type of harm with which  this  Tribunal  is  now
    concerned.  What this assessment is considering is essentially the risk
    of violent offences being committed.  Although the  "predictor  scores"
    shows that the appellant represents a relatively small risk of "violent-
    type reoffending" (8% in the first year and 14% in the second year)  he
    presents a much more serious risk of reoffending in general, being  39%
    in the first year and 57% in the second year (see at page  162  of  tab
    1).  So although the likelihood of "serious harm  to  others"  is  low,
    both within the community and in custody, the risk of  reoffending  is,
    on the basis of this assessment, high.  It appears from the methodology
    used, that offences of fraud are not considered  as  ones  which  cause
    "serious harm", because it is not considered that they would be  likely
    to cause serious physical or psychological harm.

135. With regard to Dr Mahomed, the difficulty with  his  evidence  is  that
    his reports appear to accept what the appellant has said at face value.
     In his first report (at page 87 of tab 1, part D of the report),  when
    commenting on the likelihood of the appellant's reoffending, Dr Mahomed
    believes that the appellant will keep away from reoffending because  of
    his "new-found" vision, coupled with his "ingrained values and  current
    supported relationships", having "reconnected" to the strong  religious
    values in which he was brought up whilst  in  prison.   The  difficulty
    with this, as acknowledged by Mr Knafler while making his  submissions,
    was that this appellant had previously persuaded "experts" that he  was
    a changed character,  when  he  had  successfully  appealed  against  a
    deportation decision, only to  commit  the  serious  fraud  thereafter,
    which fraud he had carried on for a substantial  period  of  time  (and
    which, at times during his evidence, the appellant had  accepted  would
    have continued had he not been caught).  Dr Mahomed's recent report  is
    also founded upon what the appellant has told him, and accordingly, the
    weight which we give this assessment must depend  upon  the  impression
    which we have of the appellant's evidence,  which  will  be  considered
    below.

136. So far as Dr Boucher's  assessment  is  concerned,  at  6,  giving  her
    "summary and opinion" (at page 168 of tab  5),  she  asserts  that  the
    appellant's  "previous  offending  behaviour  appears  to   have   been
    triggered  by  financial  stress  and  the  importance  that  financial
    independence and wealth had for him" relying on  a  report  into  fraud
    apparently conducted by the Parliament of Victoria in 2004 which, after
    no doubt extensive research and expense had been incurred,  arrived  at
    the less than radical conclusion "that the motivation for  fraud  is  a
    combination of the individual's personality and the situation in  which
    they find themselves".  She considers that the appellant:

         "was exposed to another financial crisis for his last offence [that
         is the serious fraud for which  he  was  sentenced  to  54  months'
         imprisonment] as he had no means of legitimate income  due  to  his
         immigration status".

    This is in fact not correct, because as the judge's sentencing  remarks
    made clear, the offence was committed over a period of  about  a  year,
    for the last nine months or so of which the appellant had  a  residence
    card entitling him to  work.   Dr  Boucher  does  not  appear  to  have
    considered this when making her assessment.   She  also  notes  at  6.6
    (page 171 at tab 5) that the appellant's current circumstances are  now
    different from what they were when he was offending, because he has  an
    insight into the consequences of his offences,  a  consistent  form  of
    income (jobseeker's allowance) and the motivation to live a  life  free
    from crime, being (as set out elsewhere within the  report)  his  close
    relationship with his daughters.

137. This Tribunal, having  heard  the  appellant  give  evidence,  is  less
    easily persuaded.  Dr Mahomed and Dr Boucher were not  able  to  assess
    the appellant in light of cross-examination; we were,  and  he  was  an
    exceptionally  unimpressive  witness.   The  evidence  given   by   the
    appellant in cross-examination has been set out in some  detail  above;
    he was evasive,  inconsistent  and  in  our  judgement  not  an  honest
    witness.  We also cannot ignore that having been afforded what  at  the
    time he realised was his "last chance" previously,  he  then  embarked,
    over a long period of time on the serious fraud for which  he  received
    such a substantial prison sentence; this fraud continued over a  period
    of some twelve months, during which he had the right to work, and  also
    had a strong relationship with his daughters.  When  asked  to  explain
    why  it  was  that  he  continued  with  the  offence  even  after  his
    immigration status was settled, he lied, and claimed (contrary  to  the
    evidence) that he had got his residence card much later and  then  that
    his offending had only been continued over a three  month  period.   We
    did not regard that evidence as indicative of  a  person  with  insight
    into his criminal behaviour or of a person who truly felt  remorse  for
    what he had done.

138. We were in no doubt whatsoever but that  the  risk  of  this  appellant
    continuing to offend was a high one;  we  also  consider  the  type  of
    offences which this  appellant  has  regularly  committed  to  be  very
    serious, and a threat to one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    Accordingly, we are in no doubt whatsoever but that the respondent  has
    established that she has passed through the "gateway".

Proportionality

139. Even though we are entirely satisfied that the appellant  represents  a
    serious threat to society, as required under  the  Regulations,  it  is
    still  necessary  to  consider  whether  his  removal  might  still  be
    disproportionate, because of the effect that  this  will  have  on  his
    daughters.  We of course have in  mind  the  factors  set  out  by  the
    President at paragraph 12 of his decision, when  finding  an  error  of
    law, and we also have in mind  the  report  made  by  Mrs  Pearce,  the
    independent social worker.  Although at the moment the  appellant  does
    not see A, and does not have a good relationship with  A's  mother,  we
    are nonetheless satisfied that it is in A's best interests  to  have  a
    relationship  with  her  father,  and  that  any  chance  of  having  a
    meaningful relationship with him will, in reality, disappear if  he  is
    deported.

140. Although we appreciate the importance of the EU Charter of  Fundamental
    Rights, and the very great weight which we are obliged to give  to  the
    childrens' interests, the rights of the children as set out within  the
    Charter are not absolute rights,  but  (as  recognised  within  Article
    52(1) and as accepted on behalf of the appellant) can be outweighed  by
    the public interest if this is sufficiently high.

141. So far as M is concerned, although the appellant  does  not  live  with
    her, and she only sees him about once every six weeks or so  while  she
    is at school, she does currently spend longer periods with  him  during
    the school holidays, and we have no reason to doubt  the  sincerity  of
    her mother when she says that it is very much in M's best interests  to
    continue seeing him.  The result of the appellant being  deported  will
    be again that although  she  would  in  a  literal  sense  be  able  to
    "maintain contact" with her  father  through  the  internet  and  phone
    calls, M's relationship  with  her  father  will,  in  real  terms,  be
    terminated, much as it was when he was sent to prison.   In respect  of
    both children, a relationship by "modern means of communication" is not
    a meaningful substitute for a real flesh and blood relationship.

142. Regrettably, that is what happens when foreign  criminals,  whether  or
    not entitled to rights under the EEA Regulations,  are  deported.   The
    question we have to consider is whether or  not  the  need  to  protect
    society from the risk which we have  found  this  appellant  poses,  is
    sufficiently strong as to outweigh the price which will be paid by  his
    daughters, having at the forefront of our minds that absent the  public
    interest in their father's removal, the children  would  have  a  right
    under Article 24(3) of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights to maintain
    on a regular basis direct contact with him.

143. In our judgement, this appellant is a career criminal, who  has  shown,
    both through his record of criminal conduct and in his evidence  before
    us, that he continues to represent a serious threat to the security  of
    this  country.   His  fraudulent  activities  have  been  serious   and
    sustained and he has in the past continued to offend even though he has
    a family which cares about him and when he has had  settled  status  in
    the UK.  The respondent has an obligation to protect  the  citizens  of
    this country, and although there will be a price to pay, and it will be
    paid by the  appellant's  daughters,  their  best  interests,  while  a
    primary consideration, cannot absolve the respondent, or this Tribunal,
    from  that  responsibility.   As  already  noted,  the  appellant   was
    previously given a "last  chance"  to  demonstrate  that  the  experts'
    belief that he was a reformed character was justified; he  showed  that
    it was not.  He went on to offend again  and  we  believe  it  is  very
    likely indeed that unless deported he will continue to do so.

144. For the reasons we have given, we are clear that  the  public  interest
    in removing this appellant outweighs the best interests of  his  family
    (even having considered those interests through the  prism  of  the  EU
    Charter of Fundamental Rights) by a very wide margin.  It follows  that
    his appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  deport  him  is
dismissed, under the EEA Regulations.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                         Dated: 9 October 2017

