
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02587/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2015                            |On 9 February 2015            |
|Oral judgment                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                               davidson taylor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Ngwuocha, instructed by Carl Martin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mr Davidson Taylor.  He was born on 8  July  1972
    and he appeals against a decision of the respondent  dated  9  December
    2013 refusing to revoke a deportation order signed against  him  on  12
    June 2008.  He first entered the UK on 6 September  2003  on  a  forged
    Nigerian passport.

2.   On  1  November  2007  he  was  convicted  of  possession  of  a  false
    instrument and sentenced to  twelve  months'  imprisonment  and  on  10
    December 2007 he was served with  a  liability  to  deport  letter.  He
    responded to that stating that he wished to claim asylum.   His  asylum
    application was considered and refused.

3.   On 17 April 2008 he was served with a notice  of  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order but did not appeal that decision and  the  order  was
    signed on 12 June 2008 and served on 19 June 2008.  His application for
    revocation of the deportation order was considered and refused  by  the
    respondent.  The appeal against that decision was heard on 22 September
    2014 and in a determination promulgated on 1  October  2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robin Callender Smith dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.  In
    reaching that decision the judge considered the reasons  given  by  the
    Secretary of State in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

4.   Permission to appeal that determination of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    sought, the primary submission being that the  judge  had  inadequately
    considered the interference with  the  right  to  family  life  of  the
    appellant's settled partner, and that the judge should have taken  into
    account consideration of the appellant's partner's own right to  family
    life.  She had been diagnosed with schizophrenia and depended upon  him
    for daily care and support.  Specific reference was made  to  what  was
    asserted to be detailed medical evidence dealing  with  the  issues  of
    actual diagnosis, the high risk  of  self-harm  and  the  role  of  the
    appellant in relation to her care.  It was asserted that the judge  had
    not referred to all the medical evidence.  It was  also  asserted  that
    the judge had not applied the legal test of proportionality in relation
    to the appellant's partner, namely whether it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect her in her current physical and mental state  to  relocate  with
    the appellant.

5.   Permission was granted, the judge granting permission  saying  that  it
    was arguable that the judge had neglected the medical evidence and that
    it was conceivable that consideration of that evidence might  have  led
    to the conclusion that Exception 2 in Section 117C(5)  of  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  was  satisfied  and  thus  the  public
    interest did not require  the  appellant's  deportation.   Exception  2
    applies where the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with a qualifying partner and the effect  of  C's  deportation  on  the
    partner would be unduly harsh.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal made a finding in paragraph 43:

         "43. He has a recent relationship established with his partner  who
             has mental health problems.  The reality is that she  receives
             monthly visits from the community health team to check on  her
             taking her medication and - while she might wish the appellant
             to remain in the UK to assist her and  remind  her  about  her
             medication - that is something that the community health  team
             will address as a situation in his absence."


    The First-tier go on to say at paragraph 44:


         "I do not find that the effect of the  appellant's  deportation  to
         Nigeria would produce an effect on his partner that would be unduly
         harsh given the  background  community  health  support  identified
         immediately above."


7.   The first point to make is that permission to appeal was not sought  on
    the grounds that that paragraph, paragraph  44,  was  incorrect  or  in
    error.  Permission was sought on the  basis  that  the  judge  had  not
    applied the legal test  of  proportionality  to  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect her in her current physical and  mental  state  to
    relocate with the appellant.  Paragraph 117C(5) requires  consideration
    of the effect of the appellant's deportation and whether that would  be
    unduly harsh.  There has been no challenge to that in  the  grounds  of
    application and it is therefore a little difficult to see on what basis
    the First-tier Judge who granted  permission  could  say  that  it  was
    conceivable that exception 2 would have been met.

8.   Nevertheless I heard submissions from  the  appellant's  representative
    and was directed to various letters and a plan in connection  with  her
    medical care.  The appellant is not mentioned by name but it appears to
    have been accepted by the judge that he is in a  relationship  with  Ms
    Ormerod who  has  some  quite  serious  health  problems  and  requires
    intervention from the health service to  attempt  to  keep  control  of
    that.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  correctly  summarised  that  the
    reality of her treatment was that she was receiving monthly visits from
    the Community Health Team to check on her taking  her  medication.   Mr
    Ngwuocha referred to a letter of 27 December 2013 in that at a time  of
    crisis in her mental health she would have to rely  on  the  appellant.
    According to that letter she had been referred to the crisis  team  and
    that she had been very verbally threatening and refused  to  allow  the
    team into her flat.  It also says, "we initially spoke to  her  partner
    who has had a lot of concerns about her over the last few  weeks.   She
    hasn't been taking her prescribed medication.   As  a  consequence  her
    mental health has obviously deteriorated".  It is a little difficult to
    see from that, that the partner is actually playing an active  role  in
    her care and treatment.  If he had had concerns about her over the last
    few weeks he appears to have done nothing about it;  he  had  not  been
    able to ensure that she took her  prescribed  medication.   In  summary
    therefore there is no other reference to the appellant in  the  medical
    documentation other than that he seems to be present at various  visits
    and that the mental heath team are aware of his presence.  I  have  not
    been directed to any documentary evidence or any  other  evidence  that
    indicates what the appellant does for this lady  and  why  his  absence
    would cause her particular problems.  It is therefore correct that  the
    assessment by the judge in paragraph 43 that the reality  is  that  she
    receives monthly visits is in fact what actually happens.

9.   So far as an interference with her rights is concerned clearly she  may
    well be upset, it may well cause a crisis, it could have  any  type  of
    effect on her.  The mental health team will be aware of  the  risks  to
    her health and on the deportation of Mr Taylor appropriate steps can be
    expected to be taken by the NHS Mental Health Teams  that  are  looking
    after her.

10.  The failure to challenge the finding that the  effect  on  the  partner
    would not be unduly harsh in the grounds is a matter that was  referred
    to in submissions by Mr Ngwuocha to the extent that he  said  that  the
    partner was emotionally dependent on the appellant and that this was  a
    matter  that  should  have  been  taken  into  account.    Although   I
    specifically asked to be directed to evidence to that effect, I was not
    directed to anything.

11.  In terms of whether the  appellant  can  relocate  to  Nigeria,  it  is
    correct that the judge does not deal with that.  However there  appears
    to be no evidence to say she cannot.  There does not appear to  be  any
    evidence in connection with  lack  of  availability  of  mental  health
    treatment in Nigeria or if the appellant is in fact  providing  a  high
    level of care why he would not be  able  to  continue  to  do  that  in
    Nigeria.

  12. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge determination does not in terms
      work its way through Section 117  and  in  particular  does  not  work
      through Section 117B and 117C of the 2002  Act,  and  to  that  extent
      there is an error of law in the determination, even if the  judge  had
      gone through that process it is inconceivable  on  the  basis  of  the
      information that was before the judge and to which  my  attention  has
      been drawn that the outcome would have been any different at all.   In
      those circumstances therefore I find that there is  no  error  of  law
      such as to merit the setting aside of the decision to be re-made.


   Conclusion


   There is no error of law such that  the  decision  is  set  aside  to  be
   remade.
   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

   No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 9th February 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

