
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/02034/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2014                               |On 23 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MEDY HAKIZIMANA
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms White, instructed by J M Wilson


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    promulgated on 31 January 2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta and
    Mr Sandall which allowed the respondent's appeal against deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this determination, I refer to Mr Hakizimana as the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Burundi and was born on 14 January 1992.

 4. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the  UK  at
    the age of 11. Whilst a minor he committed a number of  offences  which
    are set out at [13] and [14] of the determination. The last  conviction
    was in 2008 for robbery  and  possession  of  a  weapon  for  which  he
    received a sentence of 1 year and 10 months in youth detention.

 5. The respondent made a decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  on  13
    September 2013 against the appellant. The deportation  order  was  made
    under section 3 (5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971  as  the  respondent
    deemed deportation conducive to the public good. In the reasons letter,
    reference was made  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  398(c)  of  the
    Immigration Rules which states:

         "The deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,  their
         offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistant offender
         who shows a particular disregard for the law"

 6. As I understood it, the respondent raised  four  grounds  of  challenge
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. They can be summarised
    as follows:

          a.  incorrect weight in  the  appellant's  favour  concerning  the
             delay in issuing the deportation decision

          b. insufficient attention  to  the  deterrent  and  expression  of
             public revulsion elements of the public interest

          c. the British nationality of the appellant's  partner  and  child
             did not preclude their accompanying him to Burundi

          d. the principles of SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  550  and
             Masih  (deportation  -  public  interest  -  basic  principles)
             Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC) had not been properly applied

 7. I will start with the  last  ground  first.  As  indicated  above,  the
    respondent did not make an  automatic  deportation  order  against  the
    appellant. She could not do so as he was only 16 years old at the  time
    of his last offence. Where that was so, I did not find that  the  panel
    could be said to have erred in failing to apply SS (Nigeria),  as  case
    relating to the increased  public  interest  in  automatic  deportation
    cases.

 8. The panel indicated at [5] that it directed itself to Masih and did  so
    again at [30] when reaching their conclusion. The  respondent  faced  a
    difficult task in showing that  they  panel  did  not  have  that  case
    properly in mind when making its decision, therefore.

 9. It did not appear to me that the respondent had shown that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal could be said  to  have  failed  to  apply  the  material
    factors from Masih in substance. It followed head note (c) of Masih  by
    referring to the offences that had been committed and  the  remarks  of
    the sentencing  judge  at  [13],  [14]  and  [16].  There  was  further
    reference to the remarks of the sentencing judge at [26] and [27].  The
    panel cannot be said to have failed to take into account these material
    aspects of the case.

10. They dealt with the evidence as of the date of the  hearing;  see  head
    note (d) of Masih.

11. The First-tier Tribunal  was entitled to  give  "full  account  to  any
    developments since sentence was passed",  here weighing  in  favour  of
    the appellant as in the 6 years since his last offence he had  a  clean
    record and nothing adverse had  occurred;  see  [26]  and  [27  of  the
    determination]; see head note (e) of Masih.

12. Following head note (g), his offences were committed as a  juvenile  so
    "serious reasons" were required to  justify  expulsion.   Although  not
    specifically addressed by the First-tier Tribunal it  is  difficult  to
    see how the appellant's offence of robbery and possession of  a  weapon
    for which he received a sentence of 1  year  and  10  months  in  youth
    detention was a "very serious  violent"  offence  which  could  justify
    expulsion .

13. Ground 2 was, in part, addressed before me with reliance on  paragraphs
    (a) and (b) of the head note of Masih so it is convenient to deal  with
    it here. The  public  interest  in  deportation  is  not  merely  about
    preventing someone from reoffending  as  deportation  also  acts  as  a
    deterrent and allows for the proper expression of public  revulsion  at
    criminal offending. As above, the panel cannot be said to  have  failed
    to have had the provisions of Masih in mind when reaching its decision.
    It properly weighed the offence as serious [27].  Where  those  matters
    are so, and given the view of the panel on the weight to be  placed  on
    developments since the  decision,  a  position  open  to  them  on  the
    evidence, and the appellant's age at the time of the offences,  it  did
    not appear to me that any failure to specifically refer further to  the
    factors of deterrence and the expression of public revulsion  could  be
    material.

14. As regards the first ground, it was not my view that the panel at  [25]
    stated in sufficiently clear terms  that  they  considered  the  weight
    accruing to the public interest decreased because of the amount of time
    taken by the respondent to issue the deportation decision in 2013 where
    the last convictions was in 2008. Rather, the point they appear  to  be
    making is that the delay allowed the appellant  to  show  that  he  was
    reformed as in the 6 years between the last offence and the deportation
    decision he had a clean record and established a settled  family  life.
    Mr Smart conceded that this was a  minor  aspect  of  the  respondent's
    grounds that only had weight  when  considered  cumulatively  with  the
    other grounds. As above and below, I did not find the other grounds had
    merit.

15. The  remaining  ground  can  be  dealt  with  relatively  briefly.  The
    appellant's  wife  and,  more  importantly,  his  child   are   British
    nationals. The panel was entitled to find that the child (and therefore
    his mother) could  not  be  expected  to  accompany  the  appellant  to
    Burundi; C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano and C-256/11 Murat Dereci applied.

.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 21 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
