
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02047/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |
|On 20 June 2014                               |On 22 July 2014              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MAHAMED ABDIASIS

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss V Laughton, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 26  October
    1986.  He arrived in the UK on 17 October 1994 aged almost 8 years.  He
    was granted exceptional leave to enter on 27 September  1995  until  27
    July 1996.  Thereafter he was granted indefinite leave to remain  on  5
    June 2001.

 3. He is a person who has amassed a considerable number of convictions for
    various different  types  of  offence.   The  most  recent  offence  he
    committed resulted in a sentence of twelve months' imprisonment  on  27
    November 2012 in the Crown Court sitting at Blackfriars.  That was  for
    offences of supplying controlled drugs of class A and B.  He  was  also
    made subject to an anti-social behaviour order for  a  period  of  five
    years.

 4. The consequence of the most recent  conviction  and  was  an  automatic
    deportation order on 4 October 2013 made pursuant to Section 32 of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.

 5. His appeal against that decision came before a panel of the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 29 January  2014.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds, finding that there was an exception to the
    automatic deportation provisions.  The Secretary  of  State  challenges
    that decision for  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds  before  me  and
    supplemented in oral submissions by Mr Parkinson.

 6. The panel made  a  number  of  findings  of  fact  including  that  the
    appellant arrived at the age of 8 years or so, that he had no real ties
    to Somalia and that if he speaks Somali it is only a few words. It also
    concluded that he has no contact with anyone  in  Somalia  and  has  no
    relatives or friends there upon whom he could call for assistance.  The
    panel accepted that whilst growing up he regarded  himself  as  British
    and does not regard himself as being Somalian in any sense  other  than
    formally.  The panel went on to conclude that he has relatives  in  the
    UK but that there was some doubt about the amount of  contact  that  he
    had with his mother before his current period of detention. However, it
    was accepted that there was some level of contact between  them.   That
    contact was limited because of his mother's mental health difficulties.
     It was also found that he had previously been placed in  the  care  of
    the local authority.

 7. Further findings were made in relation to his circumstances in terms of
    family members in the UK.  So far as the index  offence  is  concerned,
    the panel concluded that he did present a medium risk of  harm  to  the
    public but that this was at the lower end of medium, and that  he  also
    presented a medium risk of reoffending.   It  was  concluded  that  his
    reoffending was likely to be related to illegal drugs.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal considered the  current  situation  in  Somalia
    starting by referring to the current country guidance decision  in  AMM
    and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM)  Somalia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC). It noted the conclusion of that decision  that
    there remains in general a real risk of  Article  15(c)  harm  for  the
    majority of those returning to Mogadishu after a significant period  of
    time abroad, subject to certain exceptions.  The panel also noted  what
    was said about Article 3 to the  effect  that  the  armed  conflict  in
    Mogadishu does not create a real risk of Article 3 harm in  respect  of
    any person in that city regardless of circumstances.   The  panel  took
    into account the submissions made on behalf of the  respondent  to  the
    effect that the situation in Mogadishu had improved to such  an  extent
    that the panel should no longer follow the country guidance in AMM.

 9. In the determination there is reference to the background material,  or
    at least some of it, to which the panel was referred.  However, it  was
    concluded at [59] that the situation had not improved  sufficiently  in
    Mogadishu for it to be concluded that there was not a  real  risk  that
    the appellant would suffer Article 15(c) harm.

10. At [58] of the determination the conclusion was that the appellant  had
    not established any real risk of Article 3 harm on return to Mogadishu.
     Although vulnerable as a result of his lack of  ties  to  Somalia  and
    lack of language ability, it was found that he was capable  of  working
    and his knowledge of English was likely to be of advantage to him, thus
    not placing him at real risk of Article 3 harm on return.

11. The panel noted that one of the exceptions to the automatic deportation
    provisions does not include Article 15(c)/humanitarian protection.   On
    behalf of the appellant argument  had  been  advanced  in  relation  to
    whether humanitarian protection should be read into Section 32  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.  It is not necessary for  me  to  express  a  view
    about that because, as I indicated at  the  start  of  the  proceedings
    before me, it seems to me that the assessment of whether  there  is  an
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  can  be  made
    with reference  to  the  grounds  and  submissions  before  me  on  the
    relatively narrow basis as set out in the grounds.

12. Although the panel  concluded  that  humanitarian  protection  was  not
    within  the  scope  of  the  exceptions  to  the  UK  Borders  Act   it
    nevertheless concluded at [62] that it was a significant  factor  which
    must be taken into account when considering Article 8.  The panel  went
    on to conclude that the fact that there is a real risk of Article 15(c)
    harm  for  the  appellant  was  a  matter  that  was   significant   in
    proportionality terms and ultimately it concluded that his removal  was
    disproportionate.  It followed from that that the panel  was  satisfied
    there was an exception to the automatic deportation provisions, that is
    to say not Article 15(c) but human rights grounds, namely Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

13. The respondent's grounds as originally formulated at paragraph 2 attack
    the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal by  stating  that  the  panel
    found that the appellant would be at risk of  Article  15(c)  harm  and
    that that did not amount to an exception to the  automatic  deportation
    provisions. It seems to me that that ground misunderstands the basis on
    which the panel allowed the appeal and I think in the way the  argument
    was advanced before me by Mr  Parkinson,  it  is  clear  that  he  also
    recognised that that was a misapprehension of the way the panel decided
    the appeal.

14. The panel expressly concluded at [60] that Article 15(c) did not amount
    to an exception to the automatic deportation  provisions,  but  it  was
    undoubtedly the case as accepted by Mr Parkinson, that it  would  be  a
    relevant factor in the assessment of proportionality under  Article  8.
    In effect it was accepted on behalf of the respondent before me that if
    the panel was right to conclude that there was an  Article  15(c)  risk
    for this appellant on return to Somalia it was all but  inevitable,  if
    not actually inevitable, that the appeal would have to  be  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds because it could not be said to be  proportionate  to
    return someone to a country where they are at risk of serious  harm  in
    terms of Article 15(c).

15. Mr Parkinson advanced argument that was arguably  different  from  that
    articulated in the grounds.  He sought to persuade me  that  the  panel
    had not given sufficient reasons for  concluding  that  this  appellant
    would be at risk of Article 15(c) harm on return.

16. Miss Laughton objected to that line of argument on the  basis  that  it
    was not in the grounds and there had been no application to  amend  the
    grounds.  There was indeed  no  application  before  me  to  amend  the
    grounds, Mr Parkinson contending that the way the grounds were  drafted
    is sufficiently wide to cover the argument that he advanced.

17. I do not consider that that is a  matter  that  actually  needs  to  be
    resolved because I am  satisfied  that  the  panel  did  give  adequate
    reasons for concluding that the appellant would be at risk  of  Article
    15(c) harm on return.  It considered the country guidance  decision  by
    which it was bound and the  panel  looked  at  the  country  background
    material to which  it  was  referred.   The  assessment  was  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of Article 15(c) harm on return.

18. At [59] the  panel  concluded  that  the  situation  had  not  improved
    sufficiently to be able to say that there was not a real risk that  the
    appellant would suffer Article 15(c) harm. It is said on behalf of  the
    respondent that there was inconsistency in that  conclusion.   Thus  at
    [58] it states that the panel was not satisfied that the  appellant  is
    at real risk of Article 3 harm but  was  capable  of  working  and  his
    knowledge of English is likely to be an advantage to him.

19. It was submitted that it was for that reason that it was concluded that
    there was no Article 3 risk.  But it seems to me that that paragraph is
    simply part of the reasoning  process  by  the  Tribunal  weighing  one
    factor and another in the assessment of whether the appellant would  be
    at risk on return in Article 3 terms.

20. In any event, the current  state  of  country  guidance  is  that,  bar
    certain limited categories of people, there remains in general  a  real
    risk of Article 15(c) harm and on that basis alone it seems to me  that
    the panel would have been entitled to conclude that the appellant would
    be at such risk.

21. At [59] the panel referred to the appellant's lack of ties  to  Somalia
    including Mogadishu and his lack of language skills, plainly this being
    a reference to his knowledge of the Somalia language.   The  panel  was
    bound to take into account individual circumstances  in  assessing  the
    Article 15(c) risk and that in my judgment is what it did.

22. In the decision in Elgafaji [2009]  EUECJ  C-465/07  it  was  said,  in
    effect, that there was a sliding scale in the  assessment  of  risk  in
    terms of Article 15(c). Individual characteristics do need to be  taken
    into account.

23. It may be that the panel could have given more detailed reasons on this
    issue, but the assessment of whether there is an  error  of  law  in  a
    decision it is not  a  search  for  perfection.  I  am  satisfied  that
    sustainable reasons were given by this Tribunal.

24. In those circumstances it does also seem to me that it  was  inevitable
    that finding that the appellant would be at risk of Article 15(c)  harm
    on  return,  it  would  be  concluded  that  his   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.  I cannot see circumstances  in  which  it  would  be
    proportionate under Article 8 to return someone to a country where they
    would be at risk of harm in that sense.

25. Those conclusions are sufficient to dispose of the Secretary of State's
    appeal. Nevertheless I touch briefly on the  other  grounds  that  have
    been put before me.

26.  It  is  said  that  the  panel  failed  to  identify  any  exceptional
    circumstances in this  case  which  would  outweigh  the  Secretary  of
    State's public interest policies.  That argument is subsumed within the
    Article 15(c) point.

27. An argument was advanced in terms of whether  the  panel  wrongly  took
    into  account  that  the  appellant  only  nearly  missed  meeting  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in terms of paragraph 399A(b). At
    [65] the panel said that the appellant is over the age of 25  but  only
    by a year or so.   It went on to state that

           "We recognise the fact that he has  only  nearly  missed  coming
           within the provisions of paragraph 399A(b) is not, of itself,  a
           factor in his favour but only insofar as it is relevant  to  the
           weighing of the competing interests."

28. Mr Parkinson contends that that is an impermissible factoring in  of  a
    near miss argument.  Miss Laughton, on the contrary, contends that  the
    panel did not take into account a near miss, expressly stating that  it
    was not of itself a factor.  For my part, at the very least it seems to
    me that the panel could have been clearer in their articulation of  the
    extent to which  near  a  miss  did,  or  did  not,  feature  in  their
    deliberations.  If their conclusion was that a near miss was  a  factor
    to be taken into account that was an impermissible conclusion.

29. But in any event, even if the panel did err in law in this respect,  it
    is an error of law that is not material to the outcome of the decision,
    having regard to the conclusions I have  come  to  in  terms  of  their
    assessment of Article 15c.

30. Lastly, it is said that the panel failed to have sufficient  regard  to
    the public interest in deportation in terms of the risk of reoffending.
     Certainly that is referred to in  the  grounds.   At  [64]  the  panel
    stated that they  bore  very  much  in  mind  the  public  interest  in
    deportation of foreign offenders. It also went on to say that  it  took
    into account that an exceptionally strong case has to be  shown  before
    Article 8 rights, in particular the Article 8 right  to  private  life,
    outweighs the public interest in deportation. At [66] it is stated that
    the panel recognised the great public interest in deportation  in  this
    case.

31. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the panel did  recognise  the
    significant public interest that needed to be  taken  into  account  in
    deportation cases where offences result in terms of  imprisonment  that
    come  within  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.

32. In any event, again, even if there is an error of law in this  respect,
    it is not an error of law that is material to the outcome in the  light
    of the conclusions I have come to in terms of Article 15(c).

33. In summary, my conclusion is that there is no error of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision and even if there is an error of  law  it,  or
    they, are not errors of law that  mean  that  the  decision  should  be
    aside.









Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            18/07/14


