

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02156/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8 April 2016                               |on 11 July 2016              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                MUSLUM UGURLU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss R Akther instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. On the 12 February 2016 the Upper Tribunal published its decision in
        relation to the  making  of  an  error  of  law  by  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, a full copy of which appears at Annex A to this decision.

     2. For the purposes of this heading the relevant part of the  error  of
        law finding is as follows:


         The validity of the Deportation Order


        11. This is not a matter upon which submissions were invited at the
            hearing before the Upper Tribunal or upon which  a  grounds  of
            appeal seeks to rely but has arisen as a result of a 'Robinson'
            obvious point.
        12. It is not disputed that the appellant's correct name is  Muslum
            Ugurlu which has been used by the respondent in  correspondence
            relating to his situation.  It  is  not  disputed  that  Muslum
            Ugurlu was  convicted  on  his  guilty  plea  of  drug  related
            offences  for  which  he   was   sentenced   to   seven   years
            imprisonment. It is not disputed that Muslum Ugurlu received  a
            notice of intention  to  make  a  deportation  order  which  he
            unsuccessfully appealed. It is not disputed that the  Secretary
            of State was lawfully entitled  to  make  a  deportation  order
            against Muslum Ugurlu when he became appeal right exhausted.
        13. At paragraph 6 of the Panel determination the Panel note:


            6.    On 16 April 2003, a letter was sent to the  Respondent  by
                 the   Appellant's   solicitors,    O'Keeffes,    requesting
                 revocation of the Deportation Order (F1 - Resp).  There  is
                 some  confusion  surrounding  this  inasmuch  as  the  only
                 document entitled Deportation Order in the  papers  is  the
                 one dated 23rd December 2003  (H1  -  Resp)  which  is  not
                 properly phrased inasmuch as it  refers  not  only  to  the
                 Appellant but to someone with a different  name.   However,
                 it has not been disputed that there was a valid Deportation
                 Order made, and, on 1st August 2005, O'Keeffes wrote  again
                 stating that the Appellant "is presently the subject  of  a
                 Deportation Order", and requesting that he  be  allowed  to
                 remain.


        14. If there is no valid deportation order it matters not what  the
            solicitors have  said  in  correspondence  for  they  may  have
            mistakenly believed a valid order had been  made.  It  has  not
            been shown that any  such  belief  is  sufficient  to  make  an
            invalid order valid.
        15. Even though this is not an issues discussed previously it  does
            not prevent the Upper Tribunal raising an issue of jurisdiction
            of its own motion at this late stage.
        16. The Panel were arguably incorrect when making  the  observation
            that the Order of the 23 December 2033 mentioned the  appellant
            and another person. The  exact  terms  of  that  Order  are  as
            follows:


              HOME OFFICE
              Home Office Reference U42389


              Home Office Immigration and Nationality Directorate


              IMMIGRATION ACTS 1971 AND 1988
              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM ACY 1999


              DEPORTATION ORDER


              MUSLIM UGURLU


              Whereas the Secretary of State deems it to  be  conducive  to
              the public good to deport  from  the  United  Kingdom  MUSLIM
              UGURLU, a person who does not have the right of abode  within
              the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971, and whereas the said
              MUSLIM UGURLU  is,  accordingly,  liable  to  deportation  by
              virtue of Section 3(5)(a) of the said Act:


              Now therefore in pursuance of Section 5(1) of the  said  Act,
              the Secretary of State, by  this  order,  requires  the  said
              STEFIELD AZARIAH  KING   to  leave  and  prohibits  him  from
              entering the United Kingdom so  long  as  this  order  is  in
              force.


              And in pursuance of paragraph 2(3) of Schedule 3 to the  said
              Act, the Secretary of State  hereby  authorises  said  MUSLIM
              UGURLU to be detained until he is  removed  from  the  United
              Kingdom.


              Signed.




              Minister of State


              For and on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
              Department


              Date:                                           23/12/03


              Home Office
              Queen Anne's Gate


        17. There are two errors in the Deportation  Order.  The  first  of
            which is that the appellants name is not Muslim Ugurlu.  It  is
            Muslum Ugurlu. The second is that there appears  no  connection
            between Stefield Azariah King and the appellant. The  operative
            part of the document contains the order  of  the  Secretary  of
            State for Sefield Azariah King to leave and prohibits him  from
            entering the United Kingdom so long as this order is in  force.
            It has not been shown there is an alternative  order  in  force
            which correctly names the appellant or that an order  in  these
            terms, in the name of another, has any lawful effect  upon  the
            appellant.
        18. The earlier 2002 appeal was against  the  decision  to  make  a
            deportation order in the pre UK Borders Act 2007 regime and the
            refusal of the appeal  against  that  decision  remains  valid.
            Unless a valid and  lawful  deportation  order  is  signed  the
            appellant cannot be removed under the relevant legal provisions
            and if there is no valid order there is nothing to  revoke  and
            so no lawful immigration decision against which  the  appellant
            can appeal.
        19. If this is the case the Panel erred in  assuming  there  was  a
            valid order and a decision that conferred  a  right  of  appeal
            against a refusal to revoke. If  the  Order  of  23/12/2013  is
            invalid there is nothing to revoke. The determination  must  be
            set aside on this basis and a lawful Deportation Order  awaited
            if this is the case. If made under  the  automatic  deportation
            provisions  this  will  generate  a  right  of  appeal,  unless
            certified, in relation to which further submissions and  up  to
            date evidence should be requested  before  any  such  order  is
            made.



Discussion




     3. It was accepted  by  all  parties  that  the  deportation  order  is
        defective in that the appellant's  first  name  is  Muslum  and  not
        Muslim and that there is no record of any connection between him and
        the individual known as Stefield Azariah King.

     4. The misspelling of Muslum is clearly a typographical error  and  one
        that in itself will  arguably  have  no  material  impact  upon  the
        validity of the deportation decision. The inclusion of the name King
        is, arguably, a more serious issue.

     5. Mr Duffy provided  a  useful  insight  into  the  preparation  of  a
        deportation  order  which  is  based  upon  data  recorded  on   the
        respondent's case management system. When a case worker is tasked to
        prepare a deportation order the names recorded  on  the  system  are
        automatically inserted into the draft document. In this case  it  is
        suggested that the name Stefield Azariah King must have been part of
        the data entered by the respondent yet there  is  no  evidence  that
        this is a name used by the appellant, as an alias or otherwise.

     6. Mr Duffy submitted that even though the operative part of the  order
        was clearly defective the lack of  challenge  in  the  past  by  the
        appellant,  or  the  raising  of  this  issue,  amounted  to   their
        acquiescence of the defect and acceptance that the deportation order
        applied to the appellant and should therefore be treated as a  valid
        order.

     7. In R (on the application of Nirula) v FTT (IAC) and SSHD [2012] EWCA
        Civ 1436 the Court of Appeal said that the Tribunal was entitled  to
        take a point on its jurisdiction of  its  own  motion.   Indeed  the
        Tribunal was well advised  to  air  any  doubts  it  had  about  its
        jurisdiction and invite submissions on that question and then decide
        it.

     8. In Virk v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
        652 it was held that although the SSHD had failed  to  raise  before
        the First-tier Tribunal the issue of that Tribunal's jurisdiction to
        entertain a family's application for  leave  to  remain,  the  Upper
        Tribunal was entitled to  dismiss  the  family's  subsequent  appeal
        against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on  the  basis  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal had not had jurisdiction,  notwithstanding  that
        the point had not been raised below. In Virk it was said  "Statutory
        jurisdiction cannot be conferred by waiver or agreement; or  by  the
        failure of the parties or the tribunal to be alive to the point". It
        was also said however that if the  issue  had  not  previously  been
        raised then fairness required that the parties should be  given  the
        opportunity to address it.

     9. Virk was followed in MS(Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 50.

    10. Miss Akter in reply submitted that there is  no  authority  for  the
        proposition that the failure by the appellant to be  alive  to  this
        issue and/or to take proactive steps  to  raise  the  same  had  the
        effect of waiving the defect in the order. Mr Duffy  was  unable  to
        refer the Tribunal to  any  authority  supporting  his  position  in
        relation to this point.

    11. Authority for the proposition that "Statutory jurisdiction cannot be
        conferred by waiver or agreement; or by the failure of  the  parties
        or the tribunal to be alive to the point" is to be found in Virk.

    12. The decision under challenge in this appeal is the refusal to revoke
        the deportation order and not  an  appeal  against  the  deportation
        order itself. On the introduction of the Nationality Immigration and
        Asylum Act 2002 section 82 gave a person a right to  appeal  against
        an immigration decision. The term Immigration decision  was  defined
        and essentially included refusals of  leave  to  enter,  refusal  of
        entry clearance, refusal of a certificate of entitlement, refusal to
        vary leave if the result of the refusal was that the person  had  no
        leave  to  enter  or  remain,  variation  of  leave,  revocation  of
        indefinite leave, removals by way of directions under section 10  of
        the 1999 Act, a decision that an illegal entrant  be  removed  under
        schedule 2 of the 1971 Act, a decision to remove under section 47 of
        the 2006 Act (introduced in 2006)  decisions  to  remove  family,  a
        decision to deprive a person of a right of abode, a decision to make
        a deportation order, and a refusal to revoke a deportation order.

    13. Following the introduction of automatic  deportation  provisions  in
        the UK Borders Act 2007 section 82(3A)  also  provided  a  right  of
        appeal against a decision that  section  32  (5)  of  the  2007  Act
        applied, which is not possible under the pre 2007 regime.

    14. If a deportation order is invalid there can be  no  jurisdiction  to
        entertain an appeal against a purported revocation decision as there
        is  no  valid  order  requiring  the  appellant's  deportation   and
        exclusion to revoke. The revocation decision must,  therefore,  also
        be invalid or have no effect.

    15. The importance of accuracy in the drafting of the deportation  order
        is clearly illustrated by the text of the order itself where  it  is
        written "Now therefore in pursuance of Section 5(1) of the said Act,
        the Secretary of State, by this order, requires  the  said  ....  to
        leave and prohibits him from entering the United Kingdom so long  as
        this order is in force".  This can have serious repercussions for an
        individual and it is reasonable to expect that the  order  correctly
        records the name of the person it is  intended  to  apply  too,  and
        against  whom  the  Secretary  of  State  has  exercised  the  power
        conferred upon her, in this section. Especially in light of the fact
        a person made the subject of a  deportation  order  is  entitled  to
        receive a proper lawful copy of the decision.

    16. In this case the order does not have the effect of  advising  Muslum
        Ugurlu of the making of an order for his  deportation  or  exclusion
        from the UK during the duration of that order. It has not been shown
        by the respondent that such an order addressed  to  an  unidentified
        third party can be taken as applying to the appellant  just  because
        this is what the respondent may have intended.

    17. I find the deportation order, in so far is as it purports to  be  an
        order for the deportation of Muslum Ugurlu from the United  Kingdom,
        is defective and invalid and has no effect in law in  requiring  the
        appellant to leave the United Kingdom. I find as a consequence  that
        as there is no valid deportation order the  refusal  to  revoke  the
        deportation order is invalid as there is nothing to revoke. As  such
        there cannot be an appeal against the revocation decision.


Decision

    18.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law   and   that
        determination has been set aside.  In  light  of  the  finding  the
        underlying deportation order is invalid and any decision purporting
        to refuse to revoke the same has no legal standing/effect/validity,
        I remake the  decision  as  follows.  The  Upper  Tribunal  has  no
        jurisdiction as there  is  no  valid  decision  against  which  the
        appellant can appeal. A lawful deportation order is awaited.


   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8 April 2016



                               ANNEX A



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02156/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 12 February 2016                           |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                MUSLUM UGURLU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss R Akther instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr K Norton Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            ERROR OF LAW FINDING


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge KSH Miller  and
        Mr B D Yates (non-legal member), hereinafter referred  to  as  'the
        Panel', who in a determination  promulgated  on  the  23  May  2014
        dismissed  the  appellants  appeal  against  the  refusal  of   the
        Secretary of State to revoke a deportation order made against him.
     2. The chronology is as follows:
        1 January 1956         Appellant born in Turkey
        2 June 1989             Appellant  enters  the  UK  using  a  false
        passport.
                                Claim for asylum made which is  refused  but
                           appellant granted 12 months ELR.
        26 June 1996           His wife and  two  younger  children  having
                           joined the appellant in  the  UK,  they  are  all
                           granted ILR.
        23 July 1998           Appellant convicted of conspiracy to  supply
                           heroine on guilty plea. Seven years  imprisonment
                           and confiscation order  in  the  sum  of  �12,000
                           made.
        3 March 2011           Appellant served with Notice of Liability to
        Deportation.
        28 December 2011   Notice of Intention to  make  Deportation  Order
        served.
        6 August 2002      Appeal against Notice to Make  Deportation  Oder
                           dismissed.
        16  April   2013            Appellant's   representative   requests
                           revocation of the Deportation Order.
        23 December 2003   Deportation order  signed  (under  section  5(1)
                           Immigration Act 1971).
        1 August 2005      Letter from  appellant's  solicitors  asked  for
                           appellant  to   be   permitted   to   remain   on
                           compassionate grounds and highlighting  the  fact
                           his  wife  and  daughter  Dilara  had  now   been
                           naturalised as British citizens.
        27  November  2007    Respondent  wrote  to  appellants  solicitors
                           referring to the fact  it  has  always  been  the
                           intention  to  deport  the  appellant   following
                           dismissal of appeal on 5 July 2002 and  that  the
                           submissions made were not  accepted  as  a  fresh
                           claim.
        3 December 2012    New representatives wrote to  the  Secretary  of
                           State requesting that the appellant be  permitted
                           to remain in the UK. Claiming the  appellant  was
                           unclear about his position and had an established
                           family and private life in the UK.
        29 August 2013         Further submissions made to respondent.
        2 October 2013         Reasons for refusing to  revoke  deportation
                           order issued granting the applicant an in-country
                           right of appeal. It is stated that no exceptional
                           circumstances have  been  made  out  which  might
                           justify the revocation of the Deportation Order.
        1 May 2014             Appeal before the Panel at Taylor House.
        23 May 2014             Determination  promulgated  dismissing  the
        appeal.
        12 June 2014           Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
                           refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  on
                           basis the Panel considered the evidence with  the
                           required degree of care and the grounds amount to
                           no more, at best, than a  disagreement  with  the
                           findings made.
        12 August 2014         Renewed application for  permission  refused
                           by Upper Tribunal  Judge  C  Lane  on  basis  the
                           conclusions of the Panel  have  been  arrived  at
                           following a thorough and  even-handed  assessment
                           of the evidence. The Panel took into account  the
                           medical  evidence  and  the   severity   of   the
                           appellants offending.
        11 December 2014   Permission to bring judicial review to challenge
                           the decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  C  Lane
                           granted by the Honourable Mrs Justice McGowan  on
                           the  basis  it  is  arguable  that   the   family
                           circumstances of the appellant in this  case,  in
                           combination with the length of delay  in  seeking
                           to take action to  remove  amount  to  compelling
                           circumstances.
        9 January 2015         Order of Master Gidden in the absence  of  a
                           request for substantive hearing, the decision  of
                           the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to appeal
                           is quashed.
        28 January 2015        Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
                           granted by Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice  President  of
                           the Upper Tribunal.
        11  November  2015    Hearing  adjourned  as  appellant's  previous
                           representative Blavo & Co were the subject of  an
                           intervention   by   the   Solicitors   Regulation
                           Authority (SRA). Duncan Lewis have taken over. To
                           list after 1 January 2016.
        6 January 2016         Application for adjournment by Duncan  Lewis
                           on basis they had not  been  formally  instructed
                           and  need   to   undertake   a   public   funding
                           assessment. Not opposed. Application  granted  to
                           be listed after 6 February 2016.
        12 February 2016   Error of law hearing.  The  task  of  the  Upper
                           Tribunal  being  that  set  out  in  section   12
                           Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.




     3. An appeal against a deportation order has to be considered by
        reference to paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules which is in the
        following terms:


        390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
        considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
        following:
        (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
        (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
        (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance of
        an effective immigration control;
        (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
        circumstances.


     4. Other relevant provisions are to be found in paragraphs 390A - 392:




        390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
        consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
        it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
        interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
        other factors.




        391. In the case of a person who has been deported following
        conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation of a
        deportation order against that person will be the proper course:


        (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person
        was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years,
        unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the deportation
        order when, if an application for revocation is received,
        consideration will be given on a case by case basis to whether the
        deportation order should be maintained, or




        (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person
        was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years, at
        any time,






        Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to the
        Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to
        the Status of Refugees, or there are other exceptional
        circumstances that mean the continuation is outweighed by
        compelling factors.


        391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
        authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
        by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
        information coming to light which was not before the appellate
        authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of time since
        the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a change
        of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.


     5. Paragraph 392 has no application as the appellant has not been
        deported and remains in the United Kingdom.



Discussion


     6. Although there is no specific mention of paragraph 390 in the
        determination it appears the Panel considered the requisite
        elements. It is noted that the appellant was sentenced to seven
        years imprisonment and the comments of the sentencing Judge at
        [43], 390(i) and (iii). Representation made in support of
        revocation were considered even if not detailed in the
        determination, 390(ii). The interests of the applicant are
        mentioned at [45].
     7. It is noted at [42] of the determination:


        42.  It was accepted on behalf of the Appellant by Miss Akther that
             for the Appellant's appeal to succeed, we would have to find
             that there were "exceptional circumstances". In the case of MF
             (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, it was stated that
             "exceptional" means circumstances in which deportation would
             result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.


     8. The Panel found the appellant and his wife not to be credible for
        the reasons set out at [41 (i)- (ix)] of the determination.
     9. The chronology shows there is an issue in relation to delay in this
        case. The key findings at [44-47] are as follows:


        44.  In any event, maybe in part because of the above, as well as
             the fact that he was not living in one place, no effective
             action was taken to remove the Appellant. However, this does
             not mean, in our view, that because he has not hitherto been
             removed, the Deportation Order should now be revoked. - We
             accept that he has lived here for twenty five years.  However,
             the fact that he has not in this time learned to speak English
             fluently is indicative of the fact that he has not integrated
             into society in this country in the way that might be expected
             of others.


        45.  Of course, were the Appellant to return to Turkey, it would
             have an impact, we accept, on his wife.  However, as he have
             highlighted above, we do not accept all of her evidence, and
             we find it improbable that, as she claimed, she would neither
             go with him nor even visit him.  We do not find that she
             requires his assistance because of her health needs.  If she
             did, we are satisfied that there would have been evidence
             regarding this. We should say, moreover, that we do not accept
             that they have not even considered what plans would be made
             available in the event of the Appellant being removed.


        46.  Likewise, we do not consider that the position of the
             Appellant's son, Kenan, features heavily in this case, given
             the absence of evidence either from him or about him.


    10. A number of issues have arisen in relation to the making of an
        error of law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.


   The validity of the Deportation Order


    11. This is not a matter upon which submissions were invited at the
        hearing before the Upper Tribunal or upon which a grounds of appeal
        seeks to rely but has arisen as a result of a 'Robinson' obvious
        point.
    12. It is not disputed that the appellant's correct name is Muslum
        Ugurlu which has been used by the respondent in correspondence
        relating to his situation. It is not disputed that Muslum Ugurlu
        was convicted on his guilty plea of drug related offences for which
        he was sentenced to seven years imprisonment. It is not disputed
        that Muslum Ugurlu received a notice of intention to make a
        deportation order which he unsuccessfully appealed. It is not
        disputed that the Secretary of State was lawfully entitled to make
        a deportation order against Muslum Ugurlu when he became appeal
        right exhausted.
    13. At paragraph 6 of the Panel determination the Panel note:


        6.   On 16 April 2003, a letter was sent to the Respondent by the
             Appellant's solicitors, O'Keeffes, requesting revocation of
             the Deportation Order (F1 - Resp). There is some confusion
             surrounding this inasmuch as the only document entitled
             Deportation Order in the papers is the one dated 23rd December
             2003 (H1 - Resp) which is not properly phrased inasmuch as it
             refers not only to the Appellant but to someone with a
             different name.  However, it has not been disputed that there
             was a valid Deportation Order made, and, on 1st August 2005,
             O'Keeffes wrote again stating that the Appellant "is presently
             the subject of a Deportation Order", and requesting that he be
             allowed to remain.


    14. If there is no valid deportation order it matters not what the
        solicitors have said in correspondence for they may have mistakenly
        believed a valid order had been made. It has not been shown that
        any such belief is sufficient to make an invalid order valid.
    15. Even though this is not an issues discussed previously it does not
        prevent the Upper Tribunal raising an issue of jurisdiction of its
        own motion at this late stage.
    16. The Panel were arguably incorrect when making the observation that
        the Order of the 23 December 2033 mentioned the appellant and
        another person. The exact terms of that Order are as follows:


                                 HOME OFFICE
        Home Office Reference U42389


             Home Office Immigration and Nationality Directorate


                       IMMIGRATION ACTS 1971 AND 1988
                       IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM ACY 1999


                              DEPORTATION ORDER


        MUSLIM UGURLU


        Whereas the Secretary of State deems it to be conducive to the
        public good to deport from the United Kingdom MUSLIM UGURLU, a
        person who does not have the right of abode within the meaning of
        the Immigration Act 1971, and whereas the said MUSLIM UGURLU is,
        accordingly, liable to deportation by virtue of Section 3(5)(a) of
        the said Act:


        Now therefore in pursuance of Section 5(1) of the said Act, the
        Secretary of State, by this order, requires the said STEFIELD
        AZARIAH KING  to leave and prohibits him from entering the United
        Kingdom so long as this order is in force.


        And in pursuance of paragraph 2(3) of Schedule 3 to the said Act,
        the Secretary of State hereby authorises said MUSLIM UGURLU to be
        detained until he is removed from the United Kingdom.


        Signed.




        Minister of State


        For and on behalf of the Secretary of State for the Home Department


        Date:                                             23/12/03


        Home Office
        Queen Anne's Gate




    17. There are two errors in the Deportation Order. The first of which
        is that the appellants name is not Muslim Ugurlu. It is Muslum
        Ugurlu. The second is that there appears no connection between
        Stefield Azariah King and the appellant. The operative part of the
        document contains the order of the Secretary of State for Stefield
        Azariah King to leave and prohibits him from entering the United
        Kingdom so long as this order is in force. It has not been shown
        there is an alternative order in force which correctly names the
        appellant or that an order in these terms, in the name of another,
        has any lawful effect upon the appellant.
    18. The earlier 2002 appeal was against the decision to make a
        deportation order in the pre UK Borders Act 2007 regime and the
        refusal of the appeal against that decision remains valid. Unless a
        valid and lawful deportation order is signed the appellant cannot
        be removed under the relevant legal provisions and if there is no
        valid order there is nothing to revoke and so no lawful immigration
        decision against which the appellant can appeal.
    19. If this is the case the Panel erred in assuming there was a valid
        order and a decision that conferred a right of appeal against a
        refusal to revoke. If the Order of 23/12/2013 is invalid there is
        nothing to revoke. The determination must be set aside on this
        basis and a lawful Deportation Order awaited if this is the case.
        If made under the automatic deportation provisions this will
        generate a right of appeal, unless certified, in relation to which
        further submissions and up to date evidence should be requested
        before any such order is made.
    20. In the event a valid deportation order exists the pleaded grounds
        of challenge are considered below.


   Ground 1 - Article 8 ECHR


    21. This is the first of the pleaded grounds in which it is asserted
        there has been no finding as to whether the Panel accepts or
        rejects either family or private life in the UK. A number of
        elements are set out in the skeleton argument before the Panel as
        follows:


            . The Appellant has been in the UK since 2nd June 1989.
            . 24 years and 10 months spent in the UK.
            . Appellant has never gone back to Turkey.
            . Has substantial family life in the UK with his British
              Citizen wife who is disabled and dependant in him for
              everyday needs (medical evidence contained in the HO bundle).
            . Appellant has 2 children.  Also has grandchildren and nieces
              and nephews.
            . He has been usefully employed in the past.
            .  Behaved well in prison (as noted in first determination).
            . He is full of remorse for his actions.
            . Crime free for the past 15 years and 10 months. Thus there is
              no evidence of a propensity to reoffend.
            . Over 10 years have lapsed since the signing of the Deport
              Order in December 2003.
            . The UK has been the Appellants home since 2md June 1998. For
              nearly 25 years the Appellant has resided in the UK and not
              been back to Turkey.


    22. It is also asserted in the ground that the Panel failed to address
        the risk of re-offending which is said is relevant to the
        proportionality test.
    23. The Panel were aware of the evidence put before them, both written
        and oral but it is fair to say that there is no specific mention of
        the weight the Panel gave to the family and private life they
        accepted exists in the UK and the impact of this upon the
        assessment of the proportionality of the decision.
    24. The issue re-offending is a relevant factor when assessing the
        interests of the community [para 390 (iii)]. There does not appear
        to have been any consideration of, or finding made, in relation
        this element of the appeal.
    25. The importance of these factors can be seen by reference to the
        decision in Kaplan and Others v Norway (Application no. 32504/11)
        ECtHR (First Section) in which it was held that there was a breach
        of Article 8 in removing the claimant to Turkey despite a 1999
        conviction for aggravated assault, in part because family life had
        been established before going to Norway, because of the burden on
        the youngest autistic child, because on the facts the offence was
        not that serious, but also because the authorities took no measures
        to deport the Claimant for about six years and apart from minor
        offences he had not offended again.

Ground 2 - Medical issues

    26. It is pleaded that the Panel totally ignored the medical evidence
        available to them.
    27. It is noted that the medical issues featured prominently in the
        order of the Honourable Mrs justice McGowan by reference to the
        personal family circumstances. The case before the Panel was that
        the appellant's wife needs the physical and emotional support of
        her husband for reasons set out in the representations and her
        witness statement of the 29 April 2014. It was also said that as a
        British Citizen Mrs Ugurlu should not be required to leave the UK
        in order to maintain a relationship with her husband.  Miss Akther
        advised the Upper Tribunal that this is, in reality, a family
        splitting case as Mrs Ugurlu will not travel with her husband if he
        was to be deported to Turkey.
    28. At paragraph 4 of the Grounds for Permission dated 2 July 2014 it
        is asserted:
        4.   There was medical evidence before IJ Miller, to which he gave
             no consideration or mention of.  There was additional medical
             evidence about to be submitted in the morning of the hearing,
             which the IJ declined to wait for.


    29. This is an issue recorded at paragraph 11 of the determination in
        the following terms:


        11.  There was a bundle of documents, A1 - D24, submitted on behalf
             of the Appellant. In addition, Miss Akther had prepared a
             skeleton argument.  She stated that there were medical reports
             due to arrive in respect of the Appellant's wife and son,
             Kenan. However, there was no application for an adjournment,
             and indeed, we would have been unlikely to have granted the
             same, given the fact that the case had been listed for hearing
             as long ago as the 4th December 2013. In any event, no reports
             arrived either during the course of the hearing or before we
             had concluded our deliberations concerning the case. None has
             been received since.


    30. It is not disputed that no application for an adjournment was made.
        Miss Akther stated the Panel were in a hurry and not minded to wait
        but unless an application was made it is not known if it would have
        been refused although an indication by the Panel this may have been
        the case is noted. No explanation for the failure to provide
        detailed medical evidence in accordance with directions has been
        provided. There appears to have been an attempt to provide
        additional material, as Miss Akther indicated, which was sent by
        fax on 1 May 2014 at 9:50, ten minutes before the commencement of
        the hearing.  It does not appear this was before the Panel.
    31. The Tribunal has now had access to the judicial review bundle from
        which Miss Akther made her submissions. This had as an exhibit
        medical evidence by way of letters from the appellants wife's GP
        dated 1 May 2014, 15 August 2013 and 16 May 2013.
    32. It is accepted there was some medical evidence before the Panel in
        the respondents bundle. The index to the appellants trial bundle in
        relation to medical evidence for the appellant's wife and his son,
        who has mental health issues, is said 'To follow'.
    33. In the respondents bundle is a copy letter from O'Keeffe Solicitors
        dated 16 April 2003 stating the appellant's son Kenan is receiving
        treatment for a condition which is considered to be of a serious
        nature and that they have written to Camden and Islington NHS Trust
        to obtain the relevant information [R's bundle at F1]. A letter
        from the NHS Mental Health and Social Care Team at Camden, dated 11
        April 2003 is to be found at [R' bundle G2] which states that
        following assessment of Kenan the probable diagnosis is that of
        Schizophrenia.
    34. A copy of the letter of 16 April 2003 from the GP [R's bundle G5]
        states that the appellant's wife's disability results from
        untreated congenital dislocation of the hip which has led to a
        shorter leg and that she is at increased risk of developing
        arthritis and walks with a limp.
    35. At page M3 of the respondents bundle is a copy of the letter dated
        15 August 2013 repeating the diagnosis of congenital dislocation of
        the hips which are said to have become arthritic. The third
        paragraph of the letter is in the following terms:


        "Despite two sticks, she walks with difficulty.  She reports it
        difficult to get in and out of bed and needs assistance to lift her
        right leg into bed.  She needs help to turn over in bed.  She gets
        assistance to get in the bath and to get dressed. She finds it
        painful to stand for any prolonged periods so needs others to do
        the cooking.  She informs me that this assistance is currently
        provided predominantly by her husband."


    36. The comment in the determination at [45] that if the claimed
        dependency is genuine there would have been evidence of the same is
        suggestive of a failure of the Panel to consider this evidence, and
        that in the witness statements, on this issue. Similarly the
        comment in [45] in relation to Kenen is suggestive of a failure to
        consider the evidence made available.  It is accepted the medical
        evidence is limited and some dated but this is not the Panels
        comment. The evidence also fails to set out in clear detail the
        reality for the family if the appellant is removed or provide a
        proper explanation or why the appellant's wife is not willing to
        undergo a hip replacement operation which will cure/resolve her
        condition.
    37. A further issue upon which the Panel were aware but failed to make
        findings is that in relation to the claim by the respondent that a
        substantial part of the delay in this case has been as a result of
        the fact the appellant absconded and could not be traced. This is
        denied by the appellant who claims that during the relevant period
        he remained at the same residential address known the respondent
        but no one came to see if he was there or to remove him. This may
        be relevant for in ZZ (Tanzania) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1404 when
        there was an extensive delay, the Court of Appeal took into account
        when dismissing the appeal that the Respondent was overworked and
        under-resourced and the fact the appellant had remained in the UK
        unlawfully.
    38. Having considered the determination as a whole and the cumulative
        effect of the issues discussed above I find that the Panel have
        erred in law in failing to consider the evidence made available
        with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and in failing to make
        findings on material issues. The determination shall be set aside.


Directions

    39. The following direction apply to the future management of this
        appeal:


           i) List for a Resumed (substantive) hearing before Upper
              Tribunal Judge Hanson sitting at Field House on Friday 8
              April 2016 at 10.00AM. Time estimate 3 hours.
          ii) A Turkish interpreter shall be provided.
         iii) The parties shall file an agreed indexed and paginated bundle
              containing all the evidence they intend to rely upon, no
              later than 4.00pm 25 March 2016. Witness statements in the
              bundle must be signed, dated, contain a declaration of truth,
              and stand as the evidence in chief of the maker who shall be
              tendered for cross-examination and re-examination.
          iv) Evidence not filed in accordance with the time limit
              specified, in 39(iii) above shall not be admissible without
              permission of the Tribunal. Such permission to be sought on
              written application to be made before the expiration of the
              specified period containing an explanation for the failure to
              comply with directions, the person responsible, the nature of
              the evidence that it has not been possible to file in time,
              the relevance of this evidence to the issues under
              consideration, whether the other party consents, the
              prejudice to either party in admitting or omitting the
              evidence, when the evidence will be available, and the effect
              of granting permission upon the hearing date.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15 February 2016






