
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02112/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th February 2014                           |On 19th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                                MR DAHIR DUBI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins (instructed by Irving & Co, solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hembrough and Mrs V Street) by which,  in  a
    determination  promulgated  on  16th  December  2013,  it  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  deport
    him on humanitarian protection grounds and under Article 3 of the  ECHR
    but dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State also sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in this matter but permission was refused by both a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and on a renewed application by an Upper Tribunal Judge.

 3. Accordingly, what is before me is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    dismissal of his appeal on asylum grounds.

 4. The origin of this appeal is that the Appellant is a Somali citizen who
    came to the UK, aged 11, in 1999 with his  older  brother.  His  asylum
    application was refused in 2000 but as a minor he was given exceptional
    leave to remain and ultimately in 2005 Indefinite Leave to  Remain.  He
    and his brother were placed with foster parents and having moved on  to
    independent living the Appellant is now back  living  with  his  foster
    family.

 5. The proceedings came about following  the  Appellant's  conviction,  in
    September 2009,  on  his  guilty  plea,  of  offences  of  robbery  and
    possessing an offensive weapon for which he was sentenced to 30  months
    imprisonment. That conviction led the Secretary of  State,  eventually,
    to make a decision to deport him and she signed a deportation order  on
    19th October 2013.

 6. When the Appellant's appeal came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant claimed that as  a  member  of  a  minority  clan,  namely  a
    subdivision of the  Rehanwweyn  with  no  links  whatsoever  or  family
    support in Somalia he would be at risk of persecution on return.

 7. The Secretary of State had certified the asylum claim under Article  33
    (2)  because  having  received  a  sentence  in  excess  of  two  years
    imprisonment pursuant to section 72 (3) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 he  was  presumed  to  have  been  convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime and a danger to the community  and  as  such
    not entitled to the protection of the Refugee Convention.

 8.  The  Tribunal  considered  and  concluded  at  paragraph  53  of   the
    determination that the index offence was an isolated incident  and  the
    Appellant did not currently represent a danger  to  the  community  and
    accordingly it was not satisfied that he fell to be excluded  from  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention. They then at paragraph  54  noted
    that he was unable to point  to  a  specific  threat  awaiting  him  in
    Somalia but the Tribunal also commented that because of his age when he
    left he was unable to recall much about his life there other than  that
    his family were treated as second-class citizens and  that  their  home
    was raided by armed men. The Tribunal referred to the Letter of Refusal
    dated 7th October  2013  as  containing  a  forensic  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's likely clan membership and affiliations and the  associated
    consequences on return. The Tribunal  noted  that  it  appeared  to  be
    accepted that he was from the clan he claimed and that  that  clan  was
    particularly vulnerable to abuse. The Letter of Refusal  considers  the
    Appellant's clan membership from paragraph  28.  At  paragraph  31  the
    Secretary of State suggests that  the  clan  is  neither  minority  nor
    majority. However, the preceding paragraph in  the  Letter  of  Refusal
    indicates  that  members  of  the  Appellant's  clan  are  subject   to
    repression and abuse. If the Appellant is a member of a clan  which  is
    particularly vulnerable and subjected to abuse and in  the  absence  of
    any support or ties in Somalia then  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  he
    would not be  at  risk  of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  is
    illogical bordering on perverse. I therefore find that in so far as  it
    is found that the Appellant belongs to  a  non-majority  clan  that  is
    vulnerable to abuse but is not at risk of persecution for a  Convention
    reason the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred.  I  therefore  set  aside  its
    decision in relation to asylum and humanitarian protection and redecide
    the appeal in that respect only. On the evidence quoted by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and set out in the Letter of Refusal  and  in  accordance
    with current country guidance  the  Appellant,  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to Somalia on account of his clan membership  and
    therefore is entitled to asylum. As asylum and humanitarian  protection
    are mutually exclusive it follows  that  his  appeal  for  humanitarian
    protection must fail.

 9. For the above reasons the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




Signed                              Date 17th February  2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
