

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 02452/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 September 2014                          |On 3 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     And


                                     ZGG
                                                      [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                    Claimant






Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow (Home Officer Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Atcher (Counsel instructed by Maliks & Khan)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal we shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and to the claimant.

2.     This matter comes before us for consideration as to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the  determination  promulgated  on
    26th June 2014 by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Maxwell & Ms VS Street
    JP non legal member) in which it allowed the appeal against a  decision
    to make a deportation order signed on 11th November 2013.

Background

3.    The claimant is a  citizen  of  Georgia  and  his  date  of  birth  is
    17.10.1980. He claimed asylum in Sweden in  2003  and  entered  the  UK
    clandestinely in April 2005.  He was removed following refusal  of  his
    asylum claim on 27th June 2005. He re-entered the UK in May 2006,  made
    a further application for asylum and thereafter absconded.  His  asylum
    application was refused on 26th June 2006.

4.     On 11th November 2013, the Secretary of  State  made  a  decision  to
    deport the claimant following his conviction at the Wolverhampton Crown
    Court on 26th January 2011 for 2 counts of  possession  false  identity
    documents with intent, motoring offences including driving while  under
    the influence of alcohol, no insurance and no licence and obstructing a
    police officer. He was sentenced to a total of 18  months  imprisonment
    (12 months plus 6 months to run consecutively). He was notified of  the
    decision to automatically deport him on 12th March 2011.

5.   He appealed on the grounds that Article 8 was engaged.  He  claimed  to
    be in a relationship with his partner, N, a Georgian citizen, with whom
    he has a child born on 2.10.2010.  He  also  has  two  British  citizen
    children (born 24.2.00 and 17.11.02) from a previous relationship.  The
    claimant lives alone but sees his children regularly.

6.    The Tribunal found that the claimant's  account  was  consistent  with
    that given by his partner in separate appeal proceedings heard by Judge
    Maxwell [8].  The Tribunal concluded there was no Convention reason and
    that he was not entitled to asylum or humanitarian protection.

7.    The Tribunal  considered  Article  8  in  the  context  of  paragraphs
    399(a) and (b) and 399A  citing  MF(Nigeria)[2013]EWCA  Civ  1192.   It
    found that there was an enduring relationship between the claimant  and
    N, although they did not live together [18]. He has a relationship with
    all three children and played a significant role in  their  upbringing.
    It concluded that family life did not meet the  criteria  in  paragraph
    399. [26]. The Tribunal found that the claimant's children  lived  with
    their respective mothers who were able to look  after  them  [29i]  and
    that his partner N held valid leave only since 2012  [26ii].  It  found
    399A (private life) was not relevant [27].  The  Tribunal  went  on  to
    consider exceptional circumstances.  It  found  the  claimant's  family
    life consisted of a  partner  and  children  which  exceptionally  fell
    outside the scope of paragraph  399  (a)  or  (b)  [29].  The  Tribunal
    concluded that the interests  of  the  claimant  and  his  family  life
    outweighed the public interest in deportation and that the  deportation
    was a disproportionate interference [32].



Grounds of appeal

8.    The Secretary of State  argued  that  the  Tribunal  made  a  material
    misdirection of law.  It failed to  identify  circumstances  that  were
    exceptional  outside  of  the  rules.  Family  life  as   existed   was
    incorporated into and covered by the rules at 399a and b.

9.    The Tribunal failed to consider the public  interest  factors  and  or
    relevant case law  AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ and Masih(  deportation  -
    public interest - basic principles) Pakistan 2012 UKUT.  There  was  no
    proper consideration of the risk of  re  offending  and  the  deterrent
    element in deportation .

Submisssions

10.    Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that  it  was
    not open to the Tribunal to make a finding that having a partner and  a
    child was exceptional.  The  Tribunal  misinterpreted  the  rules.  Its
    approach had been absurd.  The Tribunal failed to place weight  on  the
    public interest in deportation.

11.   Miss Akhter submitted that the Tribunal  correctly  found  exceptional
    circumstances  outside  of  the  Rules  following   the   approach   in
    MF(Nigeria) and having found unjustifiably harsh consequences.  It  had
    also considered public interest factors. The grounds of appeal  focused
    only on the public interest point.


Discussion and conclusion


12.      We find that the determination discloses a material  error  of  law
    for the following reasons.  The Tribunal has clearly misinterpreted the
    Immigration Rules at [29] by taking the view that  they  do  not  apply
    persons whose family  life  comprises  both  a  partner  and  children.
    Furthermore, at [30] the Tribunal concluded wrongly  that  this  family
    life was exceptional, which we find is absurd.  There  was  a  material
    misdirection of the law.

13.      The Immigration Rules specify the criteria to  be  met  for  family
    life and/or private life to be satisfied in order for that to  outweigh
    the public interest in deportation.  The claimant's family life  failed
    to satisfy  those  criteria  and  there  were  plainly  no  exceptional
    circumstances beyond the  contemplation  of  the  Rules  rendering  the
    decision disproportionate. The appellant  had  failed  to  satisfy  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules either as the father of a child  or
    as the partner of N; it was absurd to suggest that there was  a  hiatus
    in the Rules because applicants with partners  and  children  were  not
    provided for.  The correct approach is set out in  (Nagre  [2013]  EWCH
    720  Admin).   The  Gulshan  (Article  8  -   new   rules   -   correct
    approach)[2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)approach for "arguably strong  grounds"
    is no longer a necessary  stage  in  the  consideration  (  MM  Lebanon
    [2014]EWCA CIV 985).

14.  The public interest is recognised in the Immigration Rules  and  it  is
    presumed to be met in deportation.  There  was  no  necessity  for  the
    Tribunal  to  make  any  separate  consideration  in  the  absence   of
    exceptional circumstances where none existed.

Decision

There is a material error of law disclosed in the determination which  shall
be set  aside.  We  substitute  the  following  decision  -  the  appeal  is
dismissed on immigration and human rights grounds.



Signed                                  Date 2.10.2014


GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Anonymity order maintained
No fee award applicable


Signed                                  Date 2.10.2014


GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


