
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02536/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 July 2015                               |On 19 August 2015             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                        JOSE MANUEL RODRIGUES CORREIA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Hooper, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent     Mr P Greatorex, Counsel - instructed by Government
Legal Dept



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Portuguese national born on 23 April 1969.  He  came
    to this country he says in 1985 and apart from two breaks, the last  of
    which was for some three years between 1992 and 1994  when  he  was  in
    Jersey, he has lived in this country.  He was married sometime  in  the
    mid 1990s and has three children the eldest of  whom  is  now  some  18
    years old and the youngest 10.  His conduct towards his wife has led to
    the making of a deportation order and the appeal is against the refusal
    to revoke that order.

2.   In 2006 the appellant was convicted on nine counts of  rape,  attempted
    rape and sexual assault on his wife.  He was sentenced in October  2006
    to nine years' imprisonment.  These  were  serious  offences  committed
    over a number of years between 2004 and 2006.  We have not seen a  copy
    of the indictment and the precise dates  covered  for  these  were  all
    specimen offences but observations by the judge who sentenced  him  and
    information in a report dealing with the risk of re-offending  suggests
    as we say that the offences were committed between 2004 and  2006.   In
    addition to the sentence of imprisonment he was ordered to be placed on
    the  Sex  Offenders'  Register  for  life.   That  was   a   compulsory
    requirement pursuant to Section 82 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 and
    does not, as the Home Office letter of 12 December 2013 giving  reasons
    for deportation  mistakenly  states  show  that  the  sentencing  judge
    considered that he posed a continuing risk to women.  He is also whilst
    on licence until September 2015 subject to what  is  known  as  MAPPA2.
    This was a means of  endeavouring  to  provide  some  way  of  avoiding
    further offending but inevitably it would not be of more than a limited
    barrier to the commission of  further  offences.   He  is  required  to
    notify his supervising officer  of  any  relationship  and  to  address
    material behavioural problems and to fail to do so would  constitute  a
    breach of his licence.

3.   This appeal has a somewhat lengthy history.  It  was  originally  heard
    by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  16  June  2014  when  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.  It was approached on the basis which had been  accepted  in
    the Home Office decision letter that the appellant was entitled to  the
    protection provided by paragraph 28 of  the  EU  Directive  2004/38  as
    transposed by the relevant Regulations at the level appropriate for  an
    EU national who had resided here permanently for a period of  at  least
    ten years.  We should start by referring to the relevant  law.   It  is
    convenient to refer to the Articles of the Directive  rather  than  the
    Regulations since we will  have  to  refer  to  cases  decided  by  the
    European Court of  Justice  in  which  of  course  they  refer  to  the
    paragraphs  of  the  Directive.   The  relevant  Regulations  are   the
    Immigration EEC Regulations 2006, Statutory Instrument 2006 No. 1003.

4.   The  Directive  by  Article  16  deals  with  the  right  of  permanent
    residence.  It provides by Article 16(1), so far as material:

         "Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period of
         five years in the  host  Member  State  shall  have  the  right  of
         permanent residence there ... "


     Article  16(2)  refers  to  family  members  and  (3)  deals  with  how
    continuity of residence is to be affected by short absences.   We  then
    come to (4) which provides - "once  acquired  the  right  of  permanent
    residence shall be lost only through absence from the host Member State
    for a period exceeding two consecutive years".

5.   So far as removal is concerned, we turn to Article 27.  This so far  as
    material provides:

         (1)  Subject to the provisions of this Chapter  Member  States  may
             restrict the  freedom  of  movement  and  residence  of  Union
             citizens and their family members irrespective of  nationality
             on grounds of public policy, public security or public health.
              These grounds shall not be invoked to serve economic ends.


         (2)  Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public  security
             shall comply with the principle of proportionality  and  shall
             be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the individual
             concerned.   Previous  criminal  convictions  shall   not   in
             themselves constitute grounds for taking such  measures.   The
             personal conduct of the individual concerned must represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society,  justifications  that
             are isolated from the particulars of the case or that rely  on
             considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted."


    Article 27(3)  we  do  not  think  we  need  to  refer  to.   It  deals
    essentially with procedural matters and therefore is not  material  for
    the purposes of this case.


6.   We then turn to Article 28 which is central to the  issues  arising  in
    this  appeal.   It  provides  under  the  heading  "Protection  against
    Expulsion" as follows:-


         "1.  Before taking an  expulsion  decision  on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security, the host Member  State  shall  take
             account of considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual
             concerned has resided on its territory, his/her age, state  of
             health, family and economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
             integration into the host  Member  State  and  the  extent  of
             his/her links with the country of origin.


         2.   The host Member State  may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
             against Union citizens or their family  members,  irrespective
             of nationality, who have the right of permanent  residence  on
             its territory, except on serious grounds of public  policy  or
             public security.

         3.   An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union citizens,
             except if the decision  is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of
             public security, as defined by Member States, if they:

              (a) have resided in the host Member State for the previous ten
             years; or


             (b)  are a minor, which of  course  does  not  apply  in  this
                  case."


7.   The provisions of Articles 27 and 28 reflect what is  set  out  in  the
    preamble to the Directive, paragraphs 23 and  24,  which  we  ought  to
    cite:

         "23. Expulsion of  Union  citizens  and  their  family  members  on
             grounds of public policy or public security is a measure  that
             can seriously harm persons who, having availed  themselves  of
             the rights and freedoms conferred on them by the Treaty,  have
             become genuinely integrated into the host  Member  State.  The
             scope  for  such  measures  should  therefore  be  limited  in
             accordance with  the  principle  of  proportionality  to  take
             account of the degree of integration of the persons concerned,
             the length of their residence in the host Member State,  their
             age, state of health, family and economic  situation  and  the
             links with their country of origin.


         24.  Accordingly, the greater the degree of  integration  of  Union
             citizens and their family members in the  host  Member  State,
             the greater the degree of protection against expulsion  should
             be.   Only  in  exceptional  circumstances,  where  there  are
             imperative grounds of public  security,  should  an  expulsion
             measure be taken against Union citizens who have  resided  for
             many years in the territory  of  the  host  Member  State,  in
             particular  when  they  were  born  and  have  resided   there
             throughout  their  life.   In   addition,   such   exceptional
             circumstances should also apply to an expulsion measure  taken
             against minors" - again that we do not need to consider.


8.   In April 2007 the appellant was served with a notice  of  liability  to
    deportation.  He took no action on that.

9.   In March 2012 there was an interview, again he took no action  so  that
    in October 2012 a deportation order was made.  There was an application
    to revoke that order.  It seems that the Portuguese Embassy was  behind
    it to some extent and that led to the  decision  of  12  December  2013
    giving reasons for refusing to revoke and in those reasons for  refusal
    the Secretary of State in paragraph 24 stated:

         "It is accepted that you have obtained a permanent right to  reside
         by virtue  of  a  five  year  period  of  continuous  residence  in
         accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations  between  1994  and   2006.
         Although it is also accepted that you have resided in the UK for at
         least ten years the Home Office takes the  view  that  you  do  not
         automatically qualify for the protection of imperative  grounds  of
         public security.  The Home  Office  has  applied  the  'integration
         test' set out at recitals 23 and 24 of the  Directive  and  in  the
         CJEU case of Tsakouridis to establish whether the highest level  of
         protection is available to you.  The following  factors  have  been
         considered."


    Then there are seven bullet points which reads:



           . The cumulative duration of and the frequency of  any  absences
             from the UK during the qualifying period and the  reasons  for
             those absences;

           . Time spent in prison;

           . The overall length of your residence in the UK;

           . Your family connections in the UK;

           . Your links with your country of origin;

           . Your age on arrival in the UK;

           . Having assessed all these factors, the Home Office  takes  the
             view that you meet the integration criteria,  as  set  out  in
             Tsakouridis.  As a result it is necessary  to  establish  that
             your deportation is warranted on imperative grounds of  public
             security."

    The decision letter went on to state that  the  imperative  grounds  of
    public security were in the circumstances met and thus the  deportation
    order should be maintained.

10.  Consideration was  further  given  to  any  family  considerations  and
    Article 8 rights  and  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009  insofar  as  the  children  of  the  family  were
    concerned.  We will come back to that in due course.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  applying  as  we  have
    indicated, the test  set  in  Article  28(3)(a),  that  is,  imperative
    grounds of public security.  This Tribunal allowed  an  appeal  against
    that decision.  That was on 30 September 2014.  What led  the  Tribunal
    to allow the appeal was that the First-tier Tribunal had not considered
    whether there were grounds for indicating that removal was not required
    because there was sufficient protection available  for  the  public  by
    other less strict means.   They  relied  on  what  was  stated  by  the
    European Court in the Tsakouridis case.  That is reported in [2011] Imm
    AR at page 276.  The questions that  had  been  put  to  the  court  in
    Tsakouridis involved by question 1 "whether the  expression  imperative
    grounds of public security" is to be interpreted as meaning  that  only
    irrefutable threats to the external or internal security  of  a  Member
    State could justify expulsion, that is only to  the  existence  of  the
    state and its essential institutions, their ability  to  function,  the
    survival of the population, external relations  and  the  peaceful  co-
    existence of nations.  Clearly if that was the appropriate test  set  a
    very high level indeed.

12.  In answering question 1, the court was concerned on the facts  of  that
    case with involvement in dealing in drugs but  what  the  court  stated
    was:

         "41. The  concept  of  'imperative  grounds  of  public  of  public
              security' presupposes not only the existence of a  threat  to
              public security,  but  also  that  such  a  threat  is  of  a
              particularly high degree of seriousness, as is  reflected  by
              the use of the words 'imperative reasons'.

         42.  It is in this context that the concept of 'public security' in
              Article  28(3)  of  the  Directive  2004/38  should  also  be
              interpreted.

         43.  As regards public security,  the  court  has  held  that  this
              covers both  a  Member  States'  internal  and  its  external
              security (and it cites a number of cases).

         44.  The court has also held that a threat to  the  functioning  of
              the  institutions  and  essential  public  services  and  the
              survival of the population, as well as the risk of a  serious
              disturbance to foreign relations or to  peaceful  coexistence
              of nations, or a  risk  of  military  interests,  may  affect
              public security (and refers to a number of other cases).

         45.  It does not follow that objectives such as the  fight  against
              crime in connection with dealing in narcotics as part  of  an
              organised group are necessarily excluded  from  that  concept
              and it appears that if one follows the language of that, that
              it was intended that the fight against dealing  in  narcotics
              was capable of being considered to be  a  threat  to  foreign
              relations or peaceful coexistence of foreign relations but it
              matters not because clearly it is not necessary from what the
              court says that there should be any cross-border  element  in
              the criminal conduct which leads to deportation on the  basis
              of Article 28(3)."

     But in paragraph 49 the court said this:

         49.  Consequently,  an  expulsion  measure  must  be  based  on  an
             individual  examination  of  the  specific  case  and  can  be
             justified on imperative grounds of public security within  the
             meaning of Article 28(3) of  the  Directive  only  if,  having
             regard to the exceptional seriousness of the  threat,  such  a
             measure is necessary for the protection of  the  interests  it
             aims  to  secure,  provided  that  that  objective  cannot  be
             attained by less strict means, having regard to the length  of
             residence of the Union citizen in the host Member State and in
             particular to the serious negative consequences such a measure
             may  have  for  Union  citizens  who  had   become   genuinely
             integrated into the host Member State.

    They continue:

         50.  In the application of the Directive a balance must  be  struck
             more particularly between the exceptional nature of the threat
             to public security as a result of the personal conduct of  the
             person concerned, assessed if necessary at the time  when  the
             expulsion decision is to be made.  [it refers to two cases] by
             reference in particular to  the  possible  penalties  and  the
             sentences imposed, the degree of involvement in  the  criminal
             activity and, if appropriate, the risk of re-offending  -  see
             to that effect, inter alia, the case of Bouchereau [1977]  ECR
             1999, paragraph 29, on the one hand, and on the other hand the
             risk of compromising the social rehabilitation  of  the  Union
             citizen  in  the  state  in  which  he  has  become  genuinely
             integrated which, as the Advocate General observes in point 95
             of his Opinion, is not only in his interest but also  in  that
             of the European Union in general.

         51.  The sentence passed must be taken into account as one  element
             in that  complex  of  factors.   A  sentence  of  five  years'
             imprisonment cannot lead to expulsion  decisions  as  provided
             for in national law  without  the  factors  described  in  the
             preceding paragraph being taken into account which is for  the
             national court to verify."

13.  As we read that last paragraph it is  indicating  that  the  length  of
    sentence is an indication of the serious nature of  the  offending  and
    that is an obvious point and here  of  course  the  sentence  was  nine
    years' imprisonment which is a very substantial sentence indeed.

14.  The Upper-tier Tribunal on 19 May 2015  in  a  directions  hearing  had
    asked Counsel to agree if they could a list of issues which would  have
    to be determined by this Tribunal on this appeal and those issues  were
    as follows:

    (1)  Whether the Secretary of State requires the permission of  the  UT
         to withdraw  her  concession  that  the  appellant  could  only  be
         deported on imperative grounds of public security and if so whether
         the UT should grant that permission.

    (2)  If the concession is withdrawn what level  of  protection  is  the
         appellant entitled to pursuant to the Immigration  EEC  Regulations
         2006 and the Directive 2004/38 EC and what should the UT's decision
         then be on the appeal.  For the avoidance of  doubt  this  includes
         the issue of whether or not withstanding the Secretary  of  State's
         acceptance  the  appellant  was  granted  a  permanent   right   of
         residence, the appellant has lost that right  and/or  the  enhanced
         protection against expulsion that right carries.

    (3)  If the concession is not withdrawn whether the  protection  regime
         in place by virtue of registration on the Sex  Offenders'  Register
         MAPPA level 2 arrangements could meet the relevant protection needs
         and it was indicated too in the decision allowing the  appeal  that
         this Tribunal would deal with the  matter  afresh  as  if  it  were
         acting as the First-tier Tribunal would normally act.

15.  Mr Greatorex submitted that in its decision  allowing  the  appeal  the
    Tribunal had indicated that the concession could be withdrawn.  That is
    not what was intended and indeed is not what  the  Tribunal  said.   It
    certainly raised the question as  to  whether  the  concession  was  an
    appropriate concession and left it to the Secretary of State to seek to
    submit that it was not appropriate.  It is apparent  from  the  refusal
    letter that the Secretary of State then believed that residence  within
    28(3)(a) was  not  affected  by  imprisonment.   That  was  a  somewhat
    surprising belief since in January 2014 the cases of Onuewkere  and  MG
    had been decided by the European Union Court of Justice.  However it is
    clear that the error stemmed from that view because  it  had  not  been
    appreciated that the fact that the appellant had  been  in  prison  for
    part of the ten years immediately preceding  the  decision  to  deport,
    would have meant that he had not been  resident  for  the  purposes  of
    28(3)(a) for the period of ten years and what could flow from that  was
    an inability to rely on the enhanced level of  protection  provided  by
    paragraph 28(3) of Article 28.

16.  Ms Hooper submitted that the decision in paragraph 24  of  the  refusal
    letter which we have already cited showed that independently as it were
    of any question whether there was a  failure  to  have  the  continuous
    period of residence for the ten years, the grounds  for  providing  the
    highest  level  of  protection  existed,  that  is  to  say  that   the
    integration  criteria  were,  according  to  the  view  formed  by  the
    Secretary of State met.  However, as we say, it is perfectly clear that
    the whole approach was based upon the assumption  that  indeed  he  did
    have the ten year residence  which  was  essential  for  the  automatic
    application of the protection provided by Article 28(3).

17.  It is therefore a question in our judgment whether  the  appellant  has
    been prejudiced or would be prejudiced if the concession, for want of a
    better word, is allowed to be withdrawn.  The answer to  that  question
    in our judgment is all too clear: there is no prejudice.   He  has  had
    some eight months to deal with or to put forward any material  that  he
    wishes to put forward to meet the issue that he now has to  face  on  a
    correct interpretation of the law.  Equally it has been open  to  those
    on his behalf to make all necessary and appropriate submissions to deal
    with the issue.

18.  Ms Hooper submitted further  that  there  was  a  requirement  to  give
    reasons for the application to withdraw the concession but it seems  to
    us that the reason is all too obvious, it was a misunderstanding of the
    correct legal position.  That it was a misunderstanding is clear in our
    view from consideration of the two cases which as we say are central to
    deciding whether the protection provided by 28(3) in the  circumstances
    can apply.

19.  The first is Onuekwere v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] 1WLR, page 2420.  That as indeed was the case of MG, a reference
    by this Tribunal to the Court of Justice of the European Union and  the
    questions that were raised in that case were related to the achievement
    of a five year permanent residence and the questions were as follows:

    (1)  In what  circumstances  if  any  will  a  period  of  imprisonment
         constitute legal residence for the purposes of the acquisition of a
         permanent right of residence under Article 16 of the Directive?

    (2)  If a period of imprisonment does not qualify as legal residence is
         a person who has  served  a  period  of  imprisonment  admitted  to
         aggregate periods of residence before and  after  his  imprisonment
         for the purposes of calculating the period of five years needed  to
         establish a permanent right of residence under the Directive?

20.  The answer given to those questions was  clear.   First,  a  period  of
    imprisonment does not constitute legal residence for  the  purposes  of
    the acquisition of  a  permanent  right  and  it  is  not  possible  to
    aggregate periods between any sentences of  imprisonment.   There  have
    effectively to be five clear years by which we mean five years  without
    any question of imprisonment in order to enable  the  qualification  to
    arise.  Those were the questions which were dealt  with  in  Onuekwere.
    It did not consider at all the application of Article 28.  However,  in
    paragraph 25 of its decision the court said this:

         "Such integration which is a precondition of the acquisition of the
         right of a permanent residence laid down in Article  16(1)  of  the
         Directive is based not only on territorial and temporal factors but
         also on qualitative elements relating to the level  of  integration
         in the host Member State - see Secretary  of  State  for  Work  and
         Pensions v Dias [2011] ECR 1-6387, paragraph 64 - to such an extent
         that the undermining of the link of integration between the  person
         concerned and the host Member State justifies the loss of the right
         of permanent residence even outside the circumstances mentioned  in
         Article 16(4) of the Directive".  [It again refers to Dias case.]

21.  It is in our view perhaps somewhat surprising that the court felt  able
    to  go  beyond  the  clear  restriction  in  the   Directive   on   the
    circumstances in which a right of permanent residence can be lost.   Of
    course imprisonment quite clearly prevents  the  formation  of  such  a
    right but the question put to the court  was  not  concerned  with  the
    issue whether such a right could be lost by  for  example  imprisonment
    independently of the provision in Article 16(4).  However the assertion
    in paragraph 25 is clear enough.

22.  The question as to the correct approach in  considering  Article  28(3)
    when concerned with the period of imprisonment was raised in  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v MG (Portugal), [2014] 1 WLR 2441,  a
    decision given by the same constitution of the Court of Justice of  the
    European Union as had considered the case of Onuekwere.  That again was
    a reference by this Tribunal.  The questions  that  the  court  had  to
    determine were as follows:

    (1)  Does a period in prison following sentence  for  commission  of  a
         criminal offence by a Union citizen break the resident's period  in
         the host Member State required for that person to benefit from  the
         highest  level  of  protection  against  expulsion  under   Article
         28(3)(a) of the Directive or otherwise precludes a  person  relying
         on this level of protection?

    (2)  Does reference to previous ten years in Article 28(3)(a) mean that
         the residence has to be continuous in order for a Union citizen  to
         be able to benefit from the highest  level  of  protection  against
         expulsion?

    (3)  For the purposes of Article 28(3)(a) is the  requisite  period  of
         ten years during which a Union citizen must  have  resided  in  the
         host Member State calculated -

              (a) by counting back from the expulsion decision, or

             (b)   by  counting  forward  from  the  commencement  of   the
                  citizen's residence in the host Member State.

    (4)  If the answer to question 3(a) is that  the  ten  year  period  is
         calculated by counting backwards then does it make a difference  if
         the  person  has  accrued  ten  years'  residence  prior  to   such
         imprisonment.

23.  The answer to question 3 was that the period of ten  years  had  to  be
    considered by counting back from the expulsion decision  and  that  the
    residence  had  to  be  one  which  was  not  tainted  as  it  were  by
    imprisonment.  That second finding is qualified in an important way  to
    which we will refer.

24.  The answer to question 4, again putting it in general terms,  was  that
    it technically did not make a difference if ten years' residence  prior
    to such imprisonment had been accrued in the sense that it did not mean
    automatically that the individual was able to rely  on  such  residence
    but it was a material factor.

25.  The crucial finding in relation to the second and third  questions  was
    given in paragraph 28.  This stated:

         "In the light of all the foregoing the answer to questions 2 and  3
         is that on a proper construction of Article 28(3)(a) the  ten  year
         period of residence referred to in that provision must in principle
         be continuous and must be calculated by counting back from the date
         of the decision ordering the expulsion of the person concerned."

26.  When they went on to consider the answer to  questions  1  and  4  they
    decided in paragraph 38 that Article 28(3)(a) must  be  interpreted  as
    meaning that a period of imprisonment is in principle capable  both  of
    interrupting the continuity of the period of residence for the purposes
    of that provision and of effecting the decision regarding the grant  of
    the enhanced protection provided for thereunder even where  the  person
    concerned resided in the host Member State for the ten years  prior  to
    imprisonment.  However the fact that that person resided  in  the  host
    Member State for the ten years prior to imprisonment may be taken  into
    consideration as part of the overall assessment required  in  order  to
    determine whether the integrating links previously forged with the host
    Member State have been broken.

27.  When the Tribunal had to consider MG on its return  from  the  decision
    of the European Court it  had  some  difficulty  as  indicated  in  its
    decision in applying what it believed MG had decided.  It  referred  to
    paragraph 33 in which it was said:

         "It follows that periods  of  imprisonment  cannot  be  taken  into
         account for  the  purposes  of  granting  the  enhanced  protection
         provided for in Article 28(3)(a)  of  the  Directive  and  that  in
         principle such periods interrupt the continuity of  the  period  of
         residence for the purposes of that provision."

28.  But it is to be noted that in every reference made  to  the  effect  of
    periods of imprisonment the words "in principle" are used and  that  in
    our view is clearly deliberate and intended to indicate that periods of
    imprisonment will not automatically mean  that  the  highest  level  of
    protection is lost.  It is necessary to consider the whole  history  of
    the individual's residence in this country and if he has for  a  period
    of at least ten years before any sentence of  imprisonment  resided  in
    this country, has integrated into the  country  so  as  to  fulfil  the
    requirements set out in the preamble and indeed reflected in Article 16
    of the Directive,  then  that  can  be  taken  into  account  and  can,
    depending on all the circumstances, mean that despite his  having  been
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment  he  does  not  lose  the  enhanced
    protection.   When  one  thinks  of  it,  that  is  not  in  the  least
    surprising.  One can take the example of someone who has spent  let  us
    say virtually the  whole  of  his  life  in  this  country,  has  fully
    integrated, has behaved in a perfectly satisfactory manner during  that
    lengthy period and then commits what might be a serious enough  offence
    in the Secretary of State's view to justify deportation.  One can  well
    see that there may well be circumstances in which  it  would  be  quite
    wrong to indicate that particular misbehaviour from  an  individual  in
    the circumstances we have indicated should automatically  deprive  that
    individual of the right of enhanced protection and we do not doubt that
    it was in order to cover that sort of situation that the court made  it
    clear that it was appropriate to include the words "in  principle"  and
    to make it clear that it was not to be regarded as an  automatic  loss.
    It is thus necessary in all cases to consider both the  seriousness  of
    the offending, the risk as a result of  such  offending  behaviour  the
    individual may pose to the security of pursuing in  the  state  or  the
    state itself and the extent to which the  individual  in  question  has
    fully integrated into the host state.


29.  We are bound to say that in the circumstances we do not find  any  real
    difficulty in marrying up the decisions of Onuekwere and MG and  indeed
    the Tsakouridis case to which we have  also  referred  because  as  the
    court again made clear in MG the question whether  enhanced  protection
    should nonetheless still exist is a question which must be made  on  an
    overall assessment of the individual's situation at  the  precise  time
    when the question of expulsion arises and that is the question which we
     have to consider.

30.  We bear in mind of course the decision of the court in  Onuekwere  that
    even a right of permanent residence given by a five year period can  be
    brought to an end as a result of a criminal conviction and Mr Greatorex
    relied on that to submit that even the protection provided  by  Article
    38(2) was not in the circumstances open to  this  appellant.   We  have
    already indicated that we have some difficulty  in  following  how  the
    court could, having regard to the clear provision in Article 16(4) that
    it was only absence from the host Member State for a period of at least
    two years that could bring permanent residence to an  end  decide  that
    the possibility existed of the removal  of  that  right  by  virtue  of
    conduct which was serious enough to justify it.  However that  is  what
    the court has clearly decided.  Nevertheless in  the  circumstances  of
    this case we do not think that  it  makes  any  difference  whether  we
    approach it on the basis that the protection provided by Article  38(2)
    or merely that provided for a European Union citizen  who  is  in  this
    country but does not have any permanent right of residence which is  at
    a lower level but nonetheless by virtue of Article 38(1) still requires
    consideration whether the conduct is sufficient to justify in  all  the
    circumstances the deportation.

31.  The First-tier Tribunal set out the background and decided as  we  have
    indicated that even though in its view the enhanced protection provided
    for by Article 28(3)(a) applied, nonetheless this   appellant  did  not
    qualify.  If one lowers that to serious in our  view  the  position  is
    clear.  First there is no question that  this  was  serious  offending.
    True that the appellant's risk of re-offending was it was said  only  a
    risk to any female with whom he might form a relationship.  Nonetheless
    it was if he did form such relationship regarded as a risk  of  serious
    harm.  It is significant in that regard that the appellant  has  failed
    to accept and still fails to accept that he has  done  anything  wrong.
    He showed no remorse whatever as the sentencing judge made clear in his
    remarks on sentencing.  It is obvious that that does  indeed  create  a
    real risk because it appears that this appellant believes the  sort  of
    conduct which led to his conviction for the serious  offending  against
    his wife was conduct which he was entitled to undertake if he was in  a
    relationship with any woman and that clearly indicates a  mindset  that
    creates a real risk to such women  whether  it  is  intended  to  be  a
    permanent or perhaps even a casual relationship were he to  be  allowed
    to remain in this country.

32.  So far as integration is concerned, we believe it is apparent  that  he
    has difficulty in understanding  English.   He  needed  an  interpreter
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  It was said that he did  not  need  an
    interpreter for this hearing but we  were  handed  a  note  during  the
    course of  the  hearing  which  indicated  that  he  was  not  able  to
    understand what was going on and he did need  an  interpreter  who  was
    actually present in court to assist him.  He has suffered unfortunately
    from a stroke and his health is not good.  He said in a statement  that
    he has produced that he has found as a  result  of  his  stroke  he  is
    unable now even to understand and speak properly in Portuguese and thus
    he needs to communicate in English.  We confess we  are  not  impressed
    with that particular statement.

33.  So far as his family is concerned he is now  divorced  from  his  wife.
    His three children had no contact with him for  a  considerable  period
    and there is no indication that he effectively has a family  life.   He
    did indicate that he has been visited by the children on  a  couple  of
    occasions and he alleges that the reason they had  not  before  visited
    him was because their mother had told them not to  come.   Equally  the
    children have been without him for a substantial  period  of  time  now
    because he was sentenced to imprisonment for the period of  nine  years
    and since his release he has been for a substantial time in immigration
    custody and equally he has accepted that  he  has  not  had  any  other
    contact with his children other than the couple of visits to  which  he
    has referred in his statement.  Thus, it is difficult to see that there
    is any effective family life.  Equally, so  far  as  the  children  are
    concerned, they are not in the circumstances deprived if  their  father
    is removed to Portugal.  True  he  has  not  been  in  Portugal  for  a
    substantial period of time but he still has brothers there.  Equally he
    is concerned that his state of health is such that he needs  to  remain
    in this country but as the Tribunal indicated,  there  are  undoubtedly
    proper facilities available to look after him in Portugal.

34.  So far as the issue whether there are measures  less  than  deportation
    which could achieve the  necessary  protection  concerned  Ms  Hooper's
    submissions on that were set out in her skeleton argument and were  not
    elaborated in the course of her oral argument.  So far as  the  signing
    on the Sex Register is concerned that provides very little  protection,
    it merely enables the police to know where he is.  So far as the  MAPPA
    2 is concerned that will run out in September and equally  his  licence
    will expire then so there is no question of the requirement to  address
    alcohol, sexual violence  and  offending  behaviour  problems  will  be
    maintained.  We take the view in all the circumstances that it is quite
    impossible to say that  there  are  indeed  lesser  means  which  would
    provide the necessary protection.  Although we do not need to deal with
    it in any detail we can equally say that we are satisfied that even  if
    we had to apply the enhanced level  of  protection  under  28(3)(a)  we
    would agree with the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal that even  in
    those circumstances the deportation was correct but as we say, for  the
    reasons that we have given, it is not in our view necessary to go  into
    that and equally it is not necessary to form a final conclusion on  the
    effects of the observations of the European  Court  in  Onuekwere  that
    imprisonment can bring the five year right to an end can apply.  It  is
    not necessary as we say for us to deal with that issue in these reasons
    nor have we heard any very full argument  on  that  issue.   For  those
    reasons, as we indicated yesterday, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

35.  The appeal is dismissed.

36.   No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   [pic]    Date     10 August 2015


pp Mr Justice Collins



