

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02570/2013


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court         |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28th November 2014                         |on 10th December 2014        |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between
                               AJMAL MOHAMMED
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar instructed by M A Consultants (Blackburn).

For the Respondent:    Mrs Johnson - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
         tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel') composed  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  North  and  Ms  J  Endersby  who,  in  a
         determination promulgated on the  8th  April  2014,  dismissed  the
         Appellants appeal against the order for his  deportation  from  the
         United Kingdom.



Background



      2. The Appellant was born on the 10th October 1967 and is  a  national
         of Pakistan. His immigration history and that of his wife and other
         family members is set out at paragraph 1 of the determination under
         challenge.


      3. The Appellant is the subject of a deportation order as a result  of
         his conviction on 3rd December 2007 at Preston Crown court of  rape
         of a female under 16; sexual assault on a  female  by  penetration;
         sexual activity with a female child under 16; and sexual assault on
         a  female.   On  13th  February  2008  he  was  sentenced  to  five
         indeterminate sentences of imprisonment for public protection, each
         with a separate minimum term of five years and six months.


      4. Relevant parts of the sentencing remarks of HHJ Slinger QC  are  as
         follows:


              "You come before this court today to be sentenced in relation
              to five charges and five convictions arising from an incident
              on the  night  of  the  15th  and  16th  February  last  year
              involving offences under the  sexual  offences  Act  2003  in
              relation to a young girl then aged  fourteen  years  of  age.
              The charges are of  committing  an  offence  with  intent  to
              commit a sexual offence.  That  is  taking  her  out  of  the
              control of her parents intending to commit a sexual  offence.
              Secondly, rape.  Thirdly, assault by penetration indulging in
              sexual activity with that young girl, and finally,  a  matter
              to which you pleaded guilty, a sexual assault upon her.


              You had  pleaded  not  guilty  to  those  charges,  the  four
              charges, and although during  the  course  of  your  evidence
              before the court you made certain admissions, and although at
              the first opportunity before the court, once the  reality  of
              what you had done had been shown  by  that  fifty-one  second
              clip, you     pleaded  guilty  to  one  matter,  the  general
              position was  that  you  denied  these  offences.   And  this
              fourteen-your-old girl had  to  go  through  the  trauma  and
              stress of waiting for  a  trial  and  then  giving  evidence.
              Finally, having denied it all along, you now admit  that  all
              that was said about you and what you have done was true.


              .......


              The background to this case is that  whilst  driving  through
              Accrington you saw this young girl and her  friend,  who  was
              older, by a  bus  stop.   You  effectively  picked  them  up.
              Within a very short time you began a sexual relationship with
              the friend, there was noting illegal about that, although  it
              might have some relevance when I consider the testimonials as
              to your  character.   There  was  nothing  illegal.   But  in
              carrying out that relationship you were  in  regular  contact
              with [DH].  You well knew how old she was.  You knew she  was
              only fourteen years of age.


              In February of last year, by which time you  had  known  them
              for some months, there was a suggestion that you, the  former
              girlfriend [NB], and her then lover your  friend  Mr  Hussain
              and [DH] should all go off to  Blackpool  to  stay  overnight
              together.  There was evidence before the court which I accept
              that you were a moving spirit  in  that  decision;  that  you
              specifically asked [DH] to come, and you well knew  that  the
              other two would be together; you intended to stay  the  night
              with her.


              You were the driver of the vehicle it was your car  in  which
              you went. You went particularly to pick  up  alcohol  from  a
              stash which you kept at someone else's  house  so  that  your
              family would  not  know  about  your  drinking  habits.   You
              encouraged the other three in their  heavy  drinking  on  the
              way, and you were well aware that this fourteen-year old girl
              was  completely  drunk  and  incapable  of  making   rational
              decisions when you got her into that hotel.  I shall  not  go
              into the precise details of what you did to her and what  you
              videoed yourself doing, but you penetrated her in a number of
              ways.  You put yourself against her and you raped  her.   The
              rape took place when she was barely conscious, but  objected.
              After she tried to get help from her friend, and nobody comes
              out of this episode with any  credit  whatsoever,  after  she
              tried to get help from a friend and your friend she was  left
              stranded still in this hotel.  You again went  to  a  bedroom
              with her and committed further sexual activities.


              This is a most serious case. You must, however  it  is  dealt
              with, go into custody for  a  very  substantial  period.   Mr
              Andrews has said all that can be  said  on  your  behalf,  he
              acknowledges that this case contains almost every aggravating
              feature so far as a case of this kind is concerned. You  knew
              she should have been at home with her  mother  you  took  her
              away you foisted alcohol upon her.  You did this when she was
              unable physically to resist because of that drink.   She  was
              young.  You filmed  her  whilst  you  did  it  and  you  were
              something like twenty over twenty years older than  she,  and
              we now find, which was not  a matter   before the jury,  that
              in fact you knew you suffered from  an  illness  which  could
              lead to a serious infection in this young  girl.  Unprotected
              sex. Knowing the dangers to her.  And  the  stress  upon  her
              must have been considerably enhanced when she found out about
              that and had to wait for the results of the  tests.  We  have
              heard of the effect on this young woman.  Any person  who  is
              raped will suffer trauma and damage. She, we  know,  took  an
              overdose within a matter of days of this  happening,  and  it
              was though that that what happened came to light.


              .....


              Taking them in the order that I have got them: for committing
              an offence with intent to commit a sexual offence you will go
              to prison for you would on a determinate sentence, you  would
              on a determinate sentence, go to prison for four  years;  for
              rape, with all those aggravating features, a proper  sentence
              would be eleven years; for the  assault  by  penetration  six
              years; sexual activity with the child, five  years,  and  the
              sexual assault, to which you pleaded guilty, three years.  So
              the proper determinate sentence, to my view, would be  eleven
              years in custody.


      5. The Appellant relies upon the exception to be found in  section  33
         UK Borders Act 2007 that his removal pursuant  to  the  deportation
         order will breach his rights under Article 8 ECHR.


      6. The Panel considered the evidence made  available  to  them.  Their
         findings can be summarised as follows:


         i.   The Appellant has two-step children Rabia Mehmood aged 19  and
              Hamid  Mehmood  aged  20.  They  are   neither   emotionally,
              financially or otherwise dependant upon the Appellant in  any
              way that can be considered exceptional [6].


         ii.  The Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
              his step-son Tayyab born in 1997 and his two sons  Qasim  and
              Abdul born in 2001 and 2004 respectively. He  has  maintained
              contact with them whilst he has been in prison. The  children
              miss their father who visited them prior to his  imprisonment
              following the separation from their mother. At that time, and
              since, the primary carer for the   children was their mother.
              There is nothing persuasive to show  their  mother  will  not
              continue to be the primary carer with the support of her  two
              adult children if required. The Appellant has not contributed
              to the financial support of  the  children  or  their  mother
              since he was sentenced [7].


         iii. A degree of separation occurred within the family prior to the
              Appellants imprisonment.  The  Appellants  removal  from  the
              United Kingdom will mean face to face contact is reduced  but
              some contact can be maintained by other means [8].


         iv.  Section 55 BCIA 2009 makes the best interests of the  children
              a primary consideration. The report for  Blackburn  Childrens
              Services dated 20/12/12 has been considered.  The  impact  of
              the Appellants conviction upon the  children  is  noted.  The
              difficulties faced  by  the  children  in  adjusting  to  the
              Appellants detention are accepted. It was not clear that  re-
              engagement with their father  after  his  release  would  not
              require similar re-adjustment [8].


         v.   The children's mother has been offered support by local social
              services and it is not unreasonable to expect  that  she  can
              obtain support in the future if required [9].


         vi.  The Appellants removal will  have  little  detrimental  effect
              upon the best interests of the children who  will  remain  in
              the United Kingdom in the sole care of their mother [10].


         vii. The Appellant and his wife intended to live together after his
              release. The evidence was that they separated due to problems
              between his wife and members of her family and the Appellants
              family in Pakistan. The nature of such problems was not  made
              clear. The Panel were not satisfied  the  Appellant  and  his
              wife would have separated merely as a result  of  differences
              between family in Pakistan had they been  in  a  genuine  and
              subsisting relationship. The relationship had broken down but
              recommenced  during  the  Appellants  imprisonment.   If  the
              Appellant is deported that will not cause significantly  more
              interference with the relationship than has  been  caused  by
              their voluntary separation and by the Appellants imprisonment
              [11].


         viii.    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 1999 aged  32.
              He spent fifteen years in the United Kingdom, only  eight  of
              which were   outside prison. The  skills  the  Appellant  has
              acquired will be available to him in Pakistan [12].


         ix.  Although the  index  offence  is  his  first  conviction,  the
              Appellant was cautioned for persistent soliciting in November
              2008. The Sentencing Judge took into account that three years
              previously the Appellant had taken a different fourteen  year
              old girl to a hotel room and plied  her  with  alcohol  as  a
              result of which he had received a specific warning in respect
              of being involved with young girls. The Sentencing Judge also
              accepted evidence showing the Appellant  had  been  in  touch
              with other young girls, all of whom had been  vulnerable  and
              in the care of local authorities and whom the  Appellant  was
              aware were under the age of 16 and vulnerable.  As  a  result
              the Panel were not satisfied the Appellant was involved in  a
              productive and responsible life in the United Kingdom  before
              his imprisonment [13].


         x.   The Appellant can re-adjust to life in Pakistan where  he  has
              maintained contact with his family. He  has  skills  obtained
              through work in the United Kingdom.  He  has  no  significant
              illness or incapacities such as to make  it  unusually  harsh
              for him to return to Pakistan. He has maintained an  interest
              in Islam [14].


         xi.  The Panel agree with the assessment by the Parole Board issued
              on 26th January 2014 that the Appellant poses a  higher  risk
              of causing serious harm to children but low risk of  violence
              or non violent offending and RM2000 indicates he poses a  low
              risk of re-offending sexually or violently.  The comments  of
              the Parole Board  regarding  the  structure  of  any  release
              cannot be viewed in isolation from the real concerns  of  the
              Sentencing Judge  and the fact the Appellant was cautioned in
              the past and ignored warning in respect of his  contact  with
              underage  girls  prior  to  the  offence  for  which  he  was
              convicted. Neither can be viewed without regard to  the  fact
              the Appellants removal is deemed by law to  be  conducive  to
              the public good [15].


         xii. The Respondents decision is proportionate [16]


      7. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  on  three
         grounds (a) the Panel erred in their assessment of Article  8,  (b)
         the  Panel  erred  in  their  assessment  of  the  children's  best
         interests pursuant to section 55,  and,  (c)  the  Panel  erred  in
         failing to give reasons.  Permission was granted by  another  judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that whilst given the  many
         adverse matters affecting the Appellants conduct in  the  UK,  such
         that he should not be unduly optimistic, all grounds may be argued.



Discussion



      8. We find the Panel considered the written  and  oral  evidence  made
         available to them with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny  a
         case of this nature required as  a  reading  of  the  determination
         amply demonstrates.


      9. We also find the Panel  set  out  the  correct  self  direction  in
         relation the applicable immigration rules in force  at  that  time.
         Since 9th July 2012 the  Secretary  of  State's  interpretation  of
         Article 8 has been set out in the Rules. In relation to deportation
         appeals this is to be found in 398, 399 and 399A, as  was  accepted
         at the hearing. These Rules are a complete code when assessing  the
         proportionality of deportation. In MM (Lebanon) and  others  [2014]
         EWCA Civ  985  it  was  said  that  where  the  relevant  group  of
         Immigration  Rules,  upon  their  proper  construction,  provide  a
         "complete code" for dealing with a person's  Convention  rights  in
         the  context  of  a  particular  Immigration  Rules  or   statutory
         provision, such as in the case of  "foreign  criminals",  then  the
         balancing exercise and the way the various factors are to be  taken
         into account in an individual case must be done in accordance  with
         that code, although references to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in
         the code will nonetheless entail a proportionality exercise.


     10. It was conceded before the Panel that the Appellant  is  unable  to
         meet the requirements of paragraphs 399 or 399A, which do not apply
         in any event as the Appellant was sentenced to more than four years
         imprisonment.  It  will  only  be  in   exceptional   circumstances
         therefore  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation   will   be
         outweighed by other factors.  Paragraph 398 states:

         Deportation and Article 8

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and


              (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good  because  they  have  been  convicted  of  an
              offence for which they have been sentenced  to  a  period  of
              imprisonment of at least 4 years;

              (b)      the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
              conducive to the public good because they have been convicted
              of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a  period
              of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12  months;
              or

              (c)      the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
              conducive to the public good because,  in  the  view  of  the
              Secretary of State, their offending has caused  serious  harm
              or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
              disregard for the law, the Secretary of  State  in  assessing
              that claim  will  consider  whether  paragraph  399  or  399A
              applies and, if it does not, it will only be  in  exceptional
              circumstances that the public interest in deportation will be
              outweighed by other factors.



     11. The term 'exceptional circumstances has  been  considered  in  case
         law. In Kabia (MF: para 298  -  "exceptional  circumstances")  2013
         UKUT 00569 (IAC)  it  was  held:  (iii)  The  new  rules  speak  of
         "exceptional circumstances" but, as has  been  made  clear  by  the
         Court of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria),  exceptionality  is  a  likely
         characteristic of a claim that  properly  succeeds  rather  than  a
         legal test  to  be  met.   In  this  context,  "exceptional"  means
         circumstances in which deportation would  result  in  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences for the individual or their family such  that  a
         deportation would not be proportionate".


     12. In McLarty (Deportation- balance) [2014] UKUT  00315  it  was  held
         that there can be little doubt that in enacting the UK Borders  Act
         2007 Parliament views the object of deporting those with a criminal
         record as a very strong policy, which is constant in all cases  (SS
         (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550).  The weight to  be  attached
         to that object will, however, include a variable  component,  which
         reflects the criminality in issue.   Nevertheless,  Parliament  has
         tilted the scales strongly in favour of deportation and for them to
         return to the level and then swing in favour of a criminal opposing
         deportation  there  must  be  compelling  reasons,  which  must  be
         exceptional; (ii) What amounts to compelling reasons or exceptional
         circumstances is very much fact dependent but must  necessarily  be
         seen in the context of the articulated will of Parliament in favour
         of deportation; (iii) Where the facts surrounding an individual who
         has committed a crime are said to be "exceptional" or "compelling",
         these are factors to be placed in the weighing scale, in  order  to
         be  weighed  against  the  public  interest;  (iv)  In  some  other
         instances, the phrase "exceptional" or "compelling" has  been  used
         to describe the end  result:  namely,  that  the  position  of  the
         individual is "exceptional" or "compelling" because, having weighed
         the unusual facts  against  the  (powerful)  public  interest,  the
         former outweighs  the  latter.   In  this  sense  "exceptional"  or
         "compelling" is the end  result  of  the  proportionality  weighing
         process.


     13. An example of the application of this  element  has  been  recently
         given by the Court of Appeal in LC (China) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1310.
         In that case the Appellant had been  here  since  2002,  he  had  2
         children with British citizenship and he was sentenced to two terms
         of 5 years for serious robberies. It was held that where  a  person
         is sentenced to a term of  4  years  or  more,  the  weight  to  be
         attached to the public interest in deportation remains  very  great
         and the fact that children have British nationality  and  would  be
         separated from their father for a long time,  was  insufficient  to
         constitute  exceptional  circumstances,  of  a  kind  which   would
         outweigh the public interest in deportation.


     14. In ZZ (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 1404 the Court  summarized  relevant  case  law  as
         follows:



         21.  In OH (Serbia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
              [2008] EWCA Civ  694  the  Court  of  Appeal  summarised  the
              propositions of law arising in this type of deportation case:



              "(a)    The risk of reoffending is one facet  of  the  public
                    interest but, in the case of very  serious  crimes,  not
                    the most important facet.

              (b)     Another important facet is the need to deter  foreign
                    nationals from committing serious crimes by leading them
                    to understand that, whatever  the  other  circumstances,
                    one consequence of them may well be deportation.

              (c)      A  further  important  facet  is  the  role   of   a
                    deportation  order  as  an   expression   of   society's
                    revulsion at  serious  crimes  and  in  building  public
                    confidence in the treatment of foreign citizens who have
                    committed serious crimes.

              (d)     Primary responsibility for the public interest, whose
                    view of it is likely to be  wider  and  better  informed
                    than that of a tribunal, resides in the respondent,  and
                    accordingly a  tribunal  hearing  an  appeal  against  a
                    decision to deport should not only consider  for  itself
                    all the facets of the public interest but should  weigh,
                    as a linked but independent  feature,  the  approach  to
                    them adopted by the      respondent in  the  context  of
                    the facts of the case.".

         22.  In MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
              [2014] 1 WLR 544 Lord Dyson MR, giving the judgment  of  this
              court, said that:

                    "43. The word "exceptional" is often used  to  denote  a
                    departure from a general rule. The general rule  in  the
                    present context is  that,  in  the  case  of  a  foreign
                    prisoner to whom paras 399 and 399A do not  apply,  very
                    compelling reasons will  be  required  to  outweigh  the
                    public interest in deportation. These compelling reasons
                    are the "exceptional circumstances".

                    "44. We would, therefore, hold that the new rules are  a
                    complete code and that the exceptional circumstances  to
                    be considered in  the  balancing  exercise  involve  the
                    application of a proportionality test as required by the
                    Strasbourg jurisprudence."

         23.  SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Dept  [2013]
              EWCA  Civ  550  considered  the  interrelation  between   the
              interests of the public in effecting the  foreign  criminal's
              deportation and the interests of his child or children.  Laws
              LJ said:

                    "43  I  will  next  describe  two  characteristics,  one
                    positive, the other negative, which the  learning  shows
                    apply in Article 8 cases involving children.  The  first
                    is that the interests of the child  or  children  are  a
                    primary consideration. The second (which applies to  all
                    removal cases, whether or not  there  are  children)  is
                    that there is no  rule  of  "exceptionality":  that  is,
                    there is no class of case where the law stipulates  that
                    an exceptional Article 8 case  must  be  shown  in  some
                    situations but need not be in others........

                    "54......while the authorities demonstrate that there is
                    no rule of  exceptionality  for  Article  8,  they  also
                    clearly show that the more pressing the public  interest
                    in removal or deportation,  the  stronger  must  be  the
                    claim under Article 8 if it is to prevail. The  pressing
                    nature of the public interest here is  vividly  informed
                    by the fact that by Parliament's express declaration the
                    public interest is injured if the criminal's deportation
                    is not effected. Such a result could in my judgment only
                    be justified by a very strong claim indeed."

         24.  SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
              [2014] EWCA Civ 256 again considered the balance to be struck
              between the interests  of  the  State  in  deporting  foreign
              criminals and the interests of those criminals  and/or  their
              families. The court confirmed that  where  someone  has  been
              convicted of a very serious crime, the need to deter and  the
              need to express society's revulsion at such  criminality  are
              even more important factors to be taken into account than the
              risk of reoffending. The harm to the public that would result
              if deportation were not  effected  includes  the  failure  to
              deter other potential foreign criminals.

         25.  The most recent relevant decision of this court,  given  on  9
              October 2014, is LC (China) v Secretary of State for the Home
              Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1310. In that case  the  appellant
              had been sentenced to five years' imprisonment for  burglary.
              His Article 8 claim relied  on  his  relationships  with  his
              partner who had indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK  and
              their two children who  were  British  citizens.  This  court
              found that there were no exceptional,  nor  very  compelling,
              circumstances and that it was  proportionate  to  deport  the
              appellant given the seriousness of his offending.  Moore-Bick
              LJ emphasised at [24] that "the public interest in  deporting
              foreign criminals  is  so  great  that  only  in  exceptional
              circumstances  will  it  be  outweighed  by  other   factors,
              including the effect of deportation on any children".



     15. We have also reminded ourselves of the  reported  determination  of
         VHR (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 367 (IAC) in  which
         it was found that appeals should not be mounted on the basis  of  a
         litany of forensic criticisms of particular findings of  the  First
         Tier Tribunal, whilst ignoring  the  basic  legal  test  which  the
         appellant has to meet.


     16.  Grounds  1  does  not  specifically  address  the   existence   of
         exceptional circumstances but contains a criticism of  the  Panel's
         consideration of the evidence relating to the private life  of  the
         young adults and others and an assertion the Panel erred  in  their
         assessment of the Appellant's wife's family and private  life.  The
         witness statement of Hamid Mehmood, aged 20  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing, contains the following statement:


         2.   When my father went to prison, things  became  very  difficult
              for my family. I had  to  give  up  on  socialising  with  my
              friends, and in effect I took on the role of a father. I  was
              a babysitter, father,  but  also  providing  comfort  for  my
              mother. I was about 12 years old at  the  time.  Even  little
              things like my father helping with  homework  was  no  longer
              available.


         3.   After my father  went  to  prison,  I  would  attend  parent's
              evenings for the other children.


     17. The evidence before the Panel appears to have been that as a result
         of the Appellant's conviction and sentence it was necessary for the
         family to reassess the way they lived and  for  adjustments  to  be
         made. The Panel, in paragraph 6 of the determination, confirm  they
         have taken both the written and oral  evidence  of  Hamid  and  his
         sibling Rabia, then aged 19, into account. The  conclusion  of  the
         skeleton argument relied upon by Mr Sarwar before the Panel was  to
         the effect that the children should not be denied an opportunity to
         live with their father in the United Kingdom which appears  on  the
         face  of  it  to  be  a  family  life  argument   although   family
         relationships can be both elements of family and private  life.  We
         do not find it  established  that  the  Panel  did  not  take  this
         evidence into account. When Mr Sarwar was asked whether  there  was
         any  evidence  that  the  disruption  to   other   family   members
         constituted exceptional circumstances he conceded that it was not a
         strong point. We find the material was considered and that  it  has
         not  been  established  that  the   conclusion   that   exceptional
         circumstances were not made out has been shown  to  be  tainted  by
         legal error on the basis of this evidence.


     18. In relation  to  the  conclusion  of  the  Panel  relating  to  the
         Appellant's wife,  at  paragraph  11,  that  if  the  Appellant  is
         deported it will not cause  significantly  more  interference  with
         their relationship  than  that  which  has  been  caused  by  their
         voluntary separation by the Appellant's imprisonment, there may  be
         an argument that the Panel have erred.  The Panel refer to the fact
         the Appellant and his  wife  separated  prior  to  his  arrest  and
         imprisonment but  accept  in  paragraph  11  that  they  maintained
         contact during his imprisonment  and  that  they  have  recommenced
         their relationship. It is not found that family life recognised  by
         Article 8 does not exist between this married  couple  and  so  one
         element the Panel were required to consider was the impact  on  the
         future positive development of the relationship. It is possible  to
         interpret paragraph 11  as  being  an  assessment  based  upon  the
         history of the relationship  rather  than  an  examination  of  the
         impact of separation following  reconciliation.  Even  if  such  an
         interpretation could be put upon this finding, we find it  has  not
         been established that any error material to the decision  has  been
         made. The Panel record the history of the relationship, and it  has
         not been shown any material aspects of the evidence  were  omitted,
         but did not find that  the  rights  of  the  Appellant  and  family
         members under Article 8 in respect of both family and private  life
         tipped the balance in favour of the  Appellant.  It  has  not  been
         shown that the consequences of separation would have such an impact
         upon the Appellant's wife  other  than  the  normal  emotional  and
         practical impact that may occur on  separation.  It  has  not  been
         established  that  there  will   be   any   resultant   exceptional
         circumstances or consequences.


     19. Paragraph 14 of the determination is challenged on the  basis  that
         when considering the Appellant's return to Pakistan the Panel found
         "the  Appellant  does  not  have   any   significant   illness   or
         incapacities which would make it and usually harsh him to return to
         Pakistan." We find no arguable legal error material to the decision
         in this submission. Whilst the  phrase  'usually  harsh'  does  not
         appear in any authorities, the term 'unduly harsh'  or  'reasonable
         in all the circumstances' does.  It is clear that  the  Panel  were
         analysing the Appellant's connections to  Pakistan,  which  include
         extended family members, his ability to readjust to life  there  on
         his return including ability to obtain employment, and the lack  of
         any illnesses or incapacities that would  create  difficulties  for
         him on return.  The clear finding of the Panel is that it  had  not
         been established that any such  obstacle  to  return  exists.   The
         Upper Tribunal accepts  there  may  be  practical  difficulties  in
         relocation but it has not been established on the evidence that the
         consequences for the Applicant  on  return  cross  the  exceptional
         circumstances  threshold.    It  was  accepted  before  the   Upper
         Tribunal that it could not be submitted that the available material
         showed that the  consequences  of  removal  would  result  in  such
         exceptionality.


     20. In relation to the section 55 ground, this asserts that  the  Panel
         misdirected themselves in reaching their conclusions regarding  the
         impact upon the children  and  failed  to  take  into  account  the
         written  and  oral  evidence  of  the  children  in  making   their
         assessment. Paragraphs 13  and  14  of  the  pleaded  grounds  were
         withdrawn as the cases quoted therein are not deportation cases. In
         relation to this matter,  Mr  Sarwar  was  asked  what  finding  he
         believes the Panel should have made which he stated was that it was
         in the children's best interests to  live  with  their  mother  and
         father in the family home. Even if the evidence had supported  such
         a finding the  difficulty  for  the  Appellant  is  that  the  best
         interests of the children are not  the  determinative  factor.  The
         children's situation is examined in detail in paragraphs 8, 9,  and
         10 of the determination. The minor children  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing were 12, 13 and 16. The Panel correctly directed themselves
         to the fact that section 55 Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act
         2009  makes  the  best  interests  of  the   children   a   primary
         consideration. The  Panel  took  into  account  all  the  available
         material, including the report from Blackburn  Children's  Services
         received by the Secretary of State on 20th December 2012.


     21. The material indicates there had been referrals to  the  Children's
         Services which  were  investigated  but  that  it  was  not  deemed
         necessary to take any further action. The Panel's findings are that
         the children's mother was the primary carer and that she could rely
         on the support of her adult children in  the  Appellant's  absence.
         Whilst that  latter  finding  is  challenged  before  us  the  only
         evidence before the Panel was of difficulties and inconvenience  in
         the adult children having to rearrange their  lifestyle  to  assist
         their mother, not that they would abandon her if she requires  help
         and assistance.  On the available material we do not find that  the
         statement by the Panel that the children's mother could rely on the
         support of  her  adult  children  in  the  Appellant's  absence  is
         infected by any legal error material to the decision. In any event,
         the Panel also noted that the mother had been  offered  support  by
         the  local  Social  Services  department  and  that  it   was   not
         unreasonable to expect that she could obtain support in the  future
         if needed. It is of note  that  notwithstanding  the  referrals  to
         social services there has been no statutory intervention or attempt
         to seek a care order or to remove  the  children,  indicating  that
         even though the Appellant is not in the family home Social Services
         are satisfied  that  the  children  are  receiving  an  appropriate
         standard  of  care  and   parenting   above   the   threshold   for
         intervention. It was conceded before the Upper Tribunal that  there
         was no up-to-date independent evidence produced by the Appellant to
         show otherwise. Even if the  finding  should  have  been  that  the
         children's best interests are served  by  living  in  a  two-parent
         household it has not been shown  that  this  would  have  been  the
         determinative factor, especially in light  of  the  other  evidence
         indicating that even if released the Appellant would not be allowed
         to return to the family home as a result of the risk  he  poses  to
         the public. It has not been shown that the impact upon the children
         of removing their father would have consequences such as to  enable
         it to be found that exceptional circumstances exist.


     22. The grounds also contain a 'reasons' challenge but we find this has
         no arguable merit. A reader of  the  determination  can  understand
         clearly why the Appellant lost his appeal. Although in paragraph  5
         the Panel state that the tribunal was required to consider  whether
         of it will be proportionate under Article 8 to remove the Appellant
         rather  than  referring  to   the   requirement   for   exceptional
         circumstances, that term  in  itself  indicates  a  proportionality
         assessment has to be undertaken. Whatever label  is  given  to  it,
         this is precisely what the Panel did. They noted the serious nature
         of the Appellant's offending, the findings that have been  made  by
         the sentencing judge in relation to the risk the Appellant poses to
         those within the United Kingdom, the legitimate aim relied upon  by
         the Secretary of State which in this case  contains  a  significant
         deterrent element, and weighed that against all the  evidence  they
         had been asked to consider, before concluding that the decision  to
         deport was proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  pursued  by  the
         respondent.


     23. In relation to the element of risk, the Panel  properly  noted  the
         material relied upon by  the  Appellant  in  paragraph  15  of  the
         determination from the Parole Board which  was  an  assessment  not
         made in relation to an application to be  released,  together  with
         the sentencing judges finding's which are as follows:


              I now have to consider whether I find you to be dangerous for
              the purposes of the Act, the criminal Justice  act  of  2003,
              whether there must be  imprisonment  for  public  protection.
              Firstly, so far as the rape is concerned,  although  life  is
              the  maximum,  I  do  not  consider  that  this   matter   is
              sufficiently serious to justify a life sentence I should  say
              that. In considering whether there is a significant  risk  of
              serious harm from further offences, I take into  account  all
              that I know  about  this  case  and  what  you  did  and  the
              circumstances in which you did it and the background  leading
              up to it.  I also know, as did  the  jury,  that  some  three
              years earlier, whilst a taxi driver,  you  had  struck  up  a
              friendship with a foster-mother in charge of a  13  year  old
              girl. On that girls  fourteenth  birthday  you  took  her  to
              Manchester, you booked a room overnight for the  two  of  you
              and you plied her with alcohol. There was no evidence of  any
              sexual activity you were not prosecuted  for  that  and  this
              court does not deal with you on  the  basis  that  there  was
              sexual activity or any evidence of intention to  have  sexual
              activity.


              Nonetheless, you had taken a young child  to  a  hotel  in  a
              city, a dangerous city, overnight and plied her with alcohol.
              You received a specific warning  which  although  I  referred
              particularly to [JB] by name nevertheless made  it  clear  to
              you the sort of criminal offences which could be involved  in
              becoming involved with the young girls.  There is now  before
              the court evidence which is accepted that you have, in  fact,
              been in touch with other young girls all of  whom  have  been
              vulnerable and in the care of  local  authorities;  three  of
              them you were  friendly  with  their  foster-mother  and  her
              husband. So you were well aware, with these youngsters,  that
              they were  vulnerable,  they  were  young,  they  were  under
              sixteen and were in the care of the local authorities.  There
              is evidence with regard to two of them  at  least  that  your
              contact with them took place after the warnings  about  [JB].
              Their mobile telephone numbers were found in the mobile phone
              the address book found on your mobile  phone,  and  there  is
              evidence of texting between you.


              So far as one of these girls is concerned, you were in direct
              contact with her son two days after you had  raped  [DH].   I
              deal with you, as I must, on  the  basis  that  there  is  no
              evidence that you had any sexual activity with any  of  them;
              that there is no evidence that you suggested sexual  activity
              to them. Nonetheless, having regard to the warnings, of which
              you know, having regard to the  contact  you  are  making  at
              around that time with the girl who you raped, it seems to  me
              inevitable that where we have  vulnerable  young  girls  that
              they are in real danger from you, a man some twenty years  or
              more older attempting regularly to be in touch with them.  In
              my view, there is a significant a very  real  risk  from  you
              towards young girls and that, as shown by the case for  which
              you are being sentenced, that can lead  to  serious  harm  to
              these young girls. There is then, in my view,  a  significant
              serious risk of serious harm to others from the commission of
              further such offences.


     24. The sentence imposed  upon  the  Appellant  was  therefore  one  of
         imprisonment for public protection.


     25. We also refer at this stage to an entry to be  found  in  the  Pre-
         Sentence Report, at paragraph 4, where the author of that  document
         records:


              Mr Mohammed  has  committed  five  extremely  serious  sexual
              offences against a very vulnerable  girl,  of  14  years.  He
              claims that he only decided to commit these offences when  he
              saw the girl was in an alcohol induced sleep. However, in  my
              assessment and  in  analyse  of  events  leading  up  to  the
              offences (i.e. befriending the girl  by  her  friend  over  a
              period of time/allowing the girl to drink a large quantity of
              alcohol/going to a hotel/booking a room etc)  there  is  much
              evidence   to   suggest   there   was   a   high   level   of
              grooming/premeditation - which only adds to  the  seriousness
              of these matters. The  psychological  damage  caused  to  the
              victim of these offences, in my assessment, is likely  to  be
              permanent - that he filmed himself whilst carrying out  these
              acts  adds  to  the  callousness   of   his   behaviour   and
              demonstrates that he has extremely distorted sexual  thinking
              patterns. In interview he was given an opportunity  to  speak
              about the consequences of his behaviour but rather than focus
              on the direct victim, he spoke instead about the shame he had
              brought on himself and his own family.


     26. It is relevant when assessing  proportionality  and  balancing  the
         Respondent's case against the issues relied upon by an Appellant to
         take into account the nature and seriousness of  the  offence.   In
         light of the nature of this offence,  which  the  sentencing  judge
         found contained a number of aggravating  factors,  and  the  public
         revulsion and need to deter  others  from  offences  of  a  similar
         nature, the conclusion that the issues relied upon did not make  it
         a case in which a finding should have been made in the  Appellant's
         favour is, in reality,  the  only  finding  the  Panel  could  have
         properly made in relation to this matter. We conclude by finding it
         has not been shown that the Panel  have  erred  in  law  in  a  way
         material to their decision to dismiss the appeal.


Decision


     27. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Panels
         decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     28. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. The Upper Tribunal make that order pursuant to rule 14 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 but only in  respect
         of the naming of the Appellant's victims.



Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 28th November 2014


