
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02565/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 July 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                            mohammad tariq saeed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Kelvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 7 April 1991 and is a citizen of Pakistan.

2.   He first entered the United  Kingdom  on  8  January  2011  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 Student until 31 December 2011.  Further leave to
    remain thereafter was refused.  He contacted the Home Office  twice  in
    January 2013 asking for the return of his passport so that he could  go
    back to Pakistan.  On 8 February 2013, he was  asked  to  attend  Eaton
    House Immigration Office on 7 March 2013 so that arrangements could  be
    made for his voluntary return to Pakistan.  He  was  unable  to  attend
    because, on 5 March 2013, he was arrested trying to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom for Canada on a passport to which  he  was  not  entitled.   He
    claimed asylum, and a screening interview was  conducted  on  the  same
    day.  He was also served with papers  as  an  overstayer  and  detained
    under Home Office powers.

3.   On 14 March 2013, the appellant was convicted at Isleworth Crown  Court
    of the possession and/or use of a false instrument.  He  was  sentenced
    to imprisonment.  Such a sentence brought into operation his  automatic
    deportation by virtue of Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

4.   On 14 April 2013, the  appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation.

5.   Thereafter the appellant sought to appeal against the  decision  of  12
    December 2013 to make a deportation order against him under Section  32
    of the 2007 Act.  He claimed also to be a refugee, whose  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would breach the UK obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention  interpreted  by  the  Refugee  or   Person   in   Need   of
    International    Protection    (Qualification)    Regulations     2006.
    Alternatively,  he  claimed  that  he  was  entitled  to   be   granted
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules.
    He also claimed that his removal from the United Kingdom  would  breach
    his rights under the 1950 Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
    and Fundamental Freedoms.

6.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Stokes and Mrs  Street
    JP at a hearing on 19  May  2014.   In  a  detailed  determination  the
    appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds, thus  the  deportation
    order in his case remains in force.

7.   The appellant sought to appeal those findings and  conclusions  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The matter came before me  in  that  connection  at  a
    hearing on 17 September 2014.   On  that  occasion  the  appellant  was
    represented by Mr Sowerby.

8.   In general terms, the experiences of the  appellant  in  Pakistan  fell
    into two parts.  It was his contention that when he lived in  the  Bara
    Khyber Agency of Pakistan he was targeted by the Taliban as were others
    in his area to join that organisation.  Many of his friends had trained
    as suicide bombers but the appellant had refused to  join  them.   This
    was in the period 2006 to 2007.   It  is  said  that  the  Taliban  had
    particularly  wanted  to  recruit  the   appellant   because   of   his
    grandfather's  position  as  the  head  of  the  tribal  elders.    His
    grandfather tried to reason with the Taliban but with  little  success.
    In December 2008 the Taliban told the family to  leave  the  house  and
    they having done so the Taliban burned it down.  This  was  a  warning.
    The appellant was given a firm indication that if he did not  join  the
    Taliban he would be killed.  In general terms that account was accepted
    by the Tribunal.

9.   Thereafter the family moved to Peshawar City and lived there from  2008
    to 2010.  Little of significance happened during that time  other  than
    that the appellant was contacted by an unknown girl, who indicated  she
    wanted to be friends with him.  They arranged to meet on 16 March  2010
    and when he did he was captured by a group of people described  by  the
    appellant as the Taliban.  The purpose of his capture  was  to  extract
    money from his family, namely 15,000,000 rupees  (�100,000)  which  was
    paid to them by his father through the elders.  He was released  on  21
    April 2010.  Following his release, however, his grandfather  called  a
    meeting seemingly to  demand  that  the  kidnappers  repay  the  money.
    Instead the  grandfather  was  killed  on  4  August  2010.   Generally
    speaking, that account was also accepted although the Tribunal did  not
    accept  necessarily  the  causation  of  the  grandfather's  death  but
    nevertheless accepted the genuineness of the death  certificate.   That
    speaks of firearm injuries.

10.  One of  the  arguments  advanced  before  the  Tribunal  was  that  the
    appellant would be at  risk  upon  return  because  of  the  continuing
    interest in him by the Taliban.  It was the contention made before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  that  there  was  a  causative  link  between  the
    Taliban's activities towards the appellant in his  home  town  and  the
    capture of him in Peshawar.

11.  The Tribunal did not accept that  there  was  a  causative  link.   The
    Tribunal found and set out a number of reasons, why they considered the
    activities of the group of Taliban who had an interest in the appellant
    in 2007 and 2008 could not necessarily be attributed to the  group  who
    abducted him in 2010.  One reason that was given in particular was that
    the first group  had  sought  to  use  him  as  a  suicide  bomber  and
    threatened to kill him if he did not co-operate.  The second group  did
    not make those threats and did not abduct  him  for  that  purpose  but
    rather to make money for themselves.

12.  It was my view upon the hearing conducted on 17 September 2014 that  it
    was reasonably open to the Tribunal to have come to the conclusions  on
    the matter which they did.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded that it was safe  for  the  appellant
    to return to his home area and that there was in  any  circumstances  a
    sufficiency of protection available to him.   Internal  relocation  was
    not considered.

14.  I found that there was a lack  of  clarity  in  the  reasoning  of  the
    Tribunal as to why such protection would be available to the  appellant
    in his home area.  In those circumstances  that  issue  needed  further
    consideration as to the safety of returning home,  also  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.

15.  Given the limited area of consideration I found that it was  reasonable
    for the matter to be retained in the Upper Tribunal for  such  findings
    to be made.  A determination was promulgated by me in that matter.

16.  Thus the matter returns before me to determine those issues which  were
    raised.

17.  Mr Plowright, who represents the appellant, invited  me  to  find  that
    the appellant having been of adverse interest to the Taliban either  in
    the Bara Khyber Agency or in Peshawar City would remain of interest  to
    those groups.

18.  Whether it had been the Taliban  in  the  Bara  Khyber  Agency  or  the
    Lashkar-e-Islam in the Peshawar City both groups  had  become  stronger
    and indeed had now amalgamated forces.  Support for that contention was
    provided by an article "The Long War Journal" by Bill Roggio  dated  12
    March 2015.

19.  The Article sought to confirm that two Taliban groups, which had  split
    in 2014 from others over a leadership dispute and the  Lashkar-e-Islam,
    had united and reformed the movement of the Taliban in  Pakistan.   The
    announcement of the reunification of the  two  large  factions  of  the
    Jihadist group, one led by Omar  Khalid  Khorasani  and  the  other  by
    Mullah Fazlullah, and the merger with Lashkar-e-Islam was announced  by
    a spokesman for one of the factions.  The amir for the  new  group  had
    not yet been named nor chosen.

20.  It remained unclear if the  two  Mehsud  factions,  led  by  Sajna  and
    Sheheryar Mehsud are in talks to rejoin the movement of the Taliban  in
    Pakistan.

21.  The article went on to speak of the  fact  that  the  movement  of  the
    Taliban in Pakistan had suffered several defections in 2014  which  had
    greatly reduced the  group's  power  and  influence  in  north  western
    Pakistan and beyond.  A group which had split was led by  Maulana  Umar
    Qasmi who opposed peace negotiations with the Pakistani Government.   A
    further split was from the organisation run by Mehsud which accused its
    parent organisation of being "un-Islamic".  Another  faction  in  north
    Waziristan led by Sheheryar  Mehsud  also  broke  away  declaring  that
    extortion,  kidnapping  for  ransom  and  bombing  public  places   was
    forbidden by Islam.

22.  Indeed I note from the documentation, that was presented to the  First-
    tier Tribunal and in particular at page 3 of the bundle, there  was  an
    article from Wikipedia  on  the  Tehrik-i-Taliban  Pakistan  which  was
    related to the Taliban movement of Pakistan dated 4 November,  speaking
    of the fact that the TTP had fragmented into at least four  groups  and
    that the defections had left the group in considerable disarray.

23.  It is also noted from the same article that on 25 August 2008  Pakistan
    had banned the group, frozen its bank account and assets and barred  it
    from media appearances.  The government also  announced  that  bounties
    would be placed on prominent leaders of the  TTP.   In  August  2009  a
    missile strike from a US drone had killed one of  the  leaders  of  the
    TTP.  Fighting had broken out between various  factions  as  to  a  new
    leader.  In August Pakistani security officials had captured the  chief
    spokesperson of the TTP.   The  report  speaks  of  various  leadership
    struggles within the group.

24.  So far as the structure of the TTP reference is made at page 7  of  the
    same article in the bundle namely that it differs in structure  to  the
    Afghan Taliban and that it lacks a central command and is a much looser
    coalition of various militant groups, united by hostility  towards  the
    central government in Islamabad.  Several analysts described the  TTP's
    structure as a loose network of dispersed constituent groups that  vary
    in size and in levels of coordination.  The various factions of the TTP
    tend to be limited to their local areas of influence and often lack the
    ability to expand their  operations  beyond  that  territory.   In  its
    original form the TTP had Baitullah Mehsud as its amir. Following  that
    person's death the organisation experienced turmoil among  its  leading
    militants.  In August 2009 Hakimullah Mehsud had been appointed as  the
    amir.  It was he seemingly who was killed in January 2010 during  a  US
    drone attack.

25.  A report published in the Express Tribune in  December  2011  described
    the  network  as  "crumbling"  with  "funds  dwindling  and  infighting
    intensifying".  According to various TTP operatives,  the  difficulties
    stemmed from differences of opinion within TTP leadership  on  pursuing
    peace talks with Islamabad.

26.  Considering  once  again  the  original  documentation  that  had  been
    presented before the First-tier Tribunal there was also an article from
    the website showing pictures  of  the  conflict  in  the  Tirah  Valley
    region.  They are to be found at pages 47 onwards in  the  bundle.   It
    speaks of the Khyber tribal area in north Pakistan being a battleground
    for various armed  groups,  it  being  a  gateway  linking  the  Afghan
    northern corridor to Pakistan it has been the  scene  of  many  battles
    between the Pakistani  army  and  the  rebels.   There  has  been  some
    semblance of normality more recently.   It  is  said  that  over  1,800
    people had been killed in the previous  year.   The  article  is  dated
    2014.  A spokesman for the Khyber Agency  spoke  of  more  than  80,000
    people being displaced in March 2013 alone as a result of the  fighting
    between the three main armed groups, the Lashkar-e-Islam, the Ansar-ul-
    Islam and the Pakistani Taliban.

27.  There was a further article from the internet speaking as to  the  role
    of Lashkar-i-Islam in Pakistan's Khyber Agency  dated  September  2014.
    That is to be found at pages 62-63 of the original bundle.

28.  It is said that that agency remains a  bastion  of  militant  activity.
    It was suffering from a blend of sectarian violence and Talibanisation.
     It reveals now at least one militant group,  the  Lashkar-i-Islam  has
    turned from a vigilante crime fighting organisation  into  a  terrorist
    group allied with the TTP.  That agency is  geographically  significant
    because it borders Peshawar.  It  is  a  critical  hub  of  the  area's
    weapons trade.  It said it has been a hotbed of  militancy  ever  since
    the Tirah Valley and has been acting as a key territory used  by  anti-
    state militancy.  This area seems to be reflective of militants fleeing
    across the borders in Afghanistan.  It speaks  of  Pakistan's  military
    being heavily engaged in Waziristan and being hard pressed to give full
    attention to the Khyber Agency.

29.  Whether the appellant could safely return to his home area be that  the
    Khyber  Agency  or  Peshawar  City  is  to  some  extent  a  matter  of
    speculation.

30.  On one hand it could reasonably be argued that there  is  little  about
    the appellant's current individual and family circumstances which would
    make him of any interest to the  Taliban.   The  Taliban  in  the  Bara
    Khyber were interested in him particularly because of the influence  of
    his  grandfather.   The  grandfather  is  now  dead.   Whatever   group
    kidnapped  him  in  Peshawar  were  concerned  to  exploit  his  family
    situation and as I understand the matter the family as a whole are  now
    living  in China.

31.  Thus there would seem to be little reason why the  Taliban  would  find
    the appellant of interest to  them  or  indeed  be  motivated  to  seek
    further funds from him.  The fact that the appellant has come to  their
    attention on two occasions is a matter that must be borne  in  mind  as
    also the general situation in that region.  Given the hard  task  which
    Pakistani forces have dealing with the militants in that area, it is in
    my view somewhat optimistic to conclude that they would be able to give
    adequate protection to the appellant were it to be  the  case  that  he
    came to the adverse attention of the Taliban.  The  appellant  will  be
    returning to the area after a considerable break of time and his return
    may be the subject of comment which leads to some potential  danger  of
    further enquiry.

32.  Although I consider that the risk to the appellant is remote  it  seems
    to me that in all the circumstances a  potential  danger  to  him  upon
    return to his home area cannot reasonably be discounted.

33.  I consider  therefore  the  issue  of  internal  relocation.   In  that
    connection I have been given the Country Information and Guidance dated
    as at 6 October 2014.  That report has rather limited  comment  on  the
    subject but it set out at paragraph  2.4.   It  makes  the  point  that
    because of Pakistan's size and diversity internal relocation  offers  a
    degree of anonymity and the opportunity for victims to seek refuge from
    discrimination or violence.  In most cases there are options  available
    for members of most ethnic and  religious  minorities  to  be  able  to
    relocate to  areas  of  relative  safety  elsewhere  in  Pakistan.   In
    particular many large urban  centres  are  home  to  mixed  ethnic  and
    religious communities and offer greater opportunities  for  employment,
    access to services and a greater degree of state protection than  other
    areas.

34.  Further in that connection I bear in mind the guidance  that  has  been
    provided by the Tribunal in AW  (sufficiency  of  protection)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC).  This was promulgated in January 2011.  I can see
    no reason why the appellant could not  safely  relocate  to  the  other
    larger cities in Pakistan.  I note indeed the evidence  that  had  been
    provided in the course of  the  previous  hearing  that  an  uncle  had
    business in Hyderabad which was a city some 1,000 miles away  from  the
    applicant's home area.  I find no reason why the  appellant  would  not
    return to live there or in Lahore or other main cities.

35.  Even on a factual basis there is little or no evidence that  the  group
    of Taliban that had sought to recruit him in the Bara Khyber region had
    any continuing interest in him.  Certainly there is no indication  that
    from 2008 until 2010 they sought to follow him to Peshawar City.   They
    had sought to recruit him as a member.  The group  that  kidnapped  him
    was interested more in money.  After the money was paid  the  appellant
    remained also for a period of time in Peshawar  before  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.

36.  I do not find that any group of the Taliban  or  related  organisations
    have any continuing interest in the appellant.  It is also  clear  from
    the background material which has been cited  that  generally  speaking
    the Taliban are not a united national body but rather a series of local
    groups  who  have  been  in  considerable  disarray   and   in   mutual
    disagreement for a number of years.  Even with the amalgamation that is
    now spoken of, of three groups, that does not include a number of other
    groups.  Although clearly the influence of the Taliban and the  various
    groups is greater in the border region there  is  nothing  to  indicate
    that they have any real influence elsewhere in Pakistan,  certainly  no
    interest in seeking the appellant or indeed having  the  infrastructure
    to share information between one group and the other even if they  had.



37.  It is clear that the Pakistan authorities are intent on  taking  action
    against the organisation or groups that  they  are  carrying  out  such
    actions in Pakistan.

38.  In the circumstances I do not find, as I have indicated, that there  is
    any reasonable likelihood of the appellant  being  at  risk  from  such
    groups either through their interest in him  or  his  involvement  with
    them.  I find, therefore, that internal relocation is properly open  to
    the appellant and that such relocation would  not  be  unreasonable  or
    unduly harsh.  He is a relatively young man and I can see no reason  at
    all why he could not have proper access to means  of  economic  support
    and livelihood elsewhere in Pakistan.

39.  In the circumstances, therefore, I  uphold  the  decisions  which  have
    been made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeals in all respects.  Insofar that I found there to  have  been  an
    error in the approach taken to asylum and  humanitarian  protection,  I
    make such findings and dismiss those appeals on such  findings  in  any
    event.

40.  In the circumstances I find that the order for deportation  stands  and
    that there has been no adjudication made favourably  to  the  appellant
    which would render his removal in  breach  of  any  obligation  of  the
    respondent or UK authorities.

Notice of Decision

41.  In all the circumstances therefore the appellant's appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  decisions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    affirmed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
