
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02523/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal                |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 June 2014                                  |On 5 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                    f m m
                      (anonymity direction maintained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, FMM is a citizen of  Zambia.   He  appealed  against  an
    order made for his deportation dated 2 December 2013 on Article 8  ECHR
    grounds.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly;
    Mr Getlevog) in a determination  promulgated  on  3  March  2014.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Peter  Lane  in  the
    following terms:

         Despite the terms of [20] of the determination, it is arguable that
         the First-tier Tribunal has not given  adequate  attention  to  the
         reports of Jayne Foster (probation officer) and  Charlotte  Barclay
         (social worker); particularly the latter, was of the  opinion  that
         it is "highly likely to be harmful and destructive to  [the  son's]
         development if there is another major change in his  life  and  his
         father is deported."

 3. The Tribunal did  not  deal  directly  with  those  items  of  evidence
    referred to in the grant of permission although at [20], it wrote:

    We are bound to be selective in our references  to  the  evidence  when
    explaining the reasons for our decision.  However, we wish to emphasise
    that we considered all the evidence in  the  round  when  reaching  our
    conclusions.

 4. The Tribunal went on at [21] to find the appellant was not a witness of
    truth.  The appellant had been charged, in August 2011,  with  wounding
    with intent to cause grievously bodily harm and possessing an offensive
    weapon in a public place.  He pleaded guilty  to  the  offences  on  16
    November 2011 and was sentenced to a term of four years'  imprisonment.
    The child, who is the focus of these proceedings, we shall refer to  as
    K.  K was born in 2010.  The Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant  had
    given a false  account  of  his  relationship  with  K's  mother.   The
    appellant claimed that he had had a brief  sexual  encounter  with  her
    when it was clear from other evidence emanating from the appellant that
    he had had an enduring relationship  with  the  mother.   The  Tribunal
    found the appellant was "prepared to paint a wholly  false  picture  of
    the relationship with [the mother of K] in an attempt to  persuade  the
    respondent from ordering his deportation".  The  Tribunal  went  on  to
    find that the appellant had also painted a "false picture  [concerning]
    the state of his  relationship  with  his  son"  [23].    At  [24]  the
    Tribunal wrote:

    The appellant claimed at  the  hearing  that  whilst  he  travelled  to
    Huddersfield on a daily basis between Monday and Friday of  each  week,
    he was nevertheless always back in Sheffield in time to pick up his son
    from nursery at 3 o' clock in the afternoon. Ms M, on the  other  hand,
    told us that it was she who habitually picked up K  from  nursery,  and
    that this was due to the fact that the appellant did not  normally  get
    home from university until around 6 or 7 o'clock in the evening.  After
    Mr Brown informed her of the appellant's testimony in relation to  this
    issue (something that he did by way of supposed  re-examination)  Ms  M
    slightly modified her evidence to say that it "may  be"  he  came  back
    earlier on Mondays and Wednesdays. However, in view of  the  manner  in
    which that particular aspect of her  testimony  was  adduced,  we  have
    attached little weight to it. Nevertheless, we consider  that  for  the
    most part Ms M was a truthful witness. By contrast, we  find  that  the
    appellant was being untruthful by deliberately  exaggerating  the  role
    that he currently plays in his son's day-to-day care.




 5. Likewise,  the  Tribunal  made  adverse  findings  in  respect  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's account of his involvement in his  son's
    day-to-day life:

    There was also a fairly major discrepancy between the appellant and  Ms
    M concerning her shift-pattern as a nurse. The  appellant  stated  that
    his mother worked three day-shifts a week. His  mother,  on  the  other
    hand, stated that she worked on two night-shifts a week.  This  was  an
    important matter because her shift-pattern must necessarily dictate the
    times when Ms M will be unable to cater K's immediate needs and thus is
    required to make alternative arrangements to  meet  them.  We  have  no
    reason to suppose that Ms M  did  not  give  a  truthful  and  accurate
    account of her own shift-pattern. On the  other  hand,  whilst  he  may
    genuinely have believed what he had to say about the matter, it remains
    a matter of concern that the appellant should have been so ignorant  of
    the true position, and this in our view speaks volumes about the extent
    to which he is genuinely involved in the provision of his son's day-to-
    day care.

 6. At [28], the  Tribunal  considered  the  appellant's  funding  and  the
    likelihood that he poses a risk of harm to others;

    In the above circumstances, we are unable to treat the appellant's plea
    of 'guilty' as a sincere expression of remorse. Whilst it is true  that
    the appellant did express some regret at the hearing (as indeed he  had
    in his witness statement) for the fact that  he  had  inflicted  injury
    upon  his  victim,  this  did  not  come  close   to   accepting   full
    responsibility for his  criminal  behaviour.  This  in  turn  makes  it
    impossible for us to accept his claim that he has  addressed  the  root
    cause  of  his  offending.  Although  the  appellant  accepts  that  he
    committed the offence whilst in drink - a fact that  is  in  any  event
    apparent from the judge's sentencing  remarks  -  his  account  of  the
    circumstances of the  offence  does  not  in  our  view  admit  to  the
    possibility that drink was the only or even the principle cause of  him
    committing the offence in question. On the contrary, he insists that he
    was merely defending his mother's property against the  actions  of  an
    aggressive drunk; something that he would presumably have wished to  do
    whatever had been his state of sobriety at the time. As  the  appellant
    continues to deny deliberately stabbing his victim with  the  intention
    of causing him  to suffer grievous bodily harm, it is difficult to  see
    how he can at the same time claim that he behaved in a manner that  was
    out of character due  to  drink.  To  the  extent  that  he  has  since
    moderated his drinking habits, we are therefore satisfied that this  is
    because he has been given to believe that it will  serve  him  well  in
    seeking to resist his deportation rather because he  truly  appreciates
    the reasons that lie behind his need to  change  his  ways.  For  these
    reasons, we are not persuaded by the view of Ms Jayne Foster  that  (i)
    the appellant now only represents a medium risk of causing serious harm
    to others, or (ii) it is unlikely that  he  will  repeat  his  previous
    behaviour (i.e. wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm) for
    so long as his current circumstances remain unchanged [see  her  letter
    of the 23rd January 2014 at page  116  of  the  appellant's  bundle  of
    documents]. On the contrary, we are satisfied that unless or until  the
    appellant is able fully and sincerely to acknowledge responsibility for
    his criminal behaviour, he will continue to pose a significant risk  of
    causing serious harm to members of the public.




 7. It is important to note from  [28]  that  the  Tribunal  gave  detailed
    reasons for not accepting the conclusions  of  Jayne  Foster  that  the
    appellant only represents a medium risk of causing harm to others.   It
    was clearly open to the Tribunal to disagree with the conclusions of Ms
    Foster provided they gave adequate reasons for doing so.  I  find  they
    have given adequate reasons.

 8. Of significance in this  appeal  are  the  reports  of  social  worker,
    Charlotte Barclay.  The first report is a risk assessment in respect of
    the appellant dated 15 August 2013.  The second report dated 3 February
    2014 deals in greater detail with K where the appellant's  relationship
    with K and  the  likely  impact  upon  the  child  of  the  appellant's
    deportation.  Put simply, the appellant submits the Tribunal has  given
    adequate reasons for reaching conclusions which differ from those of Ms
    Barclay.  Her primary conclusion in her second report is that quoted in
    the grant of permission.  In addition to that  conclusion,  Ms  Barclay
    noted that K had "significant attachment difficulties ...  due  to  the
    experiences he had as a young child in his mother's care".   She  noted
    that K is currently being assessed by a child psychotherapist.  It  was
    felt that the appellant would provide a positive male role model for  K
    during his childhood.  Ms Barclay observed:

    K has developed a close relationship with [the appellant] since he  has
    been living with him; I have observed positive  interaction  between  K
    and [the appellant] and K is very settled in his father's care.  K is a
    difficult child to care for at times and [the  appellant]  has  managed
    this well, he is able to support with K's bedtime routine  and  morning
    routine.  K, who has had problems with eating meals since he  moved  to
    live with his grandmother, will eat meals with his father.

 9. As I have noted above the Tribunal made  the  clear  finding  that  the
    appellant had deliberately exaggerated the role that he  plays  in  his
    son's  day-to-day  care.   The  Tribunal  made  the  further  following
    findings at [34]:

    There is no question of K emigrating to Zambia in order to be with  his
    father. He is a British citizen and thus entitled to  all  the  health-
    care, educational, and other benefits attaching thereto. We acknowledge
    that K's long-term interests might be better served by him having daily
    contact with his father. However, we feel that this is capable of being
    over-stated. The appellant currently studies  full-time  at  university
    and has a significant period of commuting at the beginning and  end  of
    each  day.  Following  graduation  he  will  no  doubt  seek  full-time
    employment (for what other purpose is he currently pursuing a course of
    higher education?). We  are  therefore  satisfied  that,  whatever  the
    future may hold for the appellant, the responsibility for  meeting  K's
    emotional, physical, and educational needs will, as now,  very  largely
    fall to be discharged by the appellant's mother throughout  the  period
    of his minority. We do not therefore regard the appellant's presence in
    the United Kingdom as critical to K's long-term welfare.




10. The assertion made in the grounds of appeal [20] (the grounds to First-
    tier Tribunal) ids that  the  Tribunal  had  sought  to  "minimise  the
    appellant's role as both the father and  his  role  [with]  the  social
    services [in the] scheme  for  K's  future  care".   I  disagree.   The
    Tribunal had the advantage of hearing  oral  evidence  and  considering
    that evidence together the documents.  It was the  Tribunal's  task  to
    establish a factual matrix upon which to apply the relevant  law.   The
    Tribunal came to different conclusions regarding the  appellant's  role
    in K's day-to-day care from those used by Ms Barclay to  base  her  own
    conclusions.  The passage from Ms Barclay's second report, which I have
    quoted above, appears to minimise the role played in K's  care  by  his
    primary current carer, his grandmother.  It is clear, however, from the
    Tribunal's findings of fact (especially [34]) that the appellant is not
    actually present in the family home for significant periods of the  day
    and that it is the grandmother  who  provides  much  of  the  care.   I
    acknowledge that it may have been helpful if the Tribunal  had  engaged
    directly with the contents of Ms Barclay's report  but  I  can  see  no
    reason to reject the Tribunal's assertion [20] that it  had  considered
    all the evidence in reaching its conclusion.

11. In addition, the grounds seem to confuse the different roles played  in
    the proceedings by Ms Barclay, as an expert witness, and the First-tier
    Tribunal, whose task was to make primary findings of fact and to  apply
    the relevant law.  I have no doubt at all  that  Ms  Barclay  genuinely
    believed that K would benefit from having the presence of his father in
    the home on a day-to-day basis.  That  much  was  acknowledged  by  the
    Tribunal at [34].  It was not, however, any part of Ms  Barclay's  role
    to consider that need in the wider context of the appellant's offending
    and  the  public  interest  concerned  with  his  removal  by  way   of
    deportation; that was the task of the Tribunal.   Ms  Barclay's  report
    must be considered in the context of the standard or  specification  by
    reference to which she has assessed K's welfare. It is  clear  from  Ms
    Barclay's report that she has approached the assessment of K's  welfare
    by reference to the criterion governing applications under the Children
    Act 1989 which, as she  notes  in  her  report,  "highlights  that  the
    child's welfare should be the paramount consideration".  The  Tribunal,
    on the other hand, is obliged to consider the best interests of K as  a
    primary consideration (see Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and ZH (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC 4).   The  "paramount"
    principle of the Children Act trumps all other considerations; the best
    interests of the child, as protected by Section 55, may  be  outweighed
    by other factors which the Tribunal found to exist in this instance and
    which included a "strong public interest that exists in deporting  [the
    appellant]." [38].

12. I am aware that it is not my job to fill in the gaps which may exist in
    the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  by  supplying  the  detailed
    consideration of Ms Barclay's report with which, it is true to say, the
    Tribunal did not directly engage.  However, I find  that  the  Tribunal
    has not perpetrated an error of  law  of  a  kind  which  requires  the
    determination to be set aside.   Ultimately,  Ms  Barclay's  conclusion
    that it was "highly likely  that  K's  welfare  will  be  significantly
    affected" should the  appellant  be  deported  was  based  (i)  on  the
    understanding that K's welfare was of paramount importance, a basis  of
    assessment which differed from that ("best interests") properly adopted
    by the Tribunal; and (ii) on her acceptance of evidence  that indicated
    that A had a greater  day-to-day  involvement  in  K's  life  than  the
    Tribunal, having the advantage of considering all the  evidence,  found
    as a fact. With those observations in mind, I find that the  Tribunal's
    own analysis was both cogent and supported by the evidence and I am not
    satisfied, as  the  grounds  assert,  that  the  Tribunal  has  ignored
    important and relevant evidence.   I  am  satisfied  that  this  appeal
    should be dismissed.



DECISION

13. This appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

