
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02123/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 August 2014                             |On 5 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     RN
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of France, originally from Cameroon, born on
    25 June 1962.  He arrived in the UK in 1995 from Cameroon.  He  made  a
    claim for asylum in 1996 which was refused and his appeal against  that
    decision was dismissed.

 2. Taking the further  narrative  from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant married in April  1998  to  a  French  national
    although they later divorced.  He married again in February 2006 to MF,
    in Cameroon.

 3. These proceedings arise out of a decision made  by  the  respondent  to
    make a deportation  order  under  the  deportation  provisions  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the   EEA
    Regulations").

 4. That  decision  was  made  following  the  appellant's  conviction  for
    offences of assault occasioning actual bodily harm  and  cruelty  to  a
    person under the age of 16 years, for which he was sentenced on 16  May
    2012 to a term of imprisonment of three years in total.   His  wife  MF
    was also convicted of  an  offence  of  child  cruelty  for  which  she
    received a sentence of nine  months'  imprisonment  suspended  for  two
    years, the suspended sentence being subject to certain conditions.  She
    was also required to undertake 100 hours of unpaid community work.

 5. The appellant appealed against the decision to make a deportation order
    and his appeal came before a panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  14
    April 2014, consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge N. Paul and Mrs  E.
    Morton, a non-legal member.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by an Upper  Tribunal  Judge  ("UTJ").
    Summarising the grant of permission, the UTJ stated  that  the  panel's
    assessment is arguably entirely focused on past events.  Although there
    was reference in the determination to a NOMS assessment, it was said to
    be arguable that  the  panel  did  not  consider  the  future  risk  of
    reoffending and harm.

 7. In order to put my judgment into context, it is necessary  to  set  out
    the circumstances of the offences of which the appellant was convicted.
     Those circumstances are best seen from the sentencing remarks  of  His
    Honour  Judge  Saggerson.   HHJ  Saggerson  stated  that  the   assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm consisted of "a series of injuries  that
    resulted from an incident on 28 October 2011 in which you attacked your
    ten year old daughter with the sharp point of a car key and you did  so
    on her scalp, and causing at least four wounds..."

 8. The judge concluded that this was not a momentary loss of self  control
    because there were two separate incidents, one inside the house and one
    on the balcony, both of which in parts  of  the  episode  involved  his
    using his car key to "skewer" the head of his daughter.  The judge went
    on to state that to make matters worse, the assault  and  the  injuries
    came at the very end of a period of about eleven months  in  which  the
    appellant had manifestly not only failed to  look  after  his  daughter
    properly, but it was a period during which  he  had  assaulted  her  on
    previous occasions, that being the subject matter of the child  cruelty
    charge.  The injuries did not require hospital  or  medical  attention,
    however.

 9. Judge Saggerson went on to state that the  upshot  of  the  appellant's
    behaviour culminating on 28 October, is that the child DN, having  been
    deliberately taken by the appellant from Cameroon and brought to London
    for a better life, had now lost all contact with her  family  including
    all of her siblings or half-siblings.  He described that  as  having  a
    potentially drastic impact on the child. The judge concluded  that  the
    offences were "of high culpability  that  involves  a  high  degree  of
    harm".   He  rejected  the  submission  that  the  28  October  episode
    represented  a  momentary  loss  of  temper.   He  also  rejected   the
    submission that his behaviour to DN arose in circumstances where he was
    doing his "heroic best" to struggle with four very young children.   He
    gave reasons for rejecting that submission.  Giving further  detail  of
    the offences, he stated that the child cruelty charge covered a  series
    of assaults over an appreciable  period  of  time,  being  some  eleven
    months.

10. Judge Saggerson concluded that it was impossible to  say  on  how  many
    occasions assaults occurred but it was clear that there were  a  number
    of them and they were  not  isolated  events.   He  stated  that  those
    occasions involved beating DN with a sandal over all different parts of
    her body and tying her hands together with a belt so that she could  be
    beaten with the sandal. It also  involved  beating  her  with  a  belt.
    Those assaults involved  relatively  modest  injuries,  consisting   of
    bruising and lacerations.

11. The judge went on to state that the appellant made DN at the age  of  9
    and 10 years old, adopt "stress punishment  positions"  where  she  was
    required over extended  periods  of  time  to  stand  in  uncomfortable
    positions, sometimes  in  the  freezing  cold,  because  the  appellant
    thought he was exercising discipline over her.

12. Returning for a moment to  the  appellant's  family  circumstances,  he
    disclosed in response to the Secretary of State's request  for  details
    of his family that he had  two  children  by  two  previous  wives  and
    mothers with whom he has no contact, and four children with his current
    wife, MF. Save that in respect of the oldest child, DN, she is not  his
    birth child, as established by DNA tests.

13. Again, putting into context my judgment and the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal, it is necessary to refer to the  proceedings  that  took
    place in the Family Division of  the  High  Court  before  Mrs  Justice
    Theis, whereby the local authority sought  care  orders  for  all  four
    children, together with placement orders.  The hearing before Theis  J.
    took place over  a  period  of  five  days.   Her  judgment  goes  into
    considerable detail about the family  circumstances  and  the  evidence
    that she heard.  The judgment is dated 24 May 2013.   At  [70]   it  is
    stated that DN would be at considerable risk of harm without someone to
    make decisions about her future care.  It is stated that  she  did  not
    want to return to the care of her mother and father.  At [71] Theis  J.
    stated as follows:

         "In my judgment they have both acted in a cruel way to her.   I  am
         satisfied they both could have done more in  providing  information
         about her true origins.  They have shown no empathy at all with the
         circumstances she now finds herself in, through  no  fault  of  her
         own.  It is more likely than not the father knows the  truth  about
         her background and circumstances.  For reasons which are unclear he
         has deliberately chosen not to give  any  relevant  information  to
         assist locate her birth family.  He makes no detailed reference  to
         this in his written statements and was unconvincingly vague in  his
         oral evidence."

14. At [73] she stated that it was not too late for the appellant  and  the
    child's mother to provide information which in her  judgment  they  had
    been withholding, to assist on the issue of her  age  which  the  judge
    concluded was so fundamental to her welfare.

15. At [76] of her judgment she referred to the evidential  foundation  for
    the failure to protect in the past having clearly been established "and
    the consequent risk in the future is strong and compelling" for reasons
    which were then described in the succeeding paragraphs.  At [76(4)] she
    concluded that it was more likely  than  not  that  this  was  a  house
    controlled by the father (the appellant) through frequent  threats  and
    fear and, on occasions, physical assaults of both the  mother  and  the
    children.   That  assessment,  she  concluded,  was  supported  by  the
    father's evidence, that is the appellant.  She  went  on  to  state  as
    follows at [76(5)]:

         "Up until his most recent written statement and  oral  evidence  he
         has denied any harm to these children.  The limited  admissions  in
         his evidence, in my judgment, minimise the reality of what went  on
         in the family home and his conduct to the mother and children.  He,
         in my judgment, has not been truthful  and  has  shown  a  chilling
         disregard for the welfare of all the children.  He  has  failed  to
         offer any credible explanation to assist in establishing a credible
         account of DN's background, when he is the only one who  holds  the
         key  to  providing  that   information.    That   was   graphically
         illustrated when he was unwilling to provide any information  about
         the photograph produced during the hearing.  His  account  that  he
         did not know who it was other than a vague account of  it  being  a
         relation he could not name was wholly  unconvincing.   His  limited
         admissions about his behaviour to  the  mother  and  children  came
         across as inherently unreliable."

16. In its determination the First-tier Tribunal referred to the sentencing
    remarks, gave a  detailed  summary  of  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    deportation and referred on several occasions to the judgment of  Theis
    J.  In the determination under the heading "Conclusions & Reasons"  the
    panel stated that it had regard to the complex history of the appellant
    as set out in the judgment of Theis J.   In  general  terms  the  panel
    referred to the circumstances of the offences and concluded  that  "the
    SSHD's analysis of the facts of this case does cross  the  'imperative'
    threshold."

My assessment

17. Before me were a number of documents submitted by the appellant.  These
    included manuscript letters written to the Upper Tribunal asserting his
    Article 8 right to family and private life, also asserting that  he  is
    not at risk of reoffending or at risk of harm.  A  separate  bundle  of
    documents submitted by the appellant to the Upper Tribunal consists  of
    17 items as described in the manuscript index.  These  included  copies
    of correspondence between  the  appellant  and  the  offender  manager,
    employment or tax records, correspondence from prison  in  relation  to
    requests to see his children and monthly progress reports from prison.

18. At the hearing before me, after I had explained to  the  appellant  the
    purpose of the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal, and having asked  him
    what matters he wanted to draw to my attention, he said that he did not
    understand why he was still in prison.  He referred to the OASys Report
    which he said showed a low risk to the public. He said that if  he  was
    released he would follow a course which would show him how to  be  more
    aware of looking after his children.   At the moment he has no children
    under his care, which I took to be a reference to the issue of the risk
    of reoffending.

19. Ms Isherwood relied on the 'rule 24' response, arguing that  there  was
    no error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   She
    referred to the  OASys  Report,  which  she  said  indicated  that  the
    appellant did not accept his guilt or that he had trafficked DN to  the
    UK.  I was referred to the determination of the First-tier Tribunal and
    to the references in it to the decision of Theis J.

20. Although it was accepted on behalf of the respondent  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's reasons were brief, it was  submitted  that  they  were
    legally sustainable.  The decision of Theis J.  referred  to  the  best
    interests of the children.

21. In reply, the appellant said that his sentence had been  served  on  16
    October 2013 although it was not until 18 October 2013 that a  decision
    was made to issue him with a deportation order.  He had been in  prison
    for one and a half years and  there  had  been  enough  opportunity  to
    assess his case. The UKBA, he said, had to explain why he has not  been
    released.

22. In relation to the issues raised on behalf of the respondent,  he  said
    that he had written numerous letters showing how remorseful he was  and
    that was why he did not appeal against his conviction.  DN came to  the
    UK legally, being a French citizen.  In prison there  were  no  courses
    available to him.

23. It does not appear to be in dispute, and was found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that the appellant was  entitled  to  the  highest  level  of
    protection against removal under the EEA Regulations,  namely  that  he
    could only be removed on imperative grounds of public  security.   This
    results from the Tribunal having found that he had resided  in  the  UK
    for a continuous period of at least ten years  prior  to  the  relevant
    decision.

24.  Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations, so far as  relevant,  states  as
    follows:


        "21.- Decisions taken on public policy, public security and  public
        health grounds


        (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA  decision
        taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
        health.


        (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


        (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in  respect  of  a  person
        with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
        serious grounds of public policy or public security.


        (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
        grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


        (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
        least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
        (b) is under the  age  of  18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
        necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the  Convention
        on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly  of  the
        United Nations on 20th November 1989.


        (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
        or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
        preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
        with the following principles-


        (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;


        (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
        of the person concerned;


        (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
        genuine, present and
        sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
        interests of society;


        (d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
        relate to considerations of
        general prevention do not justify the decision;


        (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
        justify the decision.


        (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
        policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
        in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
        considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
        economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
        in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
        into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
        his country of origin..."

25. Of most significance for the purposes of the appeal before  me  is  the
    question  of  the  appellant's  personal  conduct  being  required   to
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society. That was  essentially  the
    basis on which permission to appeal was granted.  That is to  say,  the
    First-tier Tribunal's treatment of that issue.  It is true to say  that
    under the subheading "Conclusions & Reasons" there is no  reference  by
    the First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  question  of  risk  of  reoffending.
    However, the panel at [9] referred to the  decision  of  Theis  J.  and
    stated that their decision

         "must be read in close conjunction  with the very detailed findings
         of fact made by the High Court Judge  in  the  Family  Division  in
         dealing with the background of the family, and  in  particular  the
         appellant's and his wife's credibility and general parenting skills
         and experience".

26. At [17] the panel quoted from the decision of Theis J.  at  [76(4)  and
    (5)], to which I have referred at [15] above.

27. At [20] of its determination the First-tier Tribunal stated that it was
    of particular importance, so far as the panel was  concerned,  to  take
    into account [40] of the Secretary of State's decision letter.  At  its
    own [20] the panel referred to the decision letter as stating that  the
    appellant had contravened immigration laws by bringing  DN  to  the  UK
    illegally.  It referred to  the  lack  of  any  remorse  regarding  her
    treatment, which showed that the appellant  was  capable  of  appalling
    treatment and disregard for her welfare. The panel  went  on  to  state
    that the Secretary of State considered that "it is necessary to prevent
    him re-offending in the UK and that he  be  deported  from  the  UK  to
    preserve the safety and security of those who are resident in the UK."

28. At [29] the panel stated that it was satisfied "adding to the  analysis
    of [the respondent] that the appellant in this case merits  deportation
    on the basis that it satisfies the test  of  'imperative'."   In  other
    words, it is apparent that the panel concluded that it was in agreement
    with the Secretary of State's reasons for deportation,  thus  including
    the conclusion by the Secretary of State that the  appellant's  removal
    was necessary to prevent him reoffending in the UK.

29.  At the start of [29] the panel stated that it was satisfied  that  the
    respondent's  analysis  of  the  facts  "does  cross  the  'imperative'
    threshold".  It is evident from the panel's  decision  that  it  agreed
    with the reasons given by the Secretary of State for  the  decision  to
    removal the appellant.

30. In the National Offender Management Service ("NOMS") report  it  states
    at page 4 that the level of risk of serious harm (taken from the  OASys
    Report) was high.  The details of who was at  risk  are  identified  as
    children who are under his care.  It is to be noted on page  5  of  the
    NOMS report that it was understood that there  was  no  abuse  directed
    towards his own children and that once he was  released  the  appellant
    would be trying to regain custody of those children. Of course,  it  is
    to be remembered that Theis J. decided that his children were to be the
    subject of care orders.  At page 6 of the NOMS report  it  states  that
    the likelihood of reconviction is low.

31. Whilst it is true that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  expressly,  in
    its reasons, state that it had made an assessment of the  risk  of  the
    appellant reoffending, I am satisfied that when read  as  a  whole  the
    determination does reveal that the First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that
    the appellant does represent a risk of reoffending.   This  is  evident
    from its reference to the detailed judgment of  Theis  J.  and  by  its
    agreement  with  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for  making  the
    deportation  order.   Again,  at  [20]  it  expressly  stated  that  of
    particular importance was the Secretary of State's decision  letter  at
    [40].  That paragraph referred to the conclusion or assessment  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  that  the  appellant  did  represent  a  risk  of
    reoffending.

32. Whilst the appellant does not presently have children in his care,  not
    least because he is detained, it is evident that he has in the past had
    close contact with children. He has two children by two previous  wives
    or mothers, albeit that he has no  contact  with  them.   He  has  four
    children with his current wife, who, as  I  have  indicated,  was  also
    convicted of an offence of child cruelty.  The appellant has  expressed
    a clear intention to try to re-establish  contact  with  his  children.
    Whether in relation to those children or others with whom he may become
    associated, there is evidence from which the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    entitled to conclude that he represented a risk  of  reoffending  which
    constituted  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

33. No doubt the First-tier  Tribunal's  reasons  could   have  been   more
    clearly articulated in  this  distinct  respect.   However,  I  am  not
    satisfied that there is any error  of  law  in  its  decision  in  that
    regard, or indeed in any other.

34. Although the appellant sought to rely on,  amongst  other  things,  the
    OASys report,  dated 8 April 2014, which does not appear to  have  been
    before the First-tier Tribunal,  that report in fact  in  my  judgement
    reinforces  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It   refers
    repeatedly to the appellant's refusal to admit  the  offences.   It  is
    correct that manuscript letters from  the  appellant  express  remorse,
    although the OASys Report makes it clear that at that time certainly he
    did not accept his guilt. Indeed, at page 19 the report states that:

         "In my opinion this shows that there are deficits in  his  thinking
         and behaviour which can only begin  to  be  addressed  when  he  is
         willing to admit his guilt.  Until this time I  have  concerns  and
         believe that the likelihood of further assaults  on  any  child  he
         comes into contact if he feels the need  to  administer  punishment
         (sic).  I have therefore linked this area to risk of  serious  harm
         and also to offending behaviour."

35. The other documentation put before me by the appellant at  the  hearing
    does not establish any error of law  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In passing, it is worth noting that the issue that  appeared
    to concern the appellant first and foremost at the  hearing  before  me
    was why he was being detained, rather than an  explanation  of  why  it
    could  be said that he was not at risk of reoffending and why the First-
    tier Tribunal was wrong in its conclusions.

36. So far as Article 8 of the ECHR is concerned,  although  this  is  also
    referred to in the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal under the EEA
    Regulations is such that an appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR in terms
    of family or private life could not have succeeded, it  being  subsumed
    within the decision under the EEA Regulations.

37. In conclusion, I am not satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss  the  appeal  therefore
    stands.

Anonymity Order

Given that these proceedings involve children, I make an order  pursuant  to
rule  14  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008.
Consequently, this determination identifies the appellant's  child  and  the
adults associated with her, including the appellant,  by  initials  only  in
order to preserve the anonymity of that child.

Signed
              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 3/09/14
