
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: DA/02307/2013
                                                               DA/02308/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2015                       |On 17 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge mahmood


                                   Between

                                     ScM
                                     Dd
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mrs R Head, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. We will refer hereafter to the respondents as  the  appellants,  as
         they were the appellants before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  we
         shall refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent.

      2. The appellants are a mother and  daughter.  They  are  citizens  of
         Jamaica. There is a significant history to  the  appellants'  case.
         The most relevant for present purposes being  that  on  12th  March
         2013 the respondent made  a  deportation  order  against  the  main
         appellant. This was on the basis of section 32(1) of the UK Borders
         Act 2007 whereby it was contended that the  main  appellant  was  a
         foreign criminal and it was conducive to the public good  that  she
         be removed from the United Kingdom.  The main appellant's daughter,
         the second appellant, a child, also had a  deportation  order  made
         against her (date of birth not referred to for anonymity  reasons).
         A further Home Office letter dated 25th October 2013 then  replaced
         the earlier decision.

      3. The appellants appealed against the decisions  in  respect  of  the
         deportation orders and on 21 May 2014  the  appeals  had  come  for
         hearing before a Panel at the First Tier Tribunal comprising  First
         Tier Tribunal Judge Aujla and Mr F.T. Jamieson. The  Panel  allowed
         the appellants' appeals. The appeals were therefore allowed in that
         the deportation orders against the appellants were  set  aside  and
         the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

      4. The respondent appealed against the  First-tier  Panel's  decision.
         Permission to appeal was refused by First tier Tribunal  Judge  Cox
         but permission was later granted by the Upper Tribunal.

      5. A hearing dealing with the error of law issues then took  place  at
         the Upper Tribunal before a Panel  comprising  Davis  J  and  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Eshun. By way of a decision dated 28 November  2014,
         the Panel concluded that there was an error  of  law.  The  Panel's
         decision stated that the most sensible  course  was  to  remit  the
         matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  "a  redetermination  of  the
         balancing exercise."

      6.  On  16  December  2014  the  appellants'  solicitors  applied  for
         permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  against  the  Upper
         Tribunal Panel's decision of 28 November 2014.

      7. A letter dated 21 January 2015 was sent  to  the  parties  by  Vice
         President Ockelton. In it he had set out his provisional view  that
         the Upper Tribunal Panel's decision on the error of law dated  28th
         November 2014 be set aside and the  decision  be  re-made.  He  had
         sought a response from the parties within  14  days  otherwise  the
         decision would be made. The Vice President had said in  his  letter
         that:

         "Having reviewed these cases it is clear that:

          i) In its determination promulgated on 28 May 2014 the First-tier
             Tribunal allowed the claimants' appeals concluding  both  that
             Mrs  M  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
             Immigration Rules and that "the circumstances of the case  are
             sufficiently compelling (and therefore exceptional)" that  the
             public interest in deportation is outweighed;

         ii) The Secretary of State  brought  challenge  before  the  Upper
             Tribunal to both of the aforesaid conclusions; and

        iii) In its decision of 28 November 2014 the Upper Tribunal  failed
             to give any consideration to the grounds brought  in  relation
             to the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions on  paragraph  399(a)
             of the Rules."

      8. Thereafter, by way of a decision dated 11 February 2015,  the  Vice
         President, as a follow up to his letter of 21 January 2015, ordered
         that the decision of the Panel at the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  28th
         November 2014 be set aside and the matter was to be re-heard at the
         Upper Tribunal.

      9. It appears that unknown to the Vice President, the  matter  had  in
         fact been remitted for hearing following the Upper Tribunal Panel's
         decision of 28th November  2014.  A  direction  was  sent  to  that
         parties stating that,

             "It appears that notwithstanding the Vice President's decision
             of 11 February 2015, the appeal was remitted to the First-tier
             Tribunal (Judge Ruth)  for  hearing  at  Taylor  House.  At  a
             hearing at the Upper Tribunal on 19 May 2015, the parties  had
             agreed that they would write jointly to Judge Ruth to ask that
             he would refrain from  promulgating  his  decision  until  the
             Upper Tribunal has made a  fresh  decision  on  error  of  law
             matters."

     10. Judge Ruth had heard the appeal at Taylor House on 6th January 2015
         and the decision had been reserved.

     11. It was on that basis that the appeal came for  hearing  before  us.
         The parties were agreed that we were to consider the error  of  law
         matter relating to the First-tier Panel's decision made  after  the
         hearing on 21 May 2014. After our decision, the appeal  would  then
         return to Judge Ruth at Taylor House, if we found an error of law.

     12. The respondent's grounds of appeal dated 26 June  2014  in  summary
         contended as follows:

          a) There was a material misdirection in law because it would  not
             be unreasonable for the child to go to live in Jamaica as  she
             would go there with  her  mother.  Further,  the  two  British
             Children who would remain in the  United  Kingdom  would  have
             their father who would be here;

          b) There were no exceptional circumstances for  the  purposes  of
             paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules;

          c) The public interest had not been properly balanced against the
             Appellant's circumstances and the  respondent  relied  on  the
             decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of
             State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550.

          d)  There  was  a  material  misdirection  in  law  because   the
             Appellants circumstances were not  so  exceptional  that  they
             outweighed the public interest in deporting the Appellants.

     13. It is quite clear that the Panel was concerned about DD  and  noted
         with care that there was  an  independent  social  worker's  report
         dealing with the effect deportation would have on her. At paragraph
         36 the Panel noted that the expert  report  had  stated  that  DD's
         removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be   a   negative   and
         retrospective measure and unnecessary and distressing for her.  The
         Panel also noted at paragraph 37 of its decision that DD had  spent
         all of her life in the United Kingdom.

     14. There is no doubt that these were relevant and  important  matters.
         As were the matters relating to  the  main  Appellant's  other  two
         children. One was aged 4 years and the other 5 months at  the  time
         of the hearing before the Panel.  These two children were noted  to
         be British.

     15. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is a thoughtful one  in  respect
         of the best interests of the children.  The  Panel  made  it  quite
         clear at paragraph 40 that was it not for the children, the  appeal
         would have failed.  Where  we  have  found  difficulties  with  the
         decision  however  is   in   respect   of   the   public   interest
         considerations. The  references  to  the  public  interest  in  the
         decision are very limited.

     16. There is a sentence at the end  of  paragraph  40  of  the  Panel's
         decision  stating  that   the   circumstances   were   sufficiently
         compelling  and  therefore  exceptional  to  outweigh  the   public
         interest in deportation.

     17. We conclude that the respondent is  correct  to  contend  that  the
         public  interest  matters  ought  to  have   featured   much   more
         significantly in the Panel's assessment of the case.  There  was  a
         correct reference by the Panel to the Court of Appeal's decision in
         MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 1192 at paragraph 29  of  its  decision  but  it  did  not
         correctly apply that decision. As was noted at paragraph 43 of  the
         Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  "very  compelling  reasons  will  be
         required to outweigh the  public  interest  in  deportation.  These
         compelling reasons are the 'exceptional circumstances' ".

     18. In addition, as  the  judgment  of  Laws  LJ   in  SS  (Nigeria)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550
         makes clear,

             "The pressing nature of the public interest  here  is  vividly
             informed by the fact that by Parliament's express  declaration
             the public interest is injured if the  criminal's  deportation
             is not effected. Such a result could in my  judgment  only  be
             justified by a very strong claim indeed."

     19. The history of the Appellant's entry to  the  United  Kingdom,  her
         offending, which was serious offending as it attracted  a  sentence
         of imprisonment of some 19 months following  an  earlier  suspended
         sentence of imprisonment, the overstaying  and  the  use  of  false
         identities were highly relevant matters that  ought  to  have  been
         weighed correctly in the assessment of the appeal based on both the
         Immigration Rules and Article 8.   Therefore  the  public  interest
         does not feature as the important factor as it  should  have  done.
         This relates to both the Immigration Rules aspect and the Article 8
         aspect of the appeal.

     20. We conclude that the First-tier Panel's  decision  does  contain  a
         material error of law and  we  set  it  aside  in  respect  of  its
         conclusions. Because of the  unusual  procedural  history  to  this
         matter which we have set out above, this matter will now return  to
         Judge Ruth at Taylor House.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.  We  continue  that
order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008).



Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
