
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02334/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal  Courts of Justice, Strand     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 June 2014                               |On 7th July 2014             |
|Prepared 30 June 2014                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                         sibongile nomthambdazo dube

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Messrs Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 1 December  1991  appeals,
    with permission against a determination of the Tribunal (Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Pirotta and Mr G F Sandall, non-legal  member)  who
    in  a  determination  promulgated  on  8  April  2014   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on
    7 November 2013 to make a deportation order  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant entered Britain on 17 November 2005 with leave  to  enter
    valid until 7 September 2010 to join her mother who is settled here.

3.   On 21 January 2011 she was convicted  at  St  Albans  Crown  Court  for
    robbery and sentenced to two years' imprisonment.   An  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed on 13 May 2011 by the Court of Appeal.   On
    31 May 2011 the appellant was served with  a  notice  of  liability  to
    automatic deportation.  On 21  January  2012  she  was  transferred  to
    immigration detention.  Although she was released  on  bail  she  later
    failed to adhere to reporting restrictions and  between  May  2012  and
    February 2013 she was classed as an absconder.

4.   Although a decision was made to deport the appellant  in  October  2012
    that was not served upon her.  She was  detained  on  5  February  2013
    because she had breached her release licence and was returned to prison
    to finish her custodial sentence.  When  that  was  completed  she  was
    again detained under immigration powers.

5.   The Tribunal heard evidence from the  appellant  and  from  her  mother
    noting arguments being put forward that the appellant was in  the  role
    of a parent  exercising  responsibility  for  her  younger  sister  and
    therefore it was claimed that she was eligible for consideration  under
    paragraph 339A of the Rules.  They noted that there had been a  failure
    to comply with  directions  and  that  the  appellant  and  her  mother
    referred to a letter, which related to the appellant's sister,  from  a
    psychologist, which should have been served but had  not  been  signed.
    It was claimed that that letter was material and the  Tribunal  granted
    further time for submission of the letter until 7 April.   On  7  April
    the appellant's solicitors said that the  report  had  still  not  been
    signed but asked for time to forward it to us as soon as possible.   It
    was not received by the Tribunal before the determination was drafted.

6.   The Tribunal noted that the appellant had come to Britain  at  the  age
    of 14. They  noted the terms of her sentence and the sentencing remarks
    of the  recorder  who  said  that  the  appellant  had  been  found  in
    possession of money and car keys taken from the taxi  driver  whom  she
    had robbed after she and her friend had directed him to a remote  spot.
    When her co-accused had held something hard on his back  the  appellant
    had threatened him that he  would  be  shot.     They  noted  the  taxi
    driver's victim statement which said that he had believed that he would
    be killed and never see his wife and children again and had been unable
    to pursue his career as a  taxi  driver  with  the  same  security  and
    application as before for fear of  a  further  robbery.   The  Tribunal
    also noted that the judge had taken into account mitigation in that the
    appellant  and  her  co-accused  were  18,  neither  had  any  previous
    convictions  and  that  it   was   claimed    that   the   attack   was
    uncharacteristic.   They  noted  that  there  were  claims   that   the
    appellant's mother and sister had HIV and  that  her  sister  also  had
    behavioural problems which meant that she would act up if the appellant
    was not present.  It was the appellant's  mother's  evidence  that  the
    appellant was "a pillar" in assisting with her sister.

7.   The Tribunal noted the various statements made by  the  appellant,  her
    mother, her brother and her sister and the pre-sentence  report.   They
    noted that the appellant had told the probation officer that she wanted
    money from the robbery to pay a drug debt of �400 and to pay for return
    plane fares to Zimbabwe because she believed  her  mother  intended  to
    send her there.  Although the appellant had worked and earned an income
    she had spent her money on clubs  and  buying  clothes.   She  had  not
    wanted her mother to discover her drug taking and had collaborated with
    her co-accused to obtain money.  The appellant had been made  to  leave
    home and stay with a cousin in a different part of  London  because  of
    her mother's anger with her but she hoped to  settle  with  her  family
    when they moved to Manchester after her sentence.  The  Tribunal  noted
    that the probation officer had concluded that  the  appellant  was  not
    being totally forthcoming about her lifestyle choices and that she  had
    shown a certain amount of sophistication in taking  the  taxi  driver's
    keys, disabling him from a fast escape.  The appellant was said to be a
    determined offender and potential danger to the public.   The  Tribunal
    recorded that the OASys Report indicated  that  the  appellant  was  at
    medium risk of harm to others because of her poor decision making, risk
    taking behaviour, drug use and negative associates.

8.   In paragraphs 42 onwards the Tribunal set out their findings  of  fact.



9.   In paragraph 43 they noted that the appellant was supposed to have  had
    a two year relationship with a woman called Katie  Simmond  but  stated
    that that was not credible given that the appellant had been in custody
    for  most  of  the  last  two  years  and  she  had  not  revealed  any
    relationships when she had been interviewed prior to the making of  the
    deportation order nor had she stated that she was a lesbian.  There was
    nothing from Katie Simmond to back  up  the  appellant's  claim.   They
    stated that:-

         "We are not satisfied to the appropriate standard of proof required
         of an appellant that she had a close relationship in  the  past  or
         has a continuing relationship of any real substance, and it is  not
         plausible that the appellant would have prevented her partner,  who
         was willing to support her, from sending a statement  or  attending
         court in her support had there been a genuine relationship  between
         them and reason to remain in the United Kingdom."


    They noted that after her arrest the appellant had not been allowed  by
    her mother to return home and lived elsewhere for a  considerable  time
    before sentence.  They commented on the appellant's  mother's  response
    as being very extreme but referred to the fact that the  appellant  had
    been taking drugs and spending her income for her own purposes  without
    making any contribution to her own or family expenditure.

10.  They noted that the appellant's mother had said  that  she  would  send
    the appellant to  Zimbabwe  and  concluded  that  the  appellant's  bad
    behaviour must have been more sustained and serious and that they  were
    not satisfied to the appropriate standard of proof required  "that  her
    mother would have sent her to Zimbabwe if there were  no  local  ties".
    They did not accept the appellant's role in the  family.   They  stated
    that there was no credible evidence the appellant's mother would not be
    able to cope with her own medical condition without the presence of the
    appellant and noted that the family had not supported the appellant  in
    complying with her bail and licence conditions.

11.  They concluded that the appellant had not discussed  the  offence  with
    her family despite the claimed frequency of contact.  The appellant had
    not known that her mother had had  a  partner  after  the  end  of  her
    relationship with her previous partner  and  had  not  known  that  the
    appellant's mother was pregnant in April 2013 during a  time  when  the
    appellant  apparently  lived  at  home.   Having  concluded  that   the
    relationships of the appellant with other members of  the  family  were
    not close they went on to specifically refer  to  the  claim  that  the
    appellant was pivotal in caring for her sister.  They stated  that  the
    absence at the hearing of the appellant's sister had been explained and
    was accepted by them and indeed it was accepted that what had  happened
    would have had an emotional impact on the appellant's sister but stated
    there was no credible evidence of dependency or reliance by any  member
    and or in particular of the sister on the appellant.  They stated  that
    the appellant's sister had been able  to  live  her  life  without  the
    appellant for a  considerable  period  and  there  was  no  independent
    evidence of self-harm or of any psychological problem or  treatment  of
    any special relationship between the appellant and  her  sister.   They
    concluded the rights of the United Kingdom  resident  family  were  not
    affected by the removal of the appellant and that there were no reasons
    why the family could not visit the appellant in Zimbabwe if they chose.

12.  Having considered the courses which the  appellant  had  undertaken  in
    prison they concluded that she would be able to work  in  Zimbabwe  and
    that there were no exceptional  circumstances  which  would  "meet  the
    criteria of for (sic) exceptions under Section 33 Borders Act  2007  to
    make her removal disproportionate."

13.  In their final paragraph of the determination they stated that even  if
    lesbian practices in Zimbabwe were against the law there is no evidence
    that  the  appellant  would  come  to  the  adverse  interest  of   the
    authorities as she had managed to live in  a  discreet  manner  in  the
    United Kingdom - even her own mother had not met her friend.  There was
    no reason to believe that the appellant would attract adverse  interest
    in Zimbabwe if she continued to live as she had  to  date.   They  said
    that she had always lived discreetly and even her  mother  and  brother
    had not  been  introduced  to  the  appellant's  friends  or  purported
    partner.  They refer to gay and lesbian support groups and agencies  in
    Zimbabwe who  would  be  able  to  befriend,  support  and  assist  the
    appellant.

14.  The conclusion of the Tribunal was that the balance of public  interest
    against interference of  the  rights  of  the  appellant  was  strongly
    weighed in favour of the public interest in her removal  by  reason  of
    the seriousness of her offence.



15.  They therefore dismissed the  appeal  on  both  immigration  and  human
    rights grounds.

16.  The grounds of appeal first  argued  that  there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness in that the Tribunal had not  given  further  time  for  the
    production of the psychiatric report and the fact that they had gone on
    then to reject the dependency between the  appellant  and  her  younger
    sister and indeed that the lack of consideration of the welfare of  the
    appellant's sister and the fact the Tribunal  had  not  considered  her
    best interests as a primary concern was in breach of  the  guidance  in
    the judgment of the House of Lords in ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC   4.
    They also stated that the Tribunal had misconstrued  the  comment  that
    the appellant's mother had considered returning her to Zimbabwe as that
    had never been the appellant's mother's intention but had merely been a
    threat.  They asserted that the Tribunal were wrong to suggest that the
    appellant must have relatives in Zimbabwe but in any event they had not
    considered whether or not any ties she might have would be "meaningful"
    in accordance "with the decision of  Blake  J  in  Ogundimu".   It  was
    claimed that the evidence was  that  the  appellant's  mother  was  not
    working part-time but full-time and therefore  it  was  said  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in their consideration of the evidence.  The grounds
    further expanded on the claim that the appellant's sister  relied  upon
    her.

17.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Howard  admitted  that  there
    was no psychiatric evidence to hand and that  therefore  he  could  not
    rely on the first ground of appeal.  He however argued  that  the  best
    interests of the appellant's  sister  had  not  been  considered  as  a
    primary consideration and suggested that in considering the appellant's
    sister's rights  too  high  a  standard  of  proof  had  been  applied.
    Moreover he argued that there was nothing to indicate  that  there  was
    anyone for the appellant to return to in Zimbabwe and that the Tribunal
    should have taken that into account.  Effectively,  he  suggested  that
    the appellant had no cultural ties there.

18.  Mr Howard referred to relevant country guidance cases suggesting  first
    of all that the Tribunal had not properly dealt with the claim  of  the
    appellant that she was a lesbian and then made  no  findings  regarding
    what would happen to her on return to her home area.

19.  Mr Saunders in reply argued that the conclusions of the  Tribunal  were
    fully open to them on the evidence.  He pointed out  that  it  was  not
    argued in the grounds of appeal that  the  Tribunal  had  not  properly
    dealt with the appellant's claim to be homosexual and  that  they  were
    entitled to treat the appellant as being a continuing  threat  in  this
    country.  They therefore asked me to dismiss the appeal.

Discussion
20.  The first ground of appeal argued that the Tribunal were wrong  not  to
    wait for a psychiatric report - this appears  to  have  been  a  report
    relating to the appellant's sister.  The reality is that no report  has
    ever been produced despite the claim that it  was  merely  waiting  for
    signature and I therefore consider that there is  simply  no  merit  in
    that ground of appeal.

21.  The grounds went on  to  state  that  the  Tribunal  had  not  properly
    considered the best interests of the appellant's sister who is aged 17.
     While it is correct the Tribunal did not state that they bore in  mind
    Section 55 of the 2009 Borders Act nor indeed did  they  refer  to  the
    judgment of the House of Lords in ZH (Tanzania)  the  reality  is  that
    they very fully considered the relationship between the  appellant  and
    other members of her family including her sister.  They  were  entitled
    to come to the conclusion that the appellant's  ties  with  her  family
    were not strong given the lack of knowledge that other members  of  the
    family appeared to know  of  her  life  and  the  appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge of their lives.  Indeed it appears that she  has  not  always
    lived with her family.  There was no evidence whatsoever of her  having
    a particularly important role  with  regard  to  her  sister.   It  was
    accepted by the Tribunal that she and her sister would have  some  sort
    of relationship and that her removal might well upset  her  sister  but
    there was nothing to indicate that the removal of the  appellant  would
    so severely affect the appellant's sister that it could  be  said  that
    the Tribunal had not considered the appellant's sister's interests as a
    primary concern.  They  considered  at  very  considerable  length  the
    appellant's lifestyle choices.  The reality is that those can only have
    had a negative impact on the appellant's sister.  I consider  therefore
    that there is no material error of law in the way in which the Tribunal
    dealt with the relationship between the appellant and her sister.

22.  It was claimed that the Tribunal had misunderstood the threat  made  by
    the appellant's mother that  she  would  send  the  appellant  back  to
    Zimbabwe.  The reality is that  the  appellant  claimed  that  she  had
    committed the robbery in part to obtain  money  so  that  the  cost  of
    travelling to Zimbabwe could be met and that rather indicated that  the
    appellant herself took seriously the belief that she would be  returned
    to Zimbabwe.

23.  The appellant's mother in evidence referred to a  number  of  relatives
    who had lived in Zimbabwe but had now gone to South Africa.  It  is  of
    note that the appellant's evidence was that she had visited Zimbabwe in
    2008 or possibly 2009 and stayed with a friend  of  her  mother,  Naomi
    whom she had called "auntie" although they were not related.   She  had
    said that they were not in contact  and  that  she  had  no  family  in
    Zimbabwe.  Given those factors it cannot be said that the appellant has
    no cultural tie with Zimbabwe.

24.  However, this appellant is a Zimbabwean and she is now aged 23.   There
    is no reason why she should not return to Zimbabwe on her own.

25.  Mr Howard raised two further points.  The first  related  to  the  fact
    that the appellant claimed to be a lesbian.  It was the  conclusion  of
    the Tribunal which was clearly open to them that the appellant, if  she
    were a lesbian, had lived extremely discreetly here and they considered
    there was no reason why she should not do so in Zimbabwe.  They pointed
    to the fact that although the appellant  claimed  to  have  been  in  a
    relationship with another woman here that could clearly not have been a
    strong relationship as the appellant was in  prison  for  much  of  the
    relevant  time  and  the  appellant's  mother  knew  nothing  of   that
    relationship or indeed of any others.  Indeed Mr Howard referred me  to
    the determination in LZ (homosexuals) Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00487
    (IAC) where that paragraph stated that lesbianism is not  criminalised,
    there were no records of any murders with a homophobic element and that
    "corrective rape" was rare and did not represent a general risk.  There
    was a "gay scene" within limitation.  The Tribunal had gone on  to  say
    "applying HJ and HT, there is no general risk to gays or lesbians".

26.  Mr Howard also stated that the Tribunal had not considered the area  to
    which the appellant would be returning.  The reality  is  however  that
    there is absolutely nothing to indicate  this  appellant  would  suffer
    persecution for her  political  beliefs  or  indeed  for  the  lack  of
    political beliefs.  It has never been argued that that is the case  nor
    of course was it raised in the grounds of appeal.

27.  The Tribunal properly considered all  relevant  factors  including  the
    appellant's crime, the various reports relating to her  sentencing  and
    release, her relationships with  her  family  and  her  claimed  sexual
    orientation against the public interest in the deportation  of  someone
    who had committed a serious  criminal  offence.   They  concluded  that
    removal  of  the  appellant  was  not  disproportionate  and  that  the
    exceptions in Section 33 were not met.  While they did  not  apply  the
    structured approach set out in the judgment in MF (Nigeria) {2013] EWCA
    1192 the reality is that they reached conclusions which  were  properly
    open to them on the facts before them.  There is no material  error  of
    law in their determination.

28.  Accordingly their decision dismissing this appeal  on  immigration  and
    human rights grounds shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

