
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/02161/2013
                                                               DA/02162/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 2 November 2015                   |On 13 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGES DEANS & MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          HELENA AND RENATA KULOVA
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A J Bradley, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are mother and daughter, born on 28 April  1965  and  25
    July 1992, both citizens of Slovakia.

 3. The SSHD appeals, on grounds numbered 1 - 6, against a determination by
    a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  comprising  Designated   Judge
    Macdonald and Judge Dennis, promulgated on 3  February  2015,  allowing
    appeals by both appellants against deportation  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. Parties agreed that the SSHD's ground 3 correctly and "in the interests
    of fairness" points out a legal slip, but the matter has no bearing  on
    the outcome.  Mrs O'Brien did not rely upon ground 6 to the extent that
    it argues that notwithstanding whether the appellants pose  any  future
    threat, past conduct alone might justify deportation.  The SSHD did not
    take that line in the decisions  under  appeal  or  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. Submissions for SSHD.  Two points were to be taken from the grounds:

         (1)      Based on the remaining parts of  grounds  1-5,  the  panel
         went wrong in finding that the appellants had acquired a  permanent
         right of residence, and so fell to be judged by the higher test  in
         the regulations.  The panel did  not  adequately  explain  why  the
         history of either appellant qualified for that status.  Such status
         might derive from the history of the witness Miroslav Kula, who  is
         the husband of the first and father of the second appellant, but no
         clear finding was made; the first appellant  was  not  individually
         qualified in terms of the regulations; the first appellant's period
         of imprisonment had  not  been  factored  into  the  consideration;
         imprisonment interrupted continuity of residence;  there  had  been
         little evidence that Mr Kula had  acquired  a  right  to  permanent
         residence; consequently, there was  inadequate  reasoning  for  the
         conclusion that the second appellant acquired  permanent  residence
         as the minor child of a qualified  person.   The  panel  found  the
         evidence from the appellants evasive, confusing  and  difficult  to
         reconcile.  The evidence from Mr Kulova was only oral.   Given  the
         criminality, the vague account  of  immigration  history,  and  the
         absence of documentation, there was  no  evidence  to  support  the
         panel's conclusion.

         (2)      Based on ground 6, the panel had failed to explain why the
         appellants did not pose a serious risk of re-offending, when had no
         insight into their offending behaviour and its impact.

 6. Submissions for appellants.  The Secretary of State  had  at  one  time
    conceded that  the  appellants  had  permanent  residence  status,  but
    withdrew that in light  of  their  convictions.   The  panel  had  oral
    evidence from Mr Kula of effectively continuous presence since  arrival
    in 2004.  There was nothing to contradict him.   Once  his  status  was
    resolved, the periods of imprisonment and any criticisms that might  be
    made of the evidence from the  appellants  were  of  no  account.   The
    positive finding on the evidence from Mr Kulova was a  complete  answer
    to point (1).  On point (2), there had  been  an  initial  social  work
    report which suggested that the  appellants  had  not  addressed  their
    offending, but that was prepared while  they  were  on  bail  prior  to
    conviction and sentence, and was overtaken by more up to date  reports.
    The author of those more recent reports attended the hearing  and  gave
    evidence, which the panel  was  entitled  to  accept.   Although  other
    evidence from the appellants was found defective,  the  evidence  about
    their recognition of responsibility was found reliable,  after  careful
    consideration (paragraph 25).

 7. We reserved our determination.

 8. The panel was entitled to find, and did find, that Mr Kula had been  in
    the UK as a qualified worker since 2004  and  so  accrued  a  permanent
    right of residence.  There was no written evidence, a factor  to  which
    the respondent was entitled to draw attention, but nor  was  there  any
    reason why the panel might not find  his  oral  evidence  reliable  and
    sufficient.  At that stage, the  vagueness  and  inconsistency  of  the
    evidence from the appellants about  their  immigration  history  became
    irrelevant to deciding their residence status.

 9. The panel's assessment of the risk of re-offending is in line with  the
    assessment by the expert author of the most recent reports.  The  panel
    did  not  simply  accept  the  reports  at  face  value   and   without
    examination.   Ground  6  is  headed  "misdirection  in  law/inadequate
    reasoning" but the respondent shows  no  legal  misdirection,  and  the
    panel's reasoning is plainly detailed and thorough,  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 20-26.

10. The determination speaks for itself in answer to both the  respondent's
    points, and no more needs be said.  The grounds are only disagreement.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           5 November 2015


