

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/02524/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                |                              Decision and     |
|                                |Reasons Promulgated                            |
|on 24 November 2015             |                              on 8 December    |
|                                |2015                                           |
|                                |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    O L P
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Bruce Short,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Poland,  born  on  10  April  1982.   By
    determination promulgated on 27  March  2015  Designated  Judge  Murray
    dismissed his appeal against deportation to Poland, by reference to the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and to Article  8
    of the ECHR.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    following grounds:

        1. At paragraph 51 when assessing the best interests of the child:

              i) In assessing the best interests of the child  the  FTT  has
                 erred in law by failing to exercise anxious  scrutiny.   In
                 particular there was a report from Dr McCormack  commenting
                 on the best interests of the child and the  effect  on  the
                 child were the appellant to be  deported.   Dr  McCormack's
                 view was that it would not be in the best interests of  the
                 child for the appellant to be deported.  The FTT has  erred
                 in law as the FTT has failed to  assess  this  report  when
                 assessing the best interests of the child and has not  paid
                 careful consideration to all relevant  factors  (see  FZ  v
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] SC (UKSC)
                 75 at paragraph 10 per lord Hodge):

             ii) By falling into the same error as  identified  in  Peart  v
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ
                 568 at paragraph 15.  Namely, the case called for a careful
                 appraisal of the child's circumstances and  the  extent  to
                 which her welfare would be better served  by  allowing  the
                 appellant to remain in  this  country,  thereby  making  it
                 possible for the child to  develop  a  proper  relationship
                 with  her  father  of  whom  she  will  otherwise  have  no
                 recollection.  It also called for the child's welfare to be
                 given  primary  (through  not   overwhelming)   importance.
                 Paragraph 51 of the decision  gives  the  clear  impression
                 that the FTT was far from persuaded that the appellant  had
                 as close an attachment to the child as he  professed,  but,
                 in order to do justice to the  child's  position,  the  FTT
                 ought to have made careful findings about that  and  should
                 have considered how the relationship might develop  in  the
                 future if the appellant were  allowed  to  remain  in  this
                 country.  That would have enabled the FTT  to  decide  what
                 was in the child's best interests.  In  the  light  of  the
                 FTT's decision  on  that  question  it  could  then  decide
                 whether the nature of the appellant's offending nonetheless
                 required his removal.  The  FTT  did  not  give  sufficient
                 consideration to what was in the child's best interests  or
                 give her welfare the degree of importance it ought to  have
                 received.

            iii)  By  failing  to  recognise  that  family  life  cannot  be
                 continued by the occasional  visit,  email  or  Skype  (see
                 Mansoor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]
                 EWHC 832 (Admin) at paragraph 16 per Blake J);

             iv) In assessing the best  interests  of  the  child,  the  FTT
                 appears  to  have  relied  on  the   appellant's   criminal
                 offending.  The FTT has erred in law as the child cannot be
                 blamed for the actions of the memorialist (see FZ, supra);

              v) In reaching contradictory findings.  At  paragraph  51  the
                 FTT carries out an assessment on the best interests of  the
                 child.  However, at paragraph 56 the FTT  appears  to  find
                 that there is no genuine relationship between the appellant
                 and his daughter.  It is  thus  unclear  why  the  FTT  has
                 carried out a best interests assessment.  The FTT has erred
                 in law by failing to  resolve  this  contradiction  (see  R
                 (Iran) and  others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                 Department [2005] Imm AR 535 at paragraph 9 per LJ Brooke).
                  In any event the findings at paragraph 56 of the  FTT  are
                 not clear as to whether  it  accepts  there  is  a  genuine
                 relationship between the appellant and his child.

        2. The FTT has erred in law at paragraph  59.   The  FTT  finds  at
           paragraph 59:

           "Although Dr McCormack states that the appellant is a  low  risk
           of re-offending  when  his  history  is  considered  I  am  more
           inclined to accept the social  work  reports  dated  2013  which
           consider him a medium risk.  One of the reasons for this is  his
           criminality has been increasing."

                      i) The FTT erred in law by failing to  apply  anxious
                         scrutiny when referring to the social work reports
                         assessing the appellant as a medium risk.  No such
                         assessment was contained within  the  social  work
                         reports.  In fact the social work  reports  stated
                         the appellant was not an immediate or serious risk
                         of harm to the public;

                     ii) The FTT  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  exercise
                         anxious scrutiny in relation to the report  by  Dr
                         McCormack.  The factors relied on by Dr  McCormack
                         were the same factors relied on by the social work
                         reports and Dr  McCormack's  conclusions  assessed
                         the appellant as a low risk which  coincided  with
                         the statement in the social work reports that  the
                         appellant was not an immediate or serious risk  of
                         harm to the public.  The FTT has thus erred in law
                         by failing to apply anxious scrutiny  in  relation
                         to the reports  before  it.   In  light  of  those
                         reports there is no insufficient evidence to  show
                         the appellant is a medium risk  and  on  a  proper
                         reading,  notwithstanding  his   criminality   had
                         increased, the reports assessed the appellant as a
                         low risk and not an immediate or serious  risk  to
                         the public.

                    iii) The FTT  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  exercise
                         anxious  scrutiny  in  relation  to  the   reports
                         referred to above.  Although the FTT  referred  to
                         the appellant's increased criminality, the reports
                         took account of that, and assessed  the  appellant
                         as a low risk and not an immediate or serious risk
                         to the public.  The reason given by  the  FTT  for
                         finding that the appellant is a  present,  genuine
                         and sufficiently serious threat is  not  supported
                         by the evidence and thus the FTT has erred in law.



        3. Having regard to the foregoing the  FTT  has  erred  in  law  at
           paragraph 60 as there is no or  insufficient  evidence  to  show
           that the  appellant  is  a  present,  genuine  and  sufficiently
           serious threat and/or that it would be proportionate  to  deport
           the appellant.

        4. In addition, the FTT finds at paragraph 48 that  the  fact  that
           the appellant has not attended  unpaid  work  goes  against  his
           credibility. The FTT  has  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  give
           adequate  reasons  as  to  why  this  factor  goes  against  his
           credibility.  The appellant admitted he had not attended  unpaid
           work due to his employment.  That does not detract from  whether
           or not the appellant is to be believed.  The FTT has thus  erred
           in law by failing to give adequate reasons for this  finding  at
           paragraph 48 or has erred  in  law  by  reaching  an  irrational
           finding.

        5. Further the FTT finds  at  paragraph  47  that  the  appellant's
           offending was for monetary gain.  The FTT has erred  in  law  as
           the FTT has failed to assess whether the appellant's answers had
           been wrongly recorded in the social work report as there was  no
           interpreter.

 3. On 28 July 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Southern  granted  permission  to
    appeal, observing as follows:

      The judge was plainly and unarguably  entitled  to  consider  that  in
      seeking to reconcile the tension between the social  workers'  reports
      and that of Dr McCormack the latter should yield to the former and she
      gave legally sufficient reasons ...

      However, it is arguable that the finding at paragraph 56 that  despite
      her appearance at the hearing ... the appellant know longer enjoyed  a
      subsisting relationship with Ms M, whilst sustainable so far  as  that
      person was concerned should  not  have  extended  without  more  to  a
      finding that there was also no family life between the  appellant  and
      his child, which seemed to flow from it.  Although the respondent  did
      not accept the parental relationship there appears to be no finding to
      that effect by the judge.

      On that basis alone, the question of  whether  the  determination  ...
      discloses legal error  in  respect  of  the  assessment  of  the  best
      interests the child, I am persuaded, if only just,  that  the  grounds
      merit further attention ...

 4. By letter from his solicitors dated 23 November  the  appellant  sought
    permission to argue all previous grounds, on the basis that  the  judge
    granting permission did not appear to  have  taken  into  consideration
    that there were 2 reports by Dr McCormack, one on the best interests of
    the child and one on the risk of re-offending.

 5. Mr Winter submitted that the grant of permission was unclear as to  its
    extent.

 6. I allowed all the grounds to be addressed.

 7. Mr Winter's submissions were along the lines of grounds 1  and  2.   He
    acknowledged  that  at  paragraph  51  the  judge  did   consider   the
    relationship between the  appellant  and  his  daughter.   However,  at
    paragraph 56 the  finding  appeared  to  be  that  there  might  be  no
    relationship with Ms M and no relationship with  her  daughter  either.
    It was to be  questioned,  in  the  light  of  those  conclusions,  why
    paragraph 51 appeared.  As to the reports by Dr McCormack, it was clear
    that the judge referred only to the one on re-offending (A), and not to
    the one concerning the child (B).  The appellant's supplementary bundle
    in the First-tier Tribunal  listed  item  A,  "Risk  assessment  by  Dr
    McCormack" and item B, "Report on NL  [the  child]  by  Dr  McCormack".
    There was some overlap but these were distinct matters.  Report B dealt
    with the child's view  of  the  relationship,  cited  research  on  the
    importance of relationship between child and father, and so  on.   From
    the judge's record of the submission for the appellant at paragraph  21
    and from her assessment at paragraph 50, it  could  be  seen  that  she
    thought there was only one report by Dr McCormack.

 8. I observed at this stage that although the supplementary  bundle  lists
    reports A and B, it contains only report B.  Report A is  to  be  found
    among the voluminous papers on the Tribunal file,  but  as  a  separate
    item.  Ms Beats,  who  represented  the  appellant  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and was present to instruct Mr Winter in the  Upper  Tribunal,
    confirmed that was the form in which the materials were put forward.

 9. Mr Winter accepted that report B  went  beyond  proper  limits  in  its
    concluding proposition  that  the  needs  of  the  child  "be  held  as
    paramount" and its recommendation that the appellant's "appeal  against
    deportation ... be upheld".  He said that the  report  should  be  read
    without reference to those recommendations which went beyond its scope,
    and that it obtained information relevant to the question  whether  the
    best interests of the child required the appellant to remain in the UK.

10. I inquired what the evidence had been about the likely future residence
    of mother and child, who  are  both  Polish  citizens  who  have  moved
    between Poland and the UK.  Mr Winter said that the judge  appeared  to
    have accepted that the gist of the evidence  was  that  they  were  now
    likely to remain in the UK.

11. Mr Winter said  that  the  social  work  reports  did  not  contain  an
    assessment of medium risk of re-offending.  The judge appeared to  have
    misapprehended that point.

12. Mr Winter submitted that either  or  both  of  those  grounds  required
    remittal of the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision,
    although he accepted that the underlying situation has not  changed  in
    any significant respect and that  there  has  been  no  application  to
    introduce any further evidence.

13. Mrs Saddiq accepted that the judge may not  have  made  it  clear  that
    there were two reports before her by Dr  McCormack.   She  argued  that
    nevertheless she had fully explained her conclusions, both in  relation
    to the best interests of the child and as to the risk of  re-offending.
    Report B at page 8 disclosed that there had been  very  little  contact
    between father and child.  Through his own fault, he has  spent  almost
    all of her life in prison.  There was little to suggest that he had  in
    the past had or would in the future have any beneficial impact on  her.
    The report contained nothing about the possibly adverse impact  of  his
    criminality on the child, as it blandly assumed that there would be  no
    further  offending.   The  report  was  very  limited.    Any   further
    consideration of it would have made no difference to the outcome.   The
    child has never had a day-to-day relationship with her father.   As  to
    risk of  re-offending,  even  if  the  social  work  reports  were  not
    explicit, the appellant's criminal history and attitudes are such as to
    disclose at least a medium level of risk.  That  is  what  the  reports
    implied.  The  judge  was  entitled  not  to  believe  the  appellant's
    explanation that his crimes were all  due  to  pressure  from  criminal
    associates.   Any  slips  made  by  the  judge  were  immaterial  to  a
    determination which overall was well reasoned.   If  the  decision  did
    need to be remade, that should be carried out on the evidence which the
    appellant had supplied, and should lead to the same conclusion.

14. In reply, Mr Winter submitted that a high standard had  to  be  reached
    before it could be said that but for an error  the  outcome  must  have
    been the same.  The errors should be found material, particularly in  a
    case which involved a proportionality assessment.  If the determination
    did need to be remade, the appellant  would  seek  the  opportunity  at
    least to make further written submissions on the outcome on the merits.



15. I reserved my determination.

16. The grounds and submissions  have  probed  hard  for  error,  and  have
    identified two slips: there were two expert reports not  one,  and  the
    social work reports did not contain an express assessment of  the  risk
    of re-offending.   Are  those  errors  significant  enough  to  justify
    setting the determination aside?

17. Report B, to which the judge did not explicitly refer, cites literature
    on the important role of the father in the development  of  the  child.
    It has little to say, apart from theory, on the  actual  and  potential
    value to this child of  her  relationship  with  the  appellant  as  an
    individual.  It states at page 9 that it was "the threat of danger  and
    violence towards her" (the child) which led him to commit  his  current
    offence.  That extraordinary conclusion is derived  from  the  separate
    meeting which the author held for purposes of report A,  to  which  the
    judge did refer.

18. The author of the reports is a chartered psychologist,  well  qualified
    and  of  long  experience.   However,  report  A  is  based  on  taking
    everything the appellant told the author at  face  value,  without  any
    critical analysis.  At page 8 the report accepts that the appellant  is
    determined not to engage in any criminal activity; that he has  adopted
    a strategy whereby he will in the future immediately contact the police
    and tell them everything he knows about  the  "criminal  activities  in
    many areas" of his associates; that he is "abject  with  remorse";  and
    that he "desires nothing but to remain in  the  UK  to  amend  for  his
    crimes, find employment and look after and support  [his  partner,  his
    former partner and his child]".

19. The appellant plainly found  it  very  easy  to  say  that  his  entire
    criminal offending, both in Poland and in the UK, was forced  upon  him
    by the bad company he kept; but he is as free to choose his company and
    his actions as anyone else.  The suggestion that  he  was  forced  into
    crime in the UK because of threats to his partner and child came  as  a
    surprise to his  partner  (paragraph  47  of  the  determination).  The
    alleged element  of  coercion  is  not  reflected  in  any  defence  or
    mitigation put forward in the criminal courts.  There has been  nothing
    to  stop  him  from  co-operating  with  the  police  by  sharing   his
    information with them, if he wishes to live the life of a good citizen.

20. The propositions that the needs of the child be held as  paramount  and
    that the appeal against deportation be upheld go beyond the province of
    the author as a chartered psychologist and as an  expert  witness.  The
    further conclusion in report B of a "high risk  estrangement  from  her
    father could  prejudice  and  even  damage  [the  child's]  social  and
    emotional and cognitive development" is not supported by  reference  to
    the facts.  It lies in the realm of theory alone.

21. The judge did not accept what the author said about  re-offending.   As
    stated below, I do not think that on that point (ground  2)  there  was
    any error of law.  The grounds are inter-related.  With all due respect
    to the learned author, I do not find that application  of  any  greater
    scrutiny to her reports might have advanced the appellant's case  based
    on the best interests of  the  child.   Both  reports  share  the  same
    defects.  Anything which may have been overlooked makes the appellant's
    case no better.

22. I do not consider that ground 1 at (i) and (ii) discloses any  material
    error.  The judge based her decision on there having been no meaningful
    relationship between daughter and child  to  date,  a  situation  which
    would not change on his release  and  deportation,  although  he  could
    still contact her by telephone and in writing or by visits  in  Poland.
    Any ambiguity about whether this amounted to a relationship at  all  is
    insignificant.  As to (iii), it is  trite  that  ordinary  family  life
    cannot be replicated by occasional visits, email or Skype but that does
    not mean that every decision which refers to the possibility of ongoing
    contact by these methods is bad in law.  As to (iv), the Judge does not
    blame the child for the actions of  the  appellant.   As  to  (v),  the
    findings  at  paragraph  51  should  be  treated  as  reached  in   the
    alternative and as sufficient.

23. The first social work report which was before the Tribunal is  dated  8
    May 2013.  Under the heading Risk  Assessment,  this  states,  "Serious
    Harm/Imminence: there are no indications  that  Mr  P  presents  as  an
    immediate or serious risk of harm."  The second report is dated 3  June
    2013.  It contains the same passage.  Oddly, neither report appears  to
    contain any other express  statement  of  the  level  of  risk  of  re-
    offending.

24. The judge  may  have  misapprehended  whether  there  was  any  express
    statement in the social work reports  of  the  level  of  risk  of  re-
    offending.  She was aware of Dr McCormack's assessment that the risk of
    re-offending was low.  The judge noted that criminality was tending  to
    escalate.  The reasons given by Dr McCormack for  stating  a  low  risk
    assessment are based on  accepting  what  the  appellant  says  and  on
    nothing else.  I do not think that any  misapprehension  was  material.
    In my opinion, it would be unrealistic for any judge to draw  from  the
    reports, from the appellant's history and from all the other evidence a
    conclusion of anything less than a medium risk of similar  re-offending
    in the future.  No material error arises from ground 2.

25. Grounds 3, 4 and 5 were not addressed in submissions  and  do  not  add
    anything of significance.

26. Reading the determination fairly and as a whole,  I  am  not  persuaded
    that the grounds disclose any errors of such materiality as to  require
    the judge's conclusions to be revisited.

27. No anonymity order has been requested or made, but as the case involves
    a young child, I have referred to the individuals  concerned  by  their
    initials only.

28.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]


            30 November 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




