
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02040/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 October 2015                             |On 20 January 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                       Shujat Hassain Shah Kazmi KAZMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THWE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Royston, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Shujat Hassain Shah Kazmi Kazmi, was born  on  31  March
    1969 and is a male citizen of  Pakistan.   He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in July 1992 on a spouse visa.  He did not return  to  Pakistan
    after his (out of time) application for further leave to remain on  the
    basis  of  marriage  was  refused  in  1993.   He  did   make   further
    applications for leave to remain in 2007 and again in  2008  but  these
    were also refused.  A deportation order was signed on 21 February  2008
    and,   following   further   representations   by    the    appellant's
    representatives, the respondent decided on 27 September 2013 to  refuse
    the appellant's human rights application and decided also not to revoke
    the deportation order.  The appellant appealed against that decision to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grimshaw)  which,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 19 August 2014, dismissed the  appeal  on  all  grounds.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  The  appellant  has  a  criminal  record  dating  back  to  2000.   In
    particular, he was convicted on 3 December 2012 and sentenced to twelve
    months imprisonment for dangerous driving.  He had also been  convicted
    of using a vehicle whilst uninsured and driving whilst disqualified.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, it is argued that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to have regard to a material  consideration,  that
    namely a policy of the respondent (Criminal Case Work: introduction  to
    children and family cases - 11 June 2013)  in  reaching  its  decision.
    The appellant submits that the respondent's  policy  does  not  require
    "family life to  be  demonstrated  as  a  condition  precedent  to  its
    application."  The policy appears to state that it  is  "triggered  ...
    where a child is separated from the parent."  It is not  disputed  that
    the appellant is the parent of children in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant argues that non-compliance with the policy by the  respondent
    without  proper  explanation  was  itself   enough   to   vitiate   the
    respondent's decision as not being in accordance  with  the  law.   The
    appellant argues that the judge failed to make any proper finding as to
    whether or not the respondent was entitled to find that there  was  not
    sufficient evidence for family life between the appellant, his wife and
    his children.

 4. It is true that the judge does  not  make  specific  reference  to  the
    policy of the respondent.  She recorded the fact  that  the  respondent
    considered the appellant to be a  persistent  offender  and  considered
    also that the respondent had failed to prove that he was in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship either living with his two  children  (both
    aged under 18 years) and his wife.  However, at [38] the  judge  stated
    this:

         When I stand back and look at the facts specific to this  case  for
         the purposes of the proportionality weighing process I  acknowledge
         that the appellant's expulsion will cause disruption  and  hardship
         to [the appellant's wife] and  all  their  children.   Their  young
         daughter should not be fixed with the wrongdoing of the  appellant.
         Unfortunately for the appellant those factors either singly  or  in
         combination do not make his case unusual or exceptional.

 5. The judge had regard to evidence [27] from  a  social  worker  that  it
    would be in the best interests of the children  for  the  appellant  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and to be "able to  rebuild  their  family
    life and support [the child]  through  her  childhood  and  adolescence
    provided he refrains from further offending."  At [25] the judge  noted
    that the appellant's wife would find it difficult coping "as  a  single
    parent" without the appellant if the latter were removed.  At [22], the
    judge made the specific finding that "the appellant  enjoys  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his wife and children ..."  The  judge
    addressed  the  question  of  the  respondent's  policy  at  [21]   but
    considered that it was not relevant because

         It only applies when the caseworker has sufficient evidence to show
         a subsisting family life.  I am aware that the respondent has taken
         the view that as a result of his marital difficulties the appellant
         cannot show that subsisting family life exists.

    The appellant's argument is that the judge should  not  have  dismissed
    the relevance of the policy so readily.  I am not satisfied  that  that
    submission has any merit.  It is true that, as the  grounds  of  appeal
    state, the judge "makes no finding that the respondent was entitled  to
    find that there was no sufficient evidence of family life ..."  But the
    judge did find that there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and his wife and children, a contention which had
    been rejected by the respondent.  In the light  of  the  judge's  clear
    finding, it would appear that she was of the view that  the  respondent
    should have considered the case on the  basis  that  there  was  family
    life.  However, I am not satisfied that  that  should  have  inevitably
    have led the judge to find that the decision of the respondent was  not
    in accordance with the law and to remit the matter to the Secretary  of
    State for her to consider the policy.  The judge was required to take a
    practical and robust approach to the  appellant's  appeal  and,  having
    found that there was family life, the judge went  on  to  consider  the
    question of proportionality.  If a conclusion regarding Article 8  ECHR
    is sound, then it follows that nothing whatever would have been  gained
    by remitting the matter to the Secretary of State and the question of a
    policy becomes "immaterial"  as  Judge  Levin  observed  when  refusing
    permission in the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The second ground of appeal concerns an alleged misdirection in law  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appellant  argues  that  there  was  no
    "exceptionality test" before Article 8 ECHR  is  engaged  and  that  by
    applying such a test the judge erred in law.  Notwithstanding the  fact
    that there was no need for the Tribunal to go looking for  "unusual  or
    exceptional  features  in  a  case,  the  appellant  accepts  [skeleton
    argument, 12] that the First-tier Tribunal  may  'look  for  compelling
    circumstances to allow a deportation appeal on Article 8 grounds ...'"

 7. At [39], Judge Grimshaw wrote:

         I remind myself that where the facts surrounding an individual  who
         has committed a crime are claimed to be exceptional  or  compelling
         those considerations are to be placed in  the  weighing  scale,  in
         order to be weighed against the public interest.  Despite the  best
         endeavours on his behalf by Mr Royston I  am  unable  to  find  the
         position of  the  appellant  exceptional  or  compelling.   I  have
         weighed all the facts against the strong public interest and  I  am
         satisfied that public interest must prevail.

 8. The judge went  on  at  [40]  to  record  that  she  had  "conducted  a
    proportionality assessment to considered the  relevant  factors  within
    the  context  of  the  expressed  will  of  Parliament  in  favour   of
    deportation ..."  She concluded that the removal of  the  appellant  to
    Pakistan was both "fair and proportionate in all the  circumstances  of
    this case."

 9. I refer to the passages from the First-tier Tribunal decision  which  I
    have quoted above.  In my opinion, those passages do not  represent  an
    example  of  a   First-tier   Tribunal   searching   for   "exceptional
    circumstances" but, rather,  a  brief  but  robust  assessment  of  the
    relevant evidence.  It is clear that the judge has not  refrained  from
    making a proportionality assessment (she states explicitly that she has
    carried out such an  assessment)  because  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances in the case.  However, the judge had  already  considered
    the Immigration Rules (paragraphs 399(a) and 399(b))  which  explicitly
    require the existence  of  exceptional  circumstances  for  the  public
    interest in favour of deportation might be outweighed [11].  The  judge
    made clear that she was not dealing  with  happy  settled  family  life
    which would be sundered by the appellant's sudden removal; family  life
    had already been fractured and  destabilised  by  the  appellant's  own
    criminal conduct.  Set against that family life  was  a  strong  public
    interest concerned with the appellant's  deportation;  he  is,  by  any
    standards, a persistent re-offender  whose  appalling  driving  conduct
    represents a threat to the public.  Finally, the judge was entitled  to
    conclude that there was no evidence to show that the best interests  of
    the children would be put at serious risk as  the  deportation  of  the
    appellant in relation to the children had already been damaged  by  his
    own conduct.

10. If the judge had, as the grounds assert, gone in search of  exceptional
    circumstances and, having identified none, made no attempt to  consider
    proportionality and the  effects  on  the  family  of  the  appellant's
    deportation, then she may have fallen into legal error.  However,  that
    is not what the judge did in this instance.  It was reasonable for  the
    judge to ask whether there was any unusual or  compelling  circumstance
    which might outweigh the very strong public interest concerned with the
    appellant's deportation and  her  conclusion  (based  on  the  relevant
    evidence) that it would  be  proportionate  for  the  appellant  to  be
    removed was plainly not perverse and was a  conclusion  which  was  not
    vitiated by any failure of process  on  the  part  of  the  judge;  the
    decision is relatively  brief  but  it  deals  with  all  the  relevant
    evidence.   In   the   circumstances,   this   appeal   is   dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 1 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 1 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
