
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02122/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 July 2014                               |On 19 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H U
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Furner, Legal Representative from Birnberg
                    Peirce Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the respondent's case depends on  his  alleged  need
    for international protection and, in the circumstances  of  this  case,
    publicity could  have  the  unfair  consequence  of  making  his  claim
    stronger that it would otherwise be.

 2. I make it plain at the outset that this is an unusual case that is very
    fact sensitive and is not authority for anything  except  that,  in  my
    judgement, the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.

 3. The respondent, hereinafter "the claimant", is a citizen of  Libya  who
    was born in 1962.  He entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student  of
    aeronautical engineering in 1981.  Save for a  short  return  to  Libya
    from August 1993 until October 1994, he has lived in the United Kingdom
    since 1981.  The claimant is an alcoholic  and,  largely  and  possibly
    exclusively, as  a  consequence  of  his  alcoholism,  he  has  behaved
    disgracefully and has been convicted of  78  different  offences  on  a
    total of 52 different  occasions.    The  appellant,  hereinafter  "the
    Secretary of State" served a total of five letters  warning  him  about
    his behaviour but he could not, or did not, improve.

 4. On 1 July 2008 the claimant was served with a notice  of  intention  to
    make him the subject of a deportation order.  He appealed  successfully
    against that decision on Article 3 and Article 8  grounds.   A  further
    notice of intention to make a deportation order was served on 25  March
    2010 and then withdrawn in May 2010.  The claimant continued to offend.
     On 30 November 2012 a decision was  made  to  make  the  claimant  the
    subject of a deportation order. That was served in  January  2013.   He
    applied to have the deportation  order  revoked.   The  application  to
    revoke was refused on 9 October 2013  and  he  appealed  that  decision
    relying on Article 3 and Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.

 5.  His  appeal  was  successful  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State sought permission to appeal.  Two reasons were given
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge who gave permission and I set them out
    below:

         "2. The grounds assert that the panel failed  to  provide  adequate
         reasons for finding  that  the  [claimant]  would  be  at  risk  if
         returned.  As paragraph 19 does not give  any  reason  for  finding
         that the [claimant] would be able to obtain alcohol and refers only
         to unspecified objective evidence in concluding he  would  then  be
         arrested, I am satisfied that it is arguable that the panel made an
         error of law.

         3. As the determination does  not  appear  to  address  the  public
         interest in deterrence or the need to prevent disorder and crime in
         the  Article  8  proportionality  consideration  that  too  may  be
         argued."

 6. In fairness to the Secretary of State I agree  that  the  determination
    would have been better if more had been said but there can be very  few
    judgments written that could not have been improved in some way.   That
    is not at all the same as saying that the  determination  is  wrong  in
    law.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal both on  Article  3  grounds
    and on Article 8 grounds.  I look carefully first at  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds.  Clearly  if  that  decision  is
    sound there is little point in saying more.

 8. This was dealt with particularly at paragraph 19 of the  determination.
    The First-tier Tribunal decided that the claimant is alcohol  dependent
    and that he would be reasonably likely to  consume  alcohol  in  Libya,
    attract the attention of the authorities (such  as  they  are)  and  be
    subjected to ill-treatment so severe that it would be contrary  to  his
    rights under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
    First-tier Tribunal was particularly concerned that there  was  a  real
    risk of his being whipped and detained for an indefinite period without
    judicial process.

 9. The reasons  given  for  these  findings  are,  frankly,  rather  thin.
    However, they were supported by expert evidence which is identified and
    considered in the  determination.   The  report  came  from  one  Belal
    Ballali who identified himself as a British citizen of  Libyan  origin.
    He described himself as a researcher who  provided  services  for  "law
    firms", university law departments  and  a  range  of  NGOs.    He  had
    researched matters in Libya both before and after  the  revolution  and
    had spent a total of seven months in Libya where he maintained  a  wide
    network of contacts.

10. He said commercially produced alcohol is widely  available  in  Tripoli
    and the surrounding area but not beyond.   It  is  largely  bought  and
    consumed by western foreigners living in the  capital.    Cheaply  made
    "moonshine" is readily available and cheap to buy outside the capital.

11. The report showed that officially the law provides custodial  sentences
    for anyone found consuming alcohol in Libya.  However,  in  early  2013
    the "New Revolutionary Brigades" were involved in the surveillance  and
    seizure of large quantities of alcohol all across the  country.    Some
    quite influential people including a Deputy Minister  of  State  and  a
    military chief of staff were arrested and the reports  were  that  they
    were all subjected to severe beating  and  imprisonment.   Additionally
    officials were subjected to public humiliation by  social  media.   The
    influential people were released.  It was widely  believed  they  could
    rely on the support of a network of friends.   A  person  without  that
    protection, he opined, would face the risk  of  harsher  penalties  and
    longer detention.  Under the rule of militia the usual  routine  for  a
    person found drinking was arrest, possible whipping and detention for a
    few days.

12. Mr Ballali thought that there  was  a  chance  of  virtually  permanent
    detention in the case of an habitual drunk without support but  it  was
    also "almost certain" that a  person  arrested  for  consuming  alcohol
    would be subjected to whipping and arbitrary detention.

13. There is a Country Report on Human Rights Practices for  2013  produced
    by the United States Bureau of  Democracy,  Human  Rights  and  Labour.
    This notes that although there is a constitutional  declaration  making
    many reassuring utterances about the right to resort to the courts  and
    the illegality of torture, it was  clear  that  many  people  who  were
    detained were detained by the militia who were not in  practical  terms
    accountable to the rule of law and had their own detention centres  and
    the report refers to there being "widespread abuse".   There  are  also
    references in the reports to detainees in all establishments, including
    regular establishments, being tortured  and  abused.   Reported  abuses
    included beatings with belts, sticks, hoses, rifles and other  horrible
    and serious acts.

14. I have considered carefully Mr Deller's  measured  submissions.   There
    really is nothing to be said against the contention that a  person  who
    faces a real risk of the  beatings  described  faces  a  real  risk  of
    treatment contrary to his  rights  under  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

15. Save for one important point, which I consider  below,  I  can  see  no
    possible basis  for  criticising  this  Tribunal's  finding  that  this
    claimant faces such a risk.  It was never  suggested  that  the  expert
    opinion was valueless or that the  Tribunal  was  somehow  perverse  in
    accepting it.  However Mr Deller did say that it was incumbent upon the
    Tribunal to explain why the claimant could  not  avoid  these  horrible
    consequences by abstaining.  Abstinence is a requirement of the laws of
    the country of which he is a national and it is disconcerting  that  he
    should seek international protection  because  he  does  not  like  the
    consequences of his decision to commit an illegal act.

16. I do not accept this argument.   Firstly,  it  is  trite  international
    protection law that a person cannot be  returned  to  a  country  where
    there is a real risk of that person being  executed.   Thus,  a  person
    cannot be returned to the United States of America to face trial  in  a
    state where execution is a possible outcome even if there is compelling
    evidence that that person is a  murderer.   In  reality  the  situation
    rarely occurs and when it does it is met  by  the  authorities  in  the
    United States entering into a solemn  obligation  not  to  execute  the
    person in the event of conviction. Similar arrangements probably do not
    exist with Libya and certainly have  not  been  canvassed  here.  If  a
    person can be protected from the adverse consequences of a decision  to
    kill a person he can surely be protected from the adverse  consequences
    of a decision to drink alcohol.

17. The Tribunal were not unaware of this tension but, again  at  paragraph
    19, summarised its findings.  The fact is the  claimant  has  had  many
    years of trying to deal with alcohol dependency and recognises that  he
    cannot. No doubt the condign punishment that awaits  him  in  Libya  is
    intended to act as a sharp deterrent but his experiences in the  United
    Kingdom  of  the  consequences  of  excess  drinking  have   not   been
    encouraging but he has continued to drink.   It  is  very  easy  for  a
    person not addicted to a substance to take the moral  high  ground  and
    pontificate about how easy it is for the addict to alter his  lifestyle
    but it clearly is not easy. If it were easy there would not be so  many
    alcoholics, smokers and overweight people.

18. I am not at all sure that it actually matters  that  a  person  seeking
    international protection could avoid the  risks  of  ill  treatment  by
    avoiding a particular kind of conduct, even if that conduct is illegal.
    What matters is whether he does in fact face a risk of ill treatment. A
    Tribunal would not find easily that a person is reasonably likely to be
    subjected to horrific ill treatment because of something  he  chose  to
    do. It will only be in unusual  circumstances  where  a  Tribunal  will
    conclude rationally that a person will expose himself to such  a  risk.
    An addict is an obvious example of how this may occur.

19. However I do not have to decide the point here. This claimant's history
    of addiction is such that he cannot abstain from consuming alcohol when
    alcohol is available. No meaningful question of choice arises  and  the
    Tribunal was entitled to find that there is a real risk  of  his  being
    ill  treated  in  Libya  in  a  way  that  would  be   intolerable   in
    international law  because  he  would  consume  alcoholic  drink.  This
    claimant cannot stop himself.

20. This is not a case of a person  having  cynically  having  a  drink  of
    alcohol to make himself irremovable. Rather it is a case  of  a  person
    who faces a real risk of unlawful detention in conditions  that  either
    are or are close to being internationally unacceptable with  the  added
    risk of unacceptably savage corporal punishment.

21. It follows that on reflection I do not agree that the Tribunal erred in
    any way by not addressing specifically  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant could avoid the problem by abstaining.   Its conclusion  that
    he would not avoid the risk because he is an addict  was  reasoned  and
    open to it.

22. It follows therefore that I see no error of  law  in  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds.

23. It is hard to see how the appeal could  have  been  allowed  under  the
    Rules except on an exceptional basis.  Although the claimant  has  been
    in the United Kingdom for a long time he has never managed twenty years
    continuous residence either because of the return trip in the 1990s  or
    because of his imprisonment.  Nevertheless, it will  almost  always  be
    the case (it might in fact  necessarily  be  the  case)  that  removing
    someone that exposes him to a risk of ill-treatment contrary  to  their
    rights under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  will
    interfere disproportionately with his private and family life.

24. It follows that I see no error of law in  the  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 8  grounds  either.   It  follows  therefore  that  I
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 December 2014               |



