
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02326/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 October 2014                            |On 6 November 2014           |
|Prepared 22 October 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                               FRANK BYAMUKAMA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Oke, of Counsel instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Uganda, born on 2  December  1986  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to deport  him  to  Uganda
    made on 11 November 2013 under the provisions of Section 32 (5) of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   His appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal who in a  determination
    dated 22 April 2014 allowed his appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  then
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted and on 28  July
    2014 I heard the Secretary of State's appeal.  Following that hearing I
    set aside the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  directed
    that the appeal proceed to a hearing afresh.

3.   In my decision  I  set  out  the  appellant's  immigration  history  in
    paragraph 3, his various convictions in paragraph 4  and  having  noted
    that the First-tier Tribunal had accepted that the appellant could  not
    succeed within the provisions of the Rules I found that they had  erred
    in their approach to the issue of the rights  of  the  appellant  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   I wrote as follows:-

         "1.  The Secretary of State appeals,  with  permission,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal Munro and Mr D R Bremmer JP (non legal  member))  who
             in a determination dated 22 April 2014 allowed the  appeal  of
             Mr Frank Byamukama against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
             State to deport the appellant made on 11 November 2013.

         2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before  me  I
             will for ease of reference refer to her as the  respondent  as
             she was the respondent in the First-tier.   Similarly  I  will
             refer to Mr Frank Byamukama as the appellant  as  he  was  the
             appellant in the First-tier Tribunal.


         3.   The appellant is a citizen of Uganda, born on 2 December 1986,
             who arrived in Britain on 18 February  1994  and  was  granted
             indefinite leave to remain in September 2000.   He  married  a
             South Korean national on 27 February 2008:  that  marriage  is
             effectively over. He has  a daughter,  Briyanna  Florence   by
             another woman, Rita Awaulira.  The  appellant  stated  to  the
             Tribunal that his daughter did not know who he is as  he  went
             to prison soon after her birth.


         4.   The appellant has a number of convictions  for  possession  of
             cocaine and  cannabis  and  has  also  been  found  guilty  of
             shoplifting and  of   inflicting  grievous  bodily  harm.   In
             September 2011 he was convicted for the supply of cocaine  and
             was given twelve months sentence suspended for 24  months  and
             required to undertake 200 hours of unpaid work.  The following
             year he was cautioned by London Transport Police for having  a
             counterfeit note.  On 9 May 2012 he  was  sentenced  to  three
             years' imprisonment for  grievous  bodily  harm  and  received
             consecutive  sentences  of  four  months  for  possession   of
             cannabis and eight months for commission of a crime  during  a
             suspended sentence.  The notice of  liability  to  deportation
             was served on 24 August 2012.


         5.   The Tribunal having heard evidence from the appellant and  his
             mother  stated  that  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules   were
             paragraphs 396, 397 and 398 62 and referred to  the  judgments
             of the European Court of Human Rights in Uner [2007]  45  EHRR
             14 and the judgments of the Court of  Appeal  in  OH  (Serbia)
             [2008] EWCA Civ 694 and DS (India) [2009] EWCA  Civ  544,  the
             decision of the European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in  Maslov
             [2009] INLR 47 and that of the Tribunal in Masih  (Deportation
             - Public Interest - Basic  Principles)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT
             00046 (IAC) as well as the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in
             MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.


         6.   They noted that the appellant "cannot bring himself within the
             Rules for the purpose of Article 8."  They stated that he  was
             separated from his wife and although he  had  stated  that  he
             hoped to get back together with her there  was  no  indication
             that  that  was  a  possibility.   He  did  however  have  the
             possibility of an "ongoing relationship with his daughter" but
             they stated that she lived with her mother.


         7.   They then went on to state  that  they  were  considering  the
             rights of the appellant under Article 8  "in  accordance  with
             the principles laid down in MF."


         8.   Having referred to case law including that  of  Razgar  [2004]
             INLR 349, Ghising (Family Life  -  Adults  -  Ghurkha  Policy)
             Nepal [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) and AG (Eritrea) [2009]  EWCA  Civ
             801 the Tribunal went on to note the sentencing remarks of the
             judge stating that the judge had noted:-


                  '... that there was no evidence to support the appellant's
                  claim that his wallet had been stolen and that he had  met
                  up with the victim to accuse him of stealing it; when they
                  met the appellant was with two other men and he struck the
                  victim on the head with a baseball bat,  causing  multiple
                  fractures to cheek and around his right eye;  he  required
                  an operation and had metal plates inserted  in  his  cheek
                  and face; fortunately he had made a  good  recovery.   The
                  appellant was 25 years old with previous  convictions  for
                  drug offences'.


         9.   They noted  the  terms  of  the  OASys  assessment  which  had
             referred to the appellant's "scant regard for the law and  the
             consequences of his actions."  They noted  that  the  risk  of
             serious harm was assessed as medium to the public and high  to
             a known adult.  Moreover they  noted  the  appellant  had  not
             chosen  to  express  remorse  at  the  hearing  before   them.
             Although they  had  not  seen  a  birth  certificate  for  the
             appellant's claimed daughter they accepted that  she  was  his
             daughter.  He said that the  amount  of  contact  between  the
             appellant and his daughter in the future "must be uncertain."


         10.  In paragraph 56 they stated the public interest  in  the  case
             required the deportation of the appellant  unless  there  were
             circumstances "which are sufficiently compelling  to  outweigh
             the public interests in the deportation."


         11.  They noted the appellant had lived in Britain since the age of
             7 and that  his  education  had  taken  place  here  and  that
             although he had visited Uganda for holidays on  two  occasions
             he would be totally unfamiliar with the way of life there  and
             did not have any close family members on whom  he  could  rely
             for support during the  initial  stages  of  finding  his  way
             around.  They stated that he appeared to have shown motivation
             in prison to change his lifestyle  and  he  had  a  supportive
             family and went on to say "he has managed to avoid a  term  in
             prison on previous occasions and gives the impression that  he
             intends to avoid individuals from his past  and  keep  on  the
             straight and narrow in the future."


         12.  In paragraph 57 they went on to say that  this  was  a  finely
             balanced decision and quoted from the judgment in Maslov  that
             "for a settled migrant that has  lawfully  spent  all  of  the
             major part of his or her childhood and youth in  this  country
             very serious reasons are required to justify expulsion."


         13.   They  concluded  that  there  are  circumstances  which  were
             sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  public  interests  in
             the deportation of the appellant.


         14.  The Secretary of State appealed on the basis  that  the  panel
             had failed to engage with the pressing nature  of  the  public
             interest.  The grounds of appeal refer to the judgment of Laws
             LJ in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550  which  made  it
             clear that only a very strong claim in respect  of  Article  8
             would be sufficient to  overcome  the  public  interest.   The
             grounds went on to refer to the "exceptional circumstances" on
             which the Tribunal had  relied  pointing  out  that  they  had
             placed  weight  on  the  appellant's  relationship  with   his
             daughter although they found that he did not have a meaningful
             relationship  with  her  and  they  had  not  considered   the
             possibility of the appellant's mother negotiating contact with
             the appellant and his  daughter  via  "modern  communicational
             means" and visits.  Moreover they had failed to  consider  the
             best interests of the child and stated that the  Tribunal  had
             failed to engage with the appellant's ties to Uganda.   Having
             referred to the European Court of  Human  Rights  decision  in
             Balogun v UK - 60286/09 [2012] ECHR 614 they  stated  that  it
             was clear that  the  appellant  did  have  ties  with  Uganda.
             Moreover they stated that it  was  evident  that  interference
             with family life could  be  justified  where  the  factors  in
             favour of deportation were sufficiently strong and in this the
             grounds referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  JO
             (Uganda) [2010] EWCA Civ 10.


         15.  They referred to the fact that the OASys Report had sated that
             there were  "limited grounds for optimism in the future."


         16.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Tufan relied on  the
             grounds of  appeal.   His  principal  argument  was  that  the
             Tribunal had effectively looked at the rights of the appellant
             under Article 8 as if it was a freestanding right rather  than
             in the properly structured approach as set out in the judgment
             of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria).  Indeed he argued that
             the cases on which they had relied  such  as  Ghising  and  AG
             Eritrea and indeed Razgar  were  not  deportation  cases.   He
             referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Gurung  and
             said that in this case as in  Gurung  the  Tribunal  had  been
             looking for ways to allow the appeal.


         17.  Miss Manyarara dealt in detail with  the  grounds  of  appeal.
             She argued that the Tribunal had taken into account the public
             interest in deportation and had properly quoted relevant  case
             law.  Moreover she claimed that it was the will of  Parliament
             that where the rights of an individual would be  infringed  by
             deportation the appeal should be allowed and that  in  putting
             in place an appeal system Parliament was placing in the  hands
             of the Tribunal the task of  making  a  proper  assessment  of
             those rights.  The facts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
             reached conclusions which were in no  way  perverse  and  were
             fully open to them meant that it would not be  appropriate  to
             overturn their decision merely because I took the view that  I
             would have reached a different decision.


         18.  She argued that the Tribunal had  referred  to  the  two-stage
             test as set out in MF (Nigeria) and had  dealt  properly  with
             the issue of proportionality.  They  had  taken  into  account
             public interest - the reason was that the determination in the
             Tribunal in Gurung had been overturned was that it had made no
             reference to the public interest in deportation.


         19.  She argued moreover that the  Tribunal  had  made  a  properly
             detailed fact-finding exercise and that they had been  correct
             to find that the appellant  had  no  ties  with  Uganda.   She
             emphasised that it had been the appellant's mother's  evidence
             that when she went to Uganda her relationship with her  family
             was such that she had had to stay in a hotel.


         20.  Moreover she asked me to find that the Tribunal had taken into
             account the sentencing remarks of the judge and  had  properly
             considered the risk of re-offending and the OASys Report.


         21.  She emphasised the interests of the child and  the  importance
             that should be placed thereon - she referred to  the  judgment
             of the House of Lords in ZH (Tanzania) [2004] UKSC 11.  It was
             her argument that the terms of Section 32 of the 2007  Borders
             Act was not a "trump card" which meant that when the Secretary
             of State decided that it was conducive to the public  good  to
             deport an individual that the appellant should be so deported.




         22.  She referred  to  the  courses  the  appellant  had  taken  in
             detention and the fact that he might have been able to take  a
             victim awareness course but that did not start because of  the
             prison in which he was held.  She emphasised  the  length  the
             appellant had been here and referred to the judgment in Maslov
             and the lack of ties in Uganda.  She stated this was clearly a
             case where exceptional circumstances existed and the  Tribunal
             were therefore correct to allow the appeal.   The  grounds  of
             appeal before me were merely a disagreement with the  findings
             of the Tribunal and did not disclose an error of law.


         Discussion


         23.  I consider that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
             determination.  The Tribunal referred to a number of  relevant
             cases at the beginning of their consideration of the merits of
             this case including the judgment  in  MF  (Nigeria).   However
             having accepted the appellant could not bring  himself  within
             the terms of the Rules (although, surprisingly, they  had  not
             referred to paragraphs 398 and  399  of  the  Rules  in  their
             consideration), they then appeared to apply case law which did
             not relate to Article 8 as considered  in  deportation  cases.
             They noted a number of  factors  which  were  clearly  to  the
             detriment of the appellant including  the  judge's  sentencing
             remarks and the terms of the OASys Report.  They noted that he
             had not expressed remorse.  They noted that the appellant  did
             not have contact with his child and that   agreed  contact  in
             the future was uncertain.


         24.  They do not however appear to have  taken  into  account  that
             where an appellant has committed  a  serious  crime  there  is
             clear  case  law   which   indicates   that   deportation   is
             appropriate.  They simply did not weigh up the public interest
             in the deportation of someone  who  has  committed  a  serious
             crime notwithstanding the conclusions of the Court  of  Appeal
             in cases such as AD Lee [20111] EWCA Civ 348  which dealt with
             the deportation of a man who had an existing family here or DS
             (India) where the public  interest  in  those  who  commission
             serious crimes was emphasised. Although they  appear to  quote
             from the judgment in Maslov when referring to  the rights of a
             settled migrant who had  lawfully spent  all or the major part
             of his childhood  here  requiring   very  serious  reasons  to
             justify expulsion they  did not appear to consider whether the
             brutality of the appellant's  attack on the  victim  indicated
             such reasons .


         25.  Although Ms Manyarara stated that the Tribunal had  considered
             the public interest in deportation the reality is  that  apart
             from a passing reference thereto they have simply not taken on
             board the serious nature of the appellant's  crime  let  alone
             directed themselves to a consideration of the issue of whether
             or not there were compelling circumstances which  should  mean
             that this appellant should be allowed to remain.


         26.  Their  reference  to  the  expectation  of  contact  is  again
             misguided.  It was their duty to consider the circumstances as
             they were at the date of the hearing and indeed the reality is
             that they themselves considered that the  chances  of  contact
             between the appellant and his daughter whom the appellant  had
             said did not know who he was would be unlikely.  Moreover they
             had not taken into account the appellant as an adult  who  has
             visited Uganda in the past and indeed as a Ugandan citizen.


         27.  In all I consider that they did not properly take into account
             the public interest in the deportation of  the  appellant  and
             that therefore they erred in law.


         28.  Accordingly  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal and direct that  the  appeal  proceed  to  a  hearing
             afresh on all issues."


5.   At the hearing before me  the  appellant  gave  evidence  adopting  his
    various  statements.  He   confirmed  that  he  was  no  longer  in   a
    relationship with the mother of his daughter, but said that although he
    had had no contact with his daughter at the time of the hearing in  the
    First-tier as he had gone to prison shortly after her birth  since  his
    release from prison he had built up a relationship with her.  She would
    spend time with him on a regular basis.  He  would  visit  her  at  her
    mother's home in Kent and would look after her when she came  to  visit
    him in London.  He stated that over the summer holidays she had  stayed
    with him for three weeks.  He said that they would speak every  day  on
    the phone and that his role in her welfare was  particularly  important
    because her mother now had a three month old baby who took up  most  of
    her time.  His relationship with his former girlfriend was now good and
    they had therefore not needed to make formal arrangements  through  the
    courts.  He regretted very much what he had done and wanted  to  remain
    in Britain to look after his daughter and his family - his  sister  was
    currently pregnant and his mother had heart problems.  His brother  was
    in Bristol and he was required to look after his daughter  because  her
    mother now had another child.

6.   He stated that he had been able to speak  Luganda  before  he  came  to
    Britain but he no longer could speak it fluently or write it.

7.   In cross-examination he  stated  that  he  had  never  lived  with  his
    child's mother although he had spent a lot of time in  her  house.   He
    had not been named on the birth certificate  because  he  had  been  in
    prison when she was born and they were on bad terms.  She had not  seen
    him in prison and had only seen her very occasionally  before  she  was
    born.

8.   He stated that the  language  spoken  in  the  schools  in  Uganda  was
    English and that was the language in which he had been taught  when  he
    had been in Uganda.

9.   In re-examination he stated that he was not working.  He said  that  if
    it had been up to him he would have got back together with his wife.

10.  The appellant then stated that he wished to make a statement.  He  said
    that he had spent twenty years of his 27 years of life in  Britain  and
    that in his heart he thought of himself as British - this was the  only
    country he knew.  He wanted to get a job and make up for  the  mistakes
    which he had made.  He said that he had no ties with Uganda  and  would
    have  no  financial  backing  there.   He  stated  that  there  was   a
    possibility of civil war in Uganda let alone  the  possibility  of  the
    Ebola virus reaching there.  He said that if returned he  would  suffer
    and die.  He went on to say that his  family  needed  him  as  did  his
    daughter.

11.  In summing up Mr Walker referred to the  detailed  notice  of  decision
    which set out  details of the appellant's crimes and the application of
    the relevant Immigration Rules.  It was considered in that letter  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances in this case and he asked me to
    find that that remained the case.  He argued that the interference with
    the appellant's private life did not outweigh the  public  interest  in
    his deportation.

12.  Mr Oke asked me to allow the appeal on the basis that  the  appellant's
    evidence had been truthful and reliant and that he had established that
    the interference with the appellant's rights under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR would be disproportionate and indeed that there  were  exceptional
    factors in this case.  He referred  to  the  appellant's  relationships
    with his daughter and members of his family and said that although  the
    appellant had visited Uganda he had stayed in a hotel and that  he  had
    no family ties there.  Other family members had gone to Sweden and  the
    reason that the appellant had been sent to Sweden in 1993  was  because
    he had been abused by an uncle in Uganda.

13.  While he did not  wish  to  diminish  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
    offences  he   asked   me   to   conclude   that   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.  He emphasised that although the  appellant's  mother
    may have had land in Uganda that was not available  for  the  appellant
    and it was likely that those living there now had  acquired  squatters'
    rights.  He stated that the appellant now felt that he was a  different
    person from the man who committed the various crimes and that having  a
    child and his other  family  responsibilities  would  ensure  that  the
    appellant would not commit further crimes in  the  future.   Given  his
    daughter's age he clearly had a meaningful relationship with her and he
    had been able to spend quality time with her.  He asked me to find that
    the various factors which meant that the removal of the appellant would
    be disproportionate were such as to amount to exceptional factors.   He
    therefore asked me to allow the appeal.

Discussion

14.  In considering this appeal I have taken into  account  the  appellant's
    statements, his oral evidence and the letters from his  mother,  sister
    and the mother of his daughter.  I have also considered the  length  of
    time which the appellant has lived in Britain.

15.  It was accepted before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant
    could not qualify under the Rules.  Paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Rules
    set out the relevant framework in which to consider a deportation case.
    The rules were altered in July this year. The  relevant  rules  at  the
    date of the decision stated:

          "398. Where a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
              contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
              Rights Convention, and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of less than 4 years but at  least  12months;
                  or

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of
                  State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
                  a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                  the law, the Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim
                  will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
                  if  it  does  not,  it  will  only   be   in   exceptional
                  circumstances that the public interest in deportation will
                  be outweighed by other factors.

          399.    This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

             (a)  the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                  20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
                  decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he
                  has no ties (including social, cultural  or  family)  with
                  the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
                  leave the UK; or

             (b)  the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least
                  half of his life living continuously in the UK immediately
                  preceding   the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no
                  ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
                  country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
                  the UK."

16.  It is accepted that the appellant cannot qualify under  the  provisions
    of paragraph 398, with the  exception  of  whether  or  not  there  are
    relevant factors  which  make  his  removal  exceptional.  I  therefore
    consider it relevant to consider all factors in this  case.   I  accept
    that the appellant was married to Ms Ahreum Han  here  but  it  is  not
    claimed that that marriage is subsisting.  The  appellant  clearly  has
    relationships with his sister and his mother both  of  whom  value  his
    support but the reality is that the appellant's behaviour in  the  past
    has not assisted his other family members and indeed they were able  to
    live their lives without any assistance from him when he was in prison.
     I do not consider that his relationship with his  own  family  members
    can be considered to be a factor of any particular weight.

17.  Turning to the relationship between the appellant and his daughter  the
    reality is that he has only recently had any contact with her.  While I
    accept that he is of use to her mother her mother appears to  be  in  a
    new relationship and indeed, of course, the appellant never lived  with
    her.  If the appellant is deported his relationship with  his  daughter
    will effectively end but the reality is that his daughter is young, the
    relationship which he has with her is not of any length and her primary
    carer is her  mother.   She  does  not  live  near  the  appellant.   A
    relationship, of sorts, can continue albeit in a much weaker form  from
    Uganda.

18.  I now turn to the appellant's criminal activity.  It is  relevant  that
    he has not committed just one offence.   He received a caution in  July
    2007 for possession of a class A drug - cocaine and also for possession
    of a class C drug - cannabis.  He was again charged with  possessing  a
    class C drug in October 2008 and  was  cautioned  by  the  Metropolitan
    police on 29 May 2009 for "attempting or making false representation to
    make gain for self or other or to cause loss to other or exposed  other
    to risk".  In 2009 he was found guilty of  shoplifting  and  possessing
    class C controlled drugs and was fined and ordered to  pay  costs.   In
    May 2010 he was again convicted of drug offences, receiving substantial
    fines and did not surrender to custody at the appointed time.

19.  On 15 September 2011 he was convicted at Lewes Crown  Court  for  being
    concerned in the offence of supplying a class  A  drug  -  cocaine  and
    given a twelve month suspended sentence that was wholly  suspended  for
    24 months.  He was required to undertake 200 hours of unpaid work.   He
    was also being charged with  supplying  class  B  drugs  and  for  that
    received a further suspended sentence.

20.  In October 2011 he was cautioned by the British  Transport  Police  for
    having a counterfeit note.  On 9 May 2012 he was convicted of  grievous
    bodily harm and sentenced to three yeas'  imprisonment.   He  was  also
    convicted for possession of a class B controlled drug, namely cannabis,
    and received four months' imprisonment.  He also received a sentence of
    eight months' imprisonment because  of  the  commission  of  a  further
    offence during "an operational period of a suspended sentence".  On  24
    August 2012 he was given the opportunity to make representations as  to
    why he should not be deported on completion of his sentence.

21.  In his sentencing remarks His Honour Judge Ader set out details of  the
    appellant's offence.  It appears that the  appellant  claimed  that  he
    believed another man had taken his wallet and he made  arrangements  to
    meet that man in an alleyway, taking with him two others.   He  used  a
    baseball bat to strike the victim who was knocked  to  the  ground  and
    when the police came to see him  he  refused  to  talk  to  them.   The
    injuries to the victim were severe in that he had had to have  titanium
    plates inserted in his cheek and face and others to hold  together  the
    fractures and sutures that were being inserted.

22.  The judge stated that he had read the two  pre-sentence  reports  which
    he stated did "not make very encouraging reading".  He stated that  the
    optimism of the original Lewes Crown Court report was not  repeated  in
    the  further  pre-sentence  report.   He  referred   to   the   various
    aggravating factors and the use of a weapon.  Having taken three and  a
    half years as the starting point he gave  credit  for  the  appellant's
    plea of guilty on the first day of trial.

23.  I have also taken into account the OASys assessment which is  dated  29
    October 2013.  I note that the writer of the  report  stated  that  the
    appellant  expressed  a  positive   view   regarding   employment   and
    "subsequently does contribute to society at times".  The writer went on
    to say "however by involving himself in the sale of drugs, he  is  also
    contributing to problems which illegal drugs  bring  upon  communities,
    families and individuals.  I  did  not  gain  the  impression  that  he
    strongly  holds  pro-offending  attitudes.   As  previously  stated  he
    impresses more as a risk taker, probably to support his income".

24.   The  writer  of  the  report  went  on  to  say  that  the   appellant
    demonstrated that he could  and  does  lose  his  temper  and  that  by
    committing  the  various  offences  which  he  committed  he  had   not
    considered the consequences of his actions and did  not  learn  by  the
    sentences imposed by the courts on previous offending behaviour.

25.  I note that in the risk of serious  harm  summary,  in  answer  to  the
    question of who would be at risk the reply was -

         "(1) any member of the  public  who  comes  into  contact  with  Mr
             Byamakuma whilst he is experiencing a loss of temper control;


          (2) whilst he denies his guilt of offending most of the time if it
             is to be believed he dealt with drugs on  occasions  so  there
             would be possible harm/financial issues to the victims of  his
             drug sales to consider."

26.  In reply to the question of "what  is  the  nature  of  the  risk"  the
    answer was -

         "(1) uncontrolled violence directed at them with no thought to  the
             consequences at the time;


         (2)  possible  health  risk  to  the  members  of  the  public  who
             purchased drugs from him and the knock-on  effects  of  taking
             drugs  on  their  families/friends.    It   was   stated   the
             circumstances  likely  to  increase  the  risk  was  when  the
             appellant had been taking drugs himself."


27.  The risks in the community to the public were considered to  be  medium
    but to known adults to be high.  With regard to his  lifestyle  it  was
    noted that it appeared that the appellant  had  associates  that  might
    encourage his offending behaviour "for example if you were found to  be
    in possession of a quantity of cannabis when stopped by the police as a
    passenger in a friend's car".

28.  I note the judgment of Rix LJ in DS (India) [2009] EWCA Civ  554  where
    he stated:-

         "In my judgment, when  consideration  was  given  to  the  manifold
         nature of that public interest (see N (Kenya) (at paragraph 87), E-
         O (Turkey) [2008] EWCA Civ 671 - (at paragraph 19) and OH  (Serbia)
         [2008] EWCA Civ 694 (at paragraph 15) it cannot  be  said  the  IAT
         erred in this respect.  The public interest in deportation of those
         who commit serious crimes goes well beyond depriving  the  offender
         in question from the  chance  to  re-offend  in  this  country:  it
         extends to deterring and preventing  serious  crime  generally  and
         upholding public abhorrence of such offending."

29.  In conclusion I take into account the very short time during which  the
    appellant has had contact with his daughter, the fact  that  he  is  no
    longer in a relationship with either her mother or his wife and  taking
    into account his age, and therefore although it may well be that he has
    close relationships with other members of his family, I  conclude  that
    they are ties which are no more than ties  between  an  adult  and  his
    parent and other adult  siblings.  Placing  particular  weight  on  the
    serious nature of the appellant's crime which led  to  his  deportation
    and the fact that he had been convicted of a  number  of  other  crimes
    leading  up  to  the  index  offence  I  can  only  conclude  that  the
    deportation of this appellant would be a proportionate response to  the
    serious crime which he committed.

30.  I have set out above the terms of paragraph 399 of the relevant  rules.
    The appellant was born on 2 December 1986 and arrived in  Britain  from
    Sweden on 18 February 1984. I  note  that  the  decision  to  make  the
    deportation order is  dated  11  November  2013.   At  that  stage  the
    appellant had been in Britain for nineteen years.  He  could  therefore
    not have qualified under the twenty year provision.   In  2013  he  was
    aged 27. He could not therefore qualify under paragraph  399(b)  as  he
    was not under the age of 25. He has lived here since then  although  he
    has visited Uganda.  He has been out of Uganda since 1986.

31.   I consider, that it cannot be said that  he  has  no  ties  with  that
    country given that he has relatives there and  indeed  his  mother  has
    land in Uganda. I have considered the Rules now in force. While I would
    accept that  the appellant has been  lawfully  resident  in Britain for
    most of his life  and that he is socially integrated in this country  -
    although the lack of a work profile  here  and his  frequent  offending
    indicate a lack of   cultural  integration,  I  do  not  consider  that
    there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his   integration  into
    Uganda  given  the fact that he has relations  there,  was   at  school
    there until the age of 7, has visited the country and  his  mother  has
    land there.

32.  I therefore, conclude that,  as  was  indeed  accepted,  the  appellant
    would not be able to benefit from  the  provisions  of  paragraph  399.
    While I consider that there is an element of a "near-miss" in this case
    but I do not find  that  that  leads  to  the  appellant's  case  being
    exceptional and for the reasons set out in paragraphs 16 onwards  above
    I conclude that there is nothing exceptional which would mean that  the
    deportation of this appellant would be disproportionate.

33.  I therefore, having set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal re-make the decision in this case and dismiss this appeal.







Sgned                                   Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy           4 November 2014


