

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/02423/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2014                            |On 3 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                FATEH SIAMER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Hodson, counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker,   Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Algeria born on  2  February  1970,
      has been granted permission to appeal against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Traynor, sitting with a non-legal member  of  that
      tribunal who, by  a  determination  promulgated  on  19  August  2014,
      dismissed the appellant's appeal against the deportation order made as
      a consequence of his conviction of an offence of possessing controlled
      drugs with intent to supply, for which he was sentenced to  18  months
      imprisonment.


   2. The grounds upon which the appellant appealed against the  deportation
      order were founded upon a claim that there would be  an  impermissible
      interference with rights protected by article 8 of the ECHR. That  was
      because the appellant had fathered a child in the United Kingdom as  a
      consequence of a brief relationship with the child's mother.  Although
      he had never lived  with  the  child's  mother  (although  his  former
      representatives had incorrectly asserted otherwise in letters sent  to
      the respondent)  he said he had a  continuing  relationship  with  the
      child that should be respected, both to accommodate the  child's  best
      interests and to afford the respect to their family life together that
      was assured by the Convention.

   3. The appellant had first come to notice in April 2002 when  he  applied
      for asylum, saying that he had arrived in the  United  Kingdom  a  few
      days earlier having produced a forged Italian identification  card  to
      secure entry, He said that the only country he had  travelled  through
      prior to entering the United Kingdom was France, but that was not true
      because sometime later his Algerian passport was  produced  showing  a
      Schengen visa issued in Spain in 2001. The date offered as to his date
      of  entry  cannot  be  considered  reliable  either  because  he   was
      subsequently to assert, when unsuccessfully seeking a  residence  card
      on the basis of a relationship with  an  EEA  national,  that  he  had
      arrived in 2000.

   4. The appellant's appeal against the removal decision  that  accompanied
      refusal of his asylum claim was dismissed following a  hearing  before
      an adjudicator on 4 November 2002. In rejecting as untrue all that the
      applicant had advanced in support of his claim to be at risk on return
      to Algeria the adjudicator said:

           "I have reached the firm conclusion that this appellant  is  not
           an honest and truthful witness. He has  fabricated  the  central
           part of his claim."

   5. Despite that, the appellant did not leave the United  Kingdom  and  he
      was not removed. In 2004 he was married to a Portuguese  national  but
      two applications for  a  right  of  residence  on  that  account  were
      refused,  in  September  2005  and  February  2006,  because  it   was
      established that she was not exercising Treaty rights in this country.
      Undeterred, the appellant made a third  such  application,  this  time
      successfully, with the result that he was granted a right of residence
      until 11 July 2011. Interestingly, in that application  the  appellant
      gave a third different date of entry into the United  Kingdom.  Having
      said previously that he had arrived in April 2002 and  December  2000,
      he now asserted that he entered in December 2001.


   6. It was in February 2011  that  the  appellant  was  arrested  for  the
      offence for which he was subsequently sentenced to imprisonment and it
      was in response to a request from the respondent that he  provide  any
      reasons why he should not be made subject to a deportation order  that
      he gave details of his daughter, who was born on 16 June 2010 and  who
      lived with her mother, Ms R, who is a Tunisian national  present  with
      limited leave to remain. The appellant no longer sought to rely upon a
      relationship with an EEA national and there  had  been  a  divorce  in
      respect of the marriage  he  had  entered  into  with  the  Portuguese
      national relied upon for the  earlier  applications  for  a  residence
      card.

   7.  The  respondent  considered  all  that  had  been  advanced  on   the
      appellant's  behalf  but  decided  that  the  deportation  order   was
      appropriate. The appellant was a foreign  criminal  whose  deportation
      was in the public interest and the respondent did not accept  that  he
      fell into any of the statutory exceptions provided by  section  33  of
      the UK Borders Act 2007. No evidence had been provided that the  child
      or the  child's  mother  relied  upon  the  appellant  for  emotional,
      financial or physical support and the respondent did not  accept  that
      there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with the  child.  Even
      if that had been the case, the appellant did not meet the requirements
      of the immigration rules because neither the child nor her mother were
      British citizens or settled and, alternatively, there was  nothing  to
      suggest that any family life that might exist could not be carried  on
      together in  Tunisia.  Nor  could  the  respondent  identify  anything
      disclosed by the application  that  called  for  the  grant  of  leave
      outside the rules in order to secure an outcome compliant with article
      8 of the ECHR.

   8. The appellant's appeal against that decision came before the judge  of
      the First-tier Tribunal on 10 June 204. He heard  oral  evidence  from
      the appellant, Ms R the  mother  of  his  child  and  from  two  other
      witnesses called to support the appellant's case. In what can only  be
      described as a detailed and carefully written determination the  judge
      set out a summary of the evidence before him and  an  explanation  for
      his decision to dismiss the appeal.

   9. The judge noted that the after the appellant had secured his residence
      card on the basis of marriage to the  Portuguese national from whom he
      is now divorced, he was able to travel to Algeria for visits in  2007,
      2008 and 2009. The  appellant  said  that  his  marriage  to  the  EEA
      national had failed in November of  2009  and  he  had  met  Ms  R  in
      September 2009. A relationship developed although it came  to  an  end
      shortly after the birth of the child in June 2010. He was arrested  in
      March  2011  after  having  retrieved  the  package  containing   12.9
      kilograms of cannabis he had hidden in the home occupied only by Ms  R
      and her daughter, he having retained a key to  Ms  R's  home.  He  was
      released on bail until sentenced to  a  term  of  imprisonment  on  15
      November 2011 but during that period was not living with Ms R.

  10. The appellant said that while in prison he had maintained contact with
      his daughter by telephone and after his release continued to  maintain
      contact. Although he lived in London and  the  child  lived  with  her
      mother in Huddersfield, he said he had visited  them  in  Huddersfield
      and they had visited him in London. By the date of the appeal  hearing
      his daughter was nearly 4 years old. He wanted to remain here so  that
      he could play a positive part in his daughter's life.

  11. In cross examination, the judge recorded, the appellant said  that  he
      had lived with the child and her mother for only a  few  months  after
      her birth in June 2010. There was telephone contact between March  and
      May 2011 while he was on bail following his arrest,  although  it  was
      pointed out to him that in her witness statement Ms R had said that he
      had had no contact with her daughter. However, since his release  from
      prison the appellant insisted that he had seen his daughter regularly,
      "every month or two months and sometimes every fifteen days".

  12. In her oral evidence before the judge Ms R said  that  after  she  had
      moved to Huddersfield in October 2011there was  no  contact  with  the
      appellant for over a year. She accepted that a letter  that  purported
      to be from her  which  had  indicates  something  different  had  been
      written by a friend  and  was  not  true  in  what  it  asserted.  She
      confirmed also that assertions made in an  earlier  witness  statement
      that were supportive of the appellant's account  of  his  relationship
      with his daughter were also not true, for which she apologised.

  13. The judge recorded that Ms R's evidence was  that  the  appellant  had
      never lived with her and her daughter. Although he came to spend  days
      with them he would not stay. He did though  maintain  regular  contact
      with his daughter by telephone and Skype and when she came  to  London
      to visit friends during school holidays the appellant  would  see  his
      daughter almost daily and on one occasion she  had  spent  two  nights
      with him.

  14. The judge's findings are lengthy and detailed and are set out  between
      paragraphs 59-75.  Mr  Hodson,  who  appeared  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal also, realistically and quite  properly  made  clear  at  the
      outset of that hearing that it was accepted that the  appellant  could
      not succeed under the immigration rules and it was not  arguable  that
      his claim considered outside the rules could succeed on  private  life
      grounds under an article 8 assessment. Therefore,  the  focus  of  his
      submissions was upon the family life between  the  appellant  and  his
      daughter and what was in the best  interest  of  that  child.   Having
      considered in  detail  the  aspects  of  the  evidence  he  considered
      important, the judge drew all this together and said:

           "The tribunal is obliged to give the public interest significant
           weight when considering the criminal conduct of  the  appellant.
           Whilst we find that he does have a relationship  with  his  four
           year old child, we take into account the child's very young  age
           and the fact that the vast majority of communication is not face-
           to-face but through the medium of telephone contact and Internet
           contact through Skype. We are  satisfied  that  if  the  child's
           mother wishes to maintain that  level  of  contact  between  the
           appellant and the child then it is open to her  to  ensure  that
           those  lines  of  communication  can  be  maintained  upon   the
           appellant's return to Algeria. We find  that  the  child's  best
           interests will be best served by her continuing to live with her
           mother, who is the only parent with whom she has ever lived.  We
           are satisfied that  when  the  appellant's  mother  has  visited
           London it has, in  the  main,  been  at  half  term  and  school
           holidays to visit her friends and not as a specific  arrangement
           for the child to see the appellant. Given the age of  the  child
           and the fact that she has barely started her education, we  find
           that visits at half  term  or  school  holidays  can  only  have
           occurred on a few limited occasions. Whilst we accept that there
           is photographic evidence depicting the appellant with the child,
           we find that most of the photographs have been taken within  the
           course of the past six months and have been taken with a view to
           seeking to present a relationship which, in reality, is no  more
           than that which we have described above, namely telephone  calls
           and Internet contact.

           Therefore, when we have taken this evidence and  weighed  it  in
           the balance, we find that the interests of the child will not be
           adversely affected as a consequence by the  appellant's  removal
           and the respondent's obligations to protect the wider public  of
           the  United  Kingdom  from  crime  and  disorder   significantly
           outweighs that relationship. Following the decision in AD Lee we
           are satisfied that the appellant's conduct justifies removal and
           if one of  the  consequences  is  that  he  will  not  have  the
           opportunity of occasionally seeing his child  face-to-face  then
           that has to be the outcome of his own actions.

           Therefore, in answering the question as to whether or not  there
           are exceptional circumstances in this case, we  find  there  are
           none. Even if we  are  wrong  in  that  respect,  following  the
           approach directed in Razgar, whilst we accept that  there  is  a
           limited family life  between  the  appellant  (and)  the  child,
           because we accept  the  relationship  is  being  maintained,  we
           nevertheless find that such interference is both reasonable  and
           proportionate when weighed against the respondent's  obligations
           to protect the wider public of the United Kingdom from crime and
           disorder. We would emphasise that in reaching a decision we have
           made the child's interests our primary  consideration  but  find
           that  the  child  would  not  be  adversely  affected   by   the
           appellant's removal, over and above the fact that  she  may  not
           see him on those  infrequent  occasions  when  she  has  visited
           London. We find there is no  evidence  that  the  appellant  has
           actually visited her in Huddersfield and discount the opponent's
           claims that he has done so."


  15. Mr Hodson's grounds for seeking to appeal  against  those  conclusions
      fall broadly into two categories. He submits that the judge  left  out
      of account material matters and that there were errors of fact  which,
      being factored into the decision making process, render  the  decision
      itself unsafe.


  16. The first issue raised by Mr Hodson is the approach taken by the judge
      to the sentencing remarks of the judge who sentenced the appellant  to
      imprisonment. He submits that Judge Traynor  took  a  flawed  approach
      because he failed to appreciate that the appellant was indicted with a
      number of others whose role in the overall  conspiracy  was  far  more
      serious, as reflected in the sentences imposed. He said that the judge
      was wrong to say, at paragraph 68 of the determination:

           "... the Sentencing Judge considered the Appellant's conduct  to
           be particularly serious..."


      Because, properly understood, all the sentencing judge was saying,  as
      he was required to, was that the offence was of a level of seriousness
      such that only a custodial sentence could be  justified.  Indeed,  the
      judge made clear  that  he  distinguished  the  appellant  from  other
      defendants in recognising that he played amore  limited  role  in  the
      overall conspiracy than did others.

  17. I do not accept that submission. Mr Hodson is entirely correct to  say
      that the judge reflected in the sentences imposed the varying roles in
      the overall  conspiracy  taken  by  the  various  defendants.  But  in
      sentencing this appellant he said also this:


           "You pleaded guilty, I recognise, at a very early stage  to  one
           Count of supplying cannabis on 2 February. Your role was limited
           to that extent, but nevertheless you knew full well what Mr Amri
           was involved in. You agreed to get involved in that, and it  did
           involve you in quite a detailed operation, even over that  short
           period of time. You  had  to  go  and  collect  that  drug  from
           somebody. You had to then take it back to your premises, or your
           girlfriend's premises, and make arrangements to store it, albeit
           over a fairly limited period of three days.


           What is more important is that you knew precisely  what  was  in
           that package - 12.9 kg of cannabis. It was a significant  amount
           of the drug. People like you,  who  help  conspirators  of  this
           nature, are crucial to the operation of a criminal conspiracy of
           this type. Without people like you, willing to hold  on  to  the
           drug, willing to supply it to whoever it needs  to  go  to,  the
           operation of that conspiracy is made all the more difficult.  It
           is impossible not to treat this offence as being so  serious,  I
           am afraid, that's only custody is the option in your case."


  18. The approach urged in not, in any event, the correct  one  because  it
      leaves out of account an important matter. As the appellant  does  not
      fall within one of the statutory  exceptions,  there  is  a  statutory
      presumption that deportation is in the  public  interest  because  the
      appellant is a foreign criminal. He is a foreign criminal  because  he
      has committed an offence for which he was sentenced to  more  than  12
      months imprisonment. That presumption is not displaced and the  public
      interest in his deportation is not in any way reduced by the fact that
      he committed the offence in association  with  others  who  were  more
      deeply  involved  in  the  criminal  venture  to   which   they   each
      contributed.


  19. The grounds assert also that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  take
      account of the appellant's "personal  mitigating  factors"  and  post-
      sentence developments including his  conduct  following  release  from
      prison. But when invited to identify what those factors were that were
      ignored by the judge Mr Hodson was unable to do so.

  20. Next, Mr Hodson submitted that the judge erred in  failing  adequately
      to have regard to what was said in the  pre-sentence  report  and  the
      OAsys report, both of which were before the  sentencing  judge,  about
      the low risk of reoffending that the appellant represented.   Again  I
      am not persuaded that there is any merit in that submission. There  is
      nothing in the determination to suggest that the  judge  proceeded  on
      the basis that the appellant represented other  than  a  low  risk  of
      reoffending, but the risk of an individual re-offending  is  just  one
      part of the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
      In any event, as I have observed in respect of the argument concerning
      the sentence imposed relative to the other defendants,  that  approach
      somewhat  misses  the  point.  The  public   interest   requires   the
      appellant's deportation because he is a foreign criminal who does  not
      fall within one of the statutory exceptions. He is a foreign  criminal
      because of the commission of this particular offence and  not  because
      this offence is thought to be part of a series of offences that may be
      committed in the future.

  21. It might be observed  also  that  there  is  an  indication  that  the
      appellant sought to mislead the author of the pre-sentence report, and
      therefore the  sentencing  judge  as  to  his  domestic  circumstances
      because he told the probation officer  that  his  reason  for  needing
      money, and hence becoming  involved  with  the  supply  of  controlled
      drugs, was because he and his wife were expecting a baby. That was, of
      course, not true. The relationship with the lady who  he  had  married
      had come to an end and there was never any pregnancy.   Ms R, who  was
      expecting the appellant's child, has said that the appellant had never
      "lived with her".

  22. The grounds complain also that  the  judge  took  no  account  of  the
      appellant's "excellent prison record" and the many letters of support.
      Neither of those complaints are made  out.  At  paragraph  26  of  the
      determination the judge noted the appellant's evidence that "he  tried
      to the best of his ability to be a model prisoner" and the judge  made
      clear at paragraph15 of the determination that he had taken account of
      all the documentary evidence the parties had put before him, including
      that contained within the  appellant's  bundle.  At  paragraph  59  he
      repeated that he had "given careful  consideration  to  the  documents
      placed before us...". The judge was certainly not required to  discuss
      in the determination each document in the bundle to  demonstrate  that
      he had done precisely that which he said he had done.

  23. On the other hand, turning to consider  the  second  category  of  the
      grounds, Mr Hodson has identified that the judge has made some  errors
      of fact. The judge was wrong to say that Ms R and her daughter had  no
      lawful status in the United Kingdom because there  is  a  pending  and
      unresolved application for  further  leave  to  remain  and  so  their
      previous temporary leave has been extended by operation of  s,3(C)  of
      the Immigration Act 1971. The judge was wrong to say that Ms R and the
      child had not visited him in prison because his  representatives  have
      provided documentary evidence confirming that they had  done  so.  The
      judge was wrong to say that the appellant had not visited his daughter
      in  Huddersfield  because  a  photograph  had  been  produced  of  the
      appellant and his child together in what is plainly a  school  setting
      and as this child, who was still not quite 4 years old, has only  ever
      attended a school in Huddersfield then  that  must  establish  such  a
      visit.

  24. As those errors have been identified the question to be  addressed  is
      whether the outcome could possibly have been any different if that had
      not been made. In my judgement the only answer that can be returned to
      that question is in the negative.

  25. In respect of the immigration status of Ms R and her child, Mr  Hodson
      submits that the error by the judge may have been significant. That is
      because the judge thought that Ms R may have an incentive to  say  and
      do whatever she could to assist  the  appellant  because  if  he  were
      successful in his attempt to secure leave then she  would  potentially
      benefit from that in her own application. That was because there would
      be an argument to be advanced that she should  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom so that contact between her daughter and the  appellant  could
      continue. However, even if that were so, the  same  incentive,  if  it
      arose in her mind, would exist  whether  or  not  she  had  a  pending
      application which would be informed by the immigration status  of  the
      father of her child. In any event,  the  decision  of  the  judge  was
      predicated upon an assessment of the relationship that existed between
      the appellant and the child and that was not something  that  depended
      upon the immigration status of the child and her mother.

  26. Similarly, as the judge accepted that there was continuing contact  of
      one kind or another after the appellant had been released from prison,
      it is unrealistic to suggest that it would have made any difference to
      the outcome had the judge factored into his assessment the  fact  that
      Ms R and her daughter had in fact visited him in prison.

  27. True it is that the judge has said both that there was a photograph of
      the appellant with  his  daughter  at  a  school,  although  that  was
      "contrived and staged to demonstrate that he  has  a  more  meaningful
      relationship with her" (paragraph 64) and that there was  no  evidence
      that  the  appellant  had  "actually"  visited  her  in   Huddersfield
      (paragraph 75) so that the judge did not accept he had done  so.  That
      may appear to be a contradiction but it may also reflect the fact that
      the photograph of the child in what appeared to be a  school  setting,
      considered in the context of the appellant being a person who had  not
      only repeatedly given untruthful  and  misleading  evidence  over  the
      years in his attempt to establish a basis upon which to remain in  the
      United Kingdom but persuaded  others  to  do  so  on  his  behalf  was
      something that the judge was simply not prepared to accept established
      was asserted. In any event, even if the judge had accepted that such a
      visit had been made it seems to me to be inconceivable it  would  have
      made any difference to the outcome of this appeal.

  28. In a slightly different context, Mr Hodson submits that the judge  was
      mistaken to apply the guidance offered by the Court of  Appeal  in  Ad
      Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 because the facts were not sufficiently
      similar  and  so  the  position  of  this   applicant   were   clearly
      distinguishable form  those  of  Mr  Lee.  However,  once  again,  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal was not predicated upon that  guidance,
      even though it is mentioned.  Further,  although  Mr  Lee  had  indeed
      committed a much more serious offence he was living with the child  in
      a family unit which this appellant was not. Also, this was  a  serious
      matter in the context of the particular case, the appellant leaving  a
      large quantity of controlled drugs in his daughter's home without  the
      knowledge of her mother.

  29.  Drawing  all  of  this  together,  the  position  can  be  summarised
      succinctly. The judge has directed himself  correctly  in  law  before
      carrying out a careful examination of all  the  evidence  the  parties
      chose to put before him. In this well structured determination he  has
      explained his assessment of  the  evidence  he  considered  to  be  of
      importance and has given clear  and  legally  sufficient  reasons  for
      reaching conclusions that were plainly open to him on the evidence. It
      has not been established that he left  out  of  account  any  material
      considerations  and  he  certainly  was  not   required   to   comment
      specifically upon all the evidence, just to make clear he  had  looked
      at it. He was required to do no more than to make  clear  the  reasons
      why he reached the decision he did. While he may have made a very  few
      factual errors, none of those are of a nature such as to consider that
      the outcome would have been any  different  in  the  absence  of  such
      errors.

Summary of decision


  30. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any error of law.


  31.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  the  determination
      of Judge Traynor is to stand.



                               Signed        [pic]


                               Date: 30 October 2014




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal

