
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02183/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 July 2014                                 |On 15th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        Oluwagbemiga Olasumibo Sowande

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Mr Sowande is the appellant before the Upper Tribunal and the Secretary
    of State is the respondent.  He has  been  granted  permission  by  the
    Upper Tribunal to challenge a determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 10 March 2014, the Tribunal consisting  of  a  panel  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Elvidge and Mrs J Holt.

 2. I have been gratefully assisted today by the  representations  made  by
    both representatives, Mr Singer for the appellant and also Mr Whitwell,
    who appears for the Secretary of State.

 3. I am satisfied that the Tribunal which heard this appeal erred  in  law
    and I make that finding for the following reasons.

 4. The concentration in this appeal has been on what the Tribunal has said
    at paragraph 44 of its determination. Referring to the  appellant  they
    said: "We find that the appellant is only just on balance able to  meet
    the criteria under 399(b) in regard to  his  partner."The  Tribunal  is
    here  referring  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  paragraph  399(b)  which
    provides that:

         Paragraph 398(b) or (c) should apply in cases where the person  has
         a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  partner  who
         is in the UK and is a British citizen settled in the UK or  in  the
         UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection and

         (i)  the person has lived in the UK with valid  leave  continuously
             for at least the fifteen years immediately preceding the  date
             of  the  immigration  decision  (discounting  any  period   of
             imprisonment); and

         (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  that
             partner continuing outside the UK.

 5. Where that paragraph applies, and it does in the case of this appellant
    with regards to 398(b), which reads

         the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
         which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less
         than four years but at least twelve months

    one is led on then to paragraph 399B, which provides that limited leave
    may be granted for periods not exceeding  30  months  subject  to  such
    conditions deemed by the Secretary of State to be appropriate.

 6. The difficulty in this case is exactly what the Tribunal has  meant  at
    paragraph [44] by saying that they found that  the  appellant  met  the
    399(b) criteria.  It is difficult because,  notwithstanding  the  clear
    and unambiguous words with which that finding is expressed, it has  not
    led them on, as Mr Singer urges me to find  it  should  have  done  and
    should lead me to do,  to  a  grant  of  leave  under  paragraph  399B.
    Instead, it seems to have led the Tribunal on to make no finding at all
    in the body  of  the  determination  regarding  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.   It  led  them  in  the  decision  section  of  the
    determination to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    notwithstanding that they found that the appellant  had  complied  with
    the necessary paragraph, and it led them on to  observe,  at  paragraph
    [49] that: "If the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the  Rules
    we have to consider the appeal also under the Article 8 case law..."

 7. There are a number of  paragraphs  in  the  determination  setting  out
    familiar items  of  jurisprudence  in  summary  and  an  assessment  of
    proportionality under Article 8.  At the beginning of  paragraph  [49],
    the Tribunal has left uncertain what  it  found,  notwithstanding  that
    they said in paragraph 44 that the appellant qualified under the Rules.

 8. Things are made no better by what the Tribunal says at paragraph [64]:

         we find that the  public  interest  in  deportation  has  not  been
         outweighed within paragraph 399(a).  His mother is able to continue
         to care for David in the  UK  as  his  primary  carer.   While  the
         appellant has a family relationship with his partner for Article  8
         purposes, she is of Nigerian origin and there are no insurmountable
         obstacles for her to relocate there if she so wished.  However,  we
         find that that relationship is not based on affection but  only  on
         his utility to her in childcare.  We find under paragraph 399A that
         the appellant continues to have strong ties to Nigeria despite  his
         length of residence in the UK.  We find as  an  overall  conclusion
         that the respondent has justified the decision as  being  necessary
         and proportionate.

 9. I consider that the Tribunal has mixed up the considerations it  should
    have addressed under the Immigration Rules with those under Article  8.
    As the Court of Appeal has established in MF (Nigeria), there is now  a
    complete code within the Immigration Rules as regards Article 8,  which
    sets out in detail where the balance is to be struck between the public
    interest and the private and  family  life  rights  of  applicants  and
    appellants. The problem with this determination is that I have no  idea
    from the paragraph which I have quoted above whether the  Tribunal  are
    referring to Article 8 outside the Rules or to  the  Rules  themselves;
    there would have been no  need  for  them  to  make  an  assessment  of
    proportionality where that is implicit within the code provided by  the
    Rules.

10. It is true that in that, in the same paragraph, the Tribunal found that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles  for  the  partner  to  relocate
    abroad with the appellant if she so wished, but that finding cannot sit
    very easily with their finding at paragraph [44] that the appellant met
    the requirements or the criteria of paragraph 399(b) with regard to his
    partner, those requirements including that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to  family  life  with  a  partner  continuing  abroad.  This
    confusion of reasoning leaves one with no clear  idea  quite  what  the
    Tribunal had in mind or what  laws  at  any  particular  point  in  its
    determination it was seeking to apply to the facts of this  appeal.  It
    is because of that confusion and uncertainty that I will not follow  Mr
    Singer's recommendation that I should simply allow  this  appeal  under
    the Rules under paragraph 399B. I am persuaded, and it is fair  to  say
    that Mr Whitwell for the respondent did not seek to advocate any  other
    course of action, that this appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal, there having been  virtually  a  complete  breakdown  in  the
    delivery of a rational decision by the First-tier Tribunal. None of the
    findings of fact shall stand.

    DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None of that
    Tribunal's findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Elvidge  or  Mrs  Holt)  to  remake  the
    decision.






Signed                              Date 12 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
