
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/02323/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 November 2014              |On 13 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                         upper tribunal judge DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR DARIUSH FARHAND
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  from  a  determination
        made by the First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
        Eldridge and Ms VS Street JP) - referred to hereafter as "the Panel"
        - and promulgated on 27 June 2014. To avoid confusion we shall refer
        to the appellant as "the Secretary of State" and to  the  respondent
        to this appeal as "the appellant." The Panel allowed the appellant's
        appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to deport him,
        following the completion of the custodial element of his sentence of
        imprisonment for causing grievous bodily harm.

     2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by a judge of the  First-
        tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) but after the Secretary  of  State  had
        submitted renewed Grounds of Appeal it was granted by a judge of the
        Upper Tribunal (Judge Andrew Jordan) on 2 October 2014.

     3. The appellant is a 32 year old Danish national who  entered  the  UK
        from Denmark to join his grandparents in 1996 at the age of 14.  The
        Panel found that by September  2001  he  had  acquired  a  right  of
        permanent residence in the UK under Regulation 15 of the Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA  Regulations").
        That issue was contested by the Secretary of State before the Panel,
        even though, as the  Panel  pointed  out  in  paragraph  24  of  the
        determination, she had taken no issue with whether he was exercising
        his EEA Treaty rights until 2001 in her refusal letter.

     4. Mr Whitwell sought before us to maintain a challenge to the  Panel's
        finding that  the  appellant  had  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
        residence, on the basis of allegedly  inadequate  reasoning  (ground
        one of the Secretary of State's  original  Grounds  of  Appeal).  He
        submitted  that  the  reasons  given  in  paragraphs  25-27  of  the
        determination did not support that finding. He pointed out that  the
        national  insurance  contributions  in  2001-2002  referred  to   in
        paragraph 26 amounted to only half a year's worth in  the  space  of
        two years, which he submitted cast some doubt on whether a five year
        period of study and work between 1996 and 2001 had been established.



     5. However, in  paragraph  28  of  the  determination  the  Panel  also
        accepted the evidence before it that the appellant had lived in  the
        UK continuously since 1996, and that "he initially  lived  with  his
        grandparents whilst his father sought employment within the NHS  (he
        is a hospital consultant)".  As the appellant has pointed out in his
        Rule 24 response, the Panel  could  easily  have  reached  the  same
        conclusion as to his acquisition of a right of  permanent  residence
        by a different route, since the appellant's  father  was  exercising
        his EEA Treaty rights to work on his arrival in the  UK  in  October
        1997.

     6. Mr Hawkin submitted that if need  be,  he  would  apply  to  us  for
        permission to adduce further documentary  evidence  confirming  that
        the father was indeed working within the NHS from 1997  onwards.  We
        looked at the small bundle of additional  documents  concerning  the
        father's employment de bene esse and Mr Whitwell was also given  the
        opportunity to consider them.  Although  no  formal  concession  was
        made, Mr Whitwell very fairly acknowledged that this evidence seemed
        conclusive of the issue.

     7. We were not persuaded in any event that the finding of the right  of
        permanent residence was not open to the Panel on the evidence before
        it or that its reasoning was inadequate or otherwise flawed.

     8. The real focus of this appeal has been on the  Panel's  approach  to
        the interpretation and application  of  Regulation  21  of  the  EEA
        Regulations.

     9. Regulation 21(3) precludes a decision being taken by a Member  State
        to remove a  person  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
        Regulation 15 "except on serious grounds of public policy or  public
        security." This was not a case about public security. Therefore  the
        first question for the Panel to address was whether the  appellant's
        removal was justified on "serious grounds of  public  policy."  This
        required  specific  consideration  of  whether  he  posed   a   "...
        sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the   fundamental
        interests of society" - Regulation 21(5)(c).  It  is  only  if  that
        threat was made out on the evidence that the Panel would need to  go
        on to  address the way in which the Secretary of State  had  weighed
        in the balance the considerations set out  under  Regulation  21(6),
        and decide if the removal was proportionate.

    10. The appellant's criminal history is set out in paragraphs 2-6 of the
        determination. It presents an unedifying portrait of a young man who
        is prepared to put the lives of  others  at  risk  by  driving  with
        excess alcohol in his bloodstream, and who in more recent years  has
        been  prone  to  violence  whilst  under  its   influence.   It   is
        particularly noteworthy that the index offence of  causing  grievous
        bodily harm, of which he was convicted after trial  at  Lewes  Crown
        Court, was committed whilst he was serving a suspended  sentence  of
        imprisonment for an earlier offence of  assault  occasioning  actual
        bodily harm. It was described by the sentencing judge as a "serious,
        senseless, unprovoked attack late at night." As the  Panel  observed
        in paragraph 36 of the determination:

        "the Respondent was particularly and understandably  concerned  that
        the Appellant appeared to have committed  an  escalating  series  of
        offences all related to problems  with  alcohol  and  without  being
        deterred by previous punishments - fines,  community  orders  and  a
        suspended sentence of imprisonment  -  the  latter  for  an  assault
        occasioning actual bodily harm."

    11. The activation of part of the suspended sentence and the sentence of
        imprisonment for the index offence led to a  total  sentence  of  30
        months' imprisonment.

    12. The Panel  considered  the  seriousness  of  the  offences  and  the
        assessments made of the risk of re-offending. They also  considered,
        in paragraph  41,  whether  the  appellant  had  shown  progress  in
        rehabilitating  himself.  In  paragraph  42  they   contrasted   his
        achievements in  the  controlled  environment  of  prison  with  the
        remarks of the sentencing judge concerning his lack of remorse,  and
        the remarks made by his offender manager  about  his  problems  with
        impulsivity and in controlling his behaviour. Their  conclusion  was
        that: "he continues to present a real  risk  of  re-offending  in  a
        similar manner but that it [i.e. the risk] is reduced by the work he
        has undertaken and the fact that since release 7 or 8 months ago  he
        has not re-offended."

    13. Thus far, the approach of the Panel was impeccable. The difficulties
        emanate from the way in which they expressed themselves in the  next
        paragraph, Paragraph 44, which is worth quoting in full:

        "We have some doubts, however,  whether  the  risk  presented  is  a
        "sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
        interests of society". The nature of his offending  has  been  anti-
        social and serious for those affected but in our judgment the phrase
        "fundamental interests of society" do not [sic] encompass prevention
        of all offences of violence."

    14. Mr Whitwell submitted that that paragraph, particularly  the  second
        sentence, indicated that the  Panel  had  not  adopted  the  correct
        interpretation of Regulation 25(1)(c) as set out in GW (Netherlands)
        [2009] UKAIT 00050 at [15]-[19] : a "threat  affecting  one  of  the
        fundamental interests of  society"  simply  means  a  threat  to  do
        something prohibited by law.

    15.  Whether  the  threat  is  "sufficiently  serious"  depends  on  the
        assessment of how likely it is that the offender will re-offend  and
        on the nature and seriousness  of  the  offences  he  is  likely  to
        commit. As a panel of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal comprising
        Carnwath LJ (as Senior President) and two Senior Immigration  Judges
        made clear in the case of LG and CC [2009] UKAIT  00024,  at  [106],
        the threat in the "serious grounds" category (level  2)  into  which
        this appellant falls, requires to be differentiated from that  posed
        in the lowest level of case, level 1, bearing in mind that a level 2
        person has acquired a permanent right of residence in  the  UK.  The
        offence must properly represent a higher level of seriousness:

        "one can imagine, for example, a serial  shoplifter  being  properly
        removable under level 1 but being unlikely to represent the level of
        risk that is required to be posed in the case of  a  person  with  a
        right of permanent residence".

    16. Mr Whitwell also submitted that it was wholly unclear what the Panel
        meant when they appeared to be seeking to differentiate between  the
        impact of the appellant's offending on his victims, on the one hand,
        and society on the other. We agree. For whatever reason,  the  Panel
        appears to have departed from consideration of the question  whether
        there was a sufficiently  serious  risk  that  the  appellant  would
        commit further offences of serious violence  in  the  future,  which
        they  addressed   in   paragraphs   41-43,   into   the   irrelevant
        consideration of how such further offending, if it  occurred,  might
        be seen to impact upon society as a whole.

    17. Despite Mr Hawkin's attempt to persuade us that the second  sentence
        of Paragraph 44 was simply a rather unclear way  of  expressing  the
        Panel's view that the  risk  of  the  appellant  committing  further
        offences of serious violence was too low to cross the threshold,  we
        accept  Mr  Whitwell's  submissions.  Unlike   the   rest   of   the
        determination, the reasoning in Paragraph 44 is plainly flawed.

    18. A sufficiently serious threat would not have been made  out  if  the
        Panel had reached the conclusion that the appellant was sufficiently
        rehabilitated as to pose little or no risk of violent re-offending -
        but it did  not  do  so.  On  the  contrary,  paragraph  42  of  the
        determination indicates that the Panel was  satisfied  that  a  real
        risk of further violent  offending  still  exists,  particularly  in
        conditions where access to alcohol is not controlled, although  that
        risk was perceived to have diminished to some extent in  consequence
        of the work he had done to address his offending behaviour in prison
        and his lack of re-offending since release.

    19. Moreover this was not a case in which there was a finding that if he
        did re-offend, his  offending  behaviour  was  unlikely  to  involve
        serious violence. In paragraph 43 the Panel stated in terms that the
        consequences of any such re-offending remained serious, and referred
        to the fact that the trigger offence was a serious unprovoked attack
        when the appellant had apparently intervened in a disagreement  that
        had nothing to do with him. It had already referred to  the  pattern
        of escalating violence in his offending.

    20. Where the  Panel  fell  into  error  in  paragraph  44  was  in  the
        expression of doubt that the risk that it had identified - namely, a
        real and continuing  risk  of  the  commission  of  further  violent
        offences which might cause serious injury to the victim or  victims,
        would meet the test in Regulation 21(5)(c). The Panel may have  been
        trying to make the  valid  observation  that  not  all  offences  of
        violence would necessarily pose a "sufficiently  serious  threat  to
        the fundamental interests of society" so as to  justify  making  the
        decision in principle to remove a level 2 offender.  However,  there
        is a world of difference between  minor  offences  of  violence  and
        causing grievous bodily harm. If members of the public are unable to
        go about their lawful business  without  a  serious  risk  of  being
        subjected to violent and unprovoked attacks  by  someone  under  the
        influence of alcohol - particularly at night - then in our  judgment
        the threshold in Regulation 21(5)(c) has plainly been crossed.

    21. Mr Hawkin submitted that paragraph 44 had to be read in the  context
        of the determination as a whole, and in particular by  reference  to
        the conclusion reached in paragraph 50:

        "In  summary,  we  have  found  the  Appellant  acquired   permanent
        residence in this country and has not lost the right to it. We  have
        the doubts we have expressed as to the  nature  and  extent  of  the
        claimed serious threat to public policy or public security. When  we
        factor in  the  considerations  we  have  mentioned  concerning  the
        Appellant's circumstances and the interests of the Union as a whole,
        we do not find the decision taken to be proportionate".

    22. Mr Hawkin referred to the way in which the Panel had approached  the
        considerations in  Regulation  21(6)  in  paragraphs  45-49  of  the
        determination. The Panel had reached  conclusions  on  the  evidence
        before it that the appellant was well settled in this country,  that
        his home had been in the UK since his early teens, that his ties  to
        Denmark were remote, his economic base is here although it is likely
        that his parents will continue to give him  financial  support,  all
        his immediate family members are  living  here,  and  his  continued
        rehabilitation could not be  enhanced  by  his  enforced  return  to
        Denmark and indeed was likely to be hindered by it.

    23.  Although  the  Secretary  of  State  sought  to   challenge   those
        conclusions in the original grounds of appeal, in our judgment  they
        are adequately reasoned and cannot be described as irrational.

    24. Mr Hawkin submitted that Regulation 21(6) considerations would  only
        arise if the conditions in Regulation 21(5)(c) were  fulfilled,  and
        therefore Paragraph  44  had  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that
        although the Panel had their doubts as to whether those requirements
        had been met, they were going to assume that they had,  and  proceed
        to consider Regulation 21(6) on that assumption. Thus, even if there
        was a misdirection in paragraph 44, it was a minor error which  made
        no difference to the outcome.

    25. In the light of the findings that the  Panel  went  on  to  make  in
        respect of the considerations  under  Regulation  21(6),  Mr  Hawkin
        submitted that even if an express finding had been made  that  there
        was a real and immediate risk of the  appellant  re-offending  in  a
        similar  manner,  the   decision   that   his   removal   would   be
        disproportionate would still be unimpeachable. He relied in  support
        of that submission on the case of LG and CC to which  reference  has
        already been made.

    26. LG, like the  appellant,  was  an  EEA  national  who  had  acquired
        permanent rights of residence in the UK. He had  been  convicted  of
        robbery and grievous bodily harm with intent and received a  lengthy
        sentence of imprisonment (12 years reduced to 9 on appeal).  He  had
        attacked the elderly victim  from  behind  in  order  to  steal  his
        wallet, inflicting serious head and  facial  injuries,  including  a
        fracture of the skull in the process. He  had  previously  served  a
        sentence of just over three years for theft and robbery. He had been
        assessed as "dangerous" by the trial judge and  a  probation  report
        had stated that "in respect of  controlling  anger  and  aggression,
        [LG] does not seem to have made any further progress in reducing the
        unacceptable risk of re-offending which was identified."

    27. Despite all these high risk  factors  the  Tribunal  concluded  that
        expulsion was not a proportionate response for someone who  came  to
        the UK as a child, acquired a permanent right of residence  in  this
        country, had lived here for some  15  years  before  the  crime  was
        committed, and had no significant links with the country of which he
        was a national, in that case, Italy.

    28. In our judgment, there are obvious parallels between the appellant's
        situation and that of  LG  in  terms  of  the  considerations  under
        Regulation 21(6) and the  balancing  exercise  to  be  carried  out.
        Although the appellant's offending was serious, it was less  serious
        than that of LG  (as  reflected  in  the  much  longer  sentence  of
        imprisonment that LG received) and it  would  also  appear  that  LG
        posed a far higher risk of re-offending, with none of  the  positive
        features reducing the risk that the Panel identified in the  present
        case.

    29. Thus we agree that the outcome of the determination  by  the  Panel,
        namely, that the  appellant's  removal  would  be  disproportionate,
        would have been  the  same  even  if  they  had  correctly  directed
        themselves as to the meaning of Regulation  21(5)(c),  and  even  if
        they had decided, as  they  should  have  done,  that  there  was  a
        sufficiently serious threat of the commission of further offences of
        violence to meet the requirements of that sub-paragraph.

    30. In any event, on the authority of LG that conclusion seems to us  to
        be inevitable on the fact-findings made by the Panel in this case.


    Notice of Decision

    31. For those reasons, although we find that  the  Panel  did  misdirect
        itself in paragraph 44, there was no material error of  law  in  the
        determination such that it should be set aside.

    32. Therefore the appeal is dismissed.


    No anonymity direction is made.
    Signed  [pic]
                                       Date 11 November 2014
    Mrs Justice Andrews




    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD


    No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


    Signed[pic]
                                  Date: 11 November 2014
    Mrs Justice Andrews



