
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02261/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 24 April 2014                     |On 29 May 2014                       |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [V C]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Steward, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Benfield, instructed by Pride Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, [VC], was born on 19 April 1970 and is a  male  citizen
    of Sri Lanka.  I shall  hereafter  refer  to  the  respondent  as  "the
    appellant" and to the Secretary of State as "the respondent"  (as  they
    respectively were before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had appealed against a decision of the  respondent  dated
    21 October 2013 to deport him to Sri Lanka.  His appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly and Dr Okitikpi) was  successful  under  the
    Immigration Rules and  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal  determination  was  promulgated  on  22  January  2014.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.



    The background to this appeal is very helpfully summarised in the First-
    tier Tribunal determination at [3]-[17]:

         The background to the making of the decision in this appeal is both
         lengthy and complex. We have done our best to summarise  it  below.
         We have generally placed the events in their  chronological  order.
         We have nevertheless on occasion found it necessary to depart  from
         the strict chronology in order to  avoid  unduly  interrupting  the
         individual narratives of those involved.

         The appellant applied for asylum in the United Kingdom on the  27th
         March 1998, having (he says) entered the country illegally  a  week
         earlier. That application was refused on the  20th  May  1999.  The
         appellant did  not  appeal  against  that  decision.  However,  the
         respondent appears not to have  taken  any  steps  to  enforce  his
         removal. Indeed, on the 27th May 1999, the then Secretary of  State
         informed him that he was free to take up employment in  the  United
         Kingdom; a situation of which he took advantage, and paid  tax  and
         National Insurance on his earnings as a result.

         On the 10th July 2004, the appellant  married  another  Sri  Lankan
         national, 'N', at the Registry Office in Kingston upon  Hull.  They
         had at that time a daughter, 'C', who was born on  the  16th  March
         2004. Their second daughter, 'V', was born on the 1st July 2008.

         On the 9th January 2007, the  appellant  sexually  assaulted  three
         women and a man in the street. The offences were  committed  within
         minutes of each other at a time when he was plainly very drunk.  He
         was sentenced to a total  of  12  months'  imprisonment  for  those
         offences, at Hull Crown Court, on the 12th  February  2007.  It  is
         that sentence that  has  triggered  the  respondent's  decision  to
         deport the appellant.

         On the 12th March 2007, the respondent issued a Notice of Liability
         for Deportation. The appellant was not released from  his  sentence
         of imprisonment until July 2007. The  respondent  nevertheless  now
         questions whether that  notice  was  effectively  served  upon  him
         whilst he was in prison. Be that as it may,  on  the  2nd  December
         2008 the respondent gave notice that the decision had been taken to
         deport  him  [see  appendix  'F'  of  the  respondent's  bundle  of
         documents]. So far as we are able to ascertain, that  decision  has
         never been formally withdrawn.

         The local social services department initially forbad the appellant
         from returning to the family home when he  was  released  from  his
         sentence of imprisonment. He  was  nevertheless  able  to  maintain
         frequent contact frequent with both C and V during this period.  In
         January 2009, he was permitted  to  resume  cohabitation  with  his
         family. However, the appellant and his wife separated after only  a
         few months.

         On the 8th December 2008, the respondent issued a second Notice  of
         Liability for Deportation, to which the appellant's representatives
         responded on the 1st January 2010. The reason  why  the  respondent
         considered it necessary to repeat this process, bearing in mind the
         previous and apparently still extant deportation decision,  remains
         obscure.

         In early 2010, N moved to Barnsley whilst the appellant remained in
         Hull. From that time onwards, various  agencies  began  to  express
         concern about the state of N's mental health and the effect that it
         was having upon her care of C and V. On the 11th February  2011,  C
         and V were taken into emergency police protection. This was in fact
         the second  occasion  upon  which  this  had  occurred.  The  first
         occasion had been whilst the appellant was  serving  his  custodial
         sentence in 2007. There then followed a period of phased return  of
         the children to their mother.

         The respondent made a second decision to deport  the  appellant  on
         the 8th  September  2011.  It  is  clear  that  by  this  time  the
         respondent was aware of the intervention of the police  and  social
         services, following on from the incident of the 11th February 2011.
         However, the respondent noted that the children were at that  stage
         living once again with their mother. Moreover, in view of the  fact
         that neither his  wife  nor  children  were  now  living  with  the
         appellant, the respondent decided not to deport N but to grant  her
         a period of 3 years' discretionary leave to  remain  instead.  This
         was granted on the 18th October 2011.

         On the 15th September 2011, the police  were  forced  to  take  the
         children into emergency protection for a third time  due  to  their
         mother's irrational behaviour and neglect in caring  for  them.  On
         the 19th November 2011, the local authority issued applications for
         full Care Orders to be made in respect of C and V, and the first of
         a series of Interim Care Orders was made on the 21st November 2011.
         Thereafter, contact between the children  and  their  parents  took
         place upon a supervised basis  at  a  Contact  Centre.  Immediately
         after a contact visit that took place on the 7th November  2011,  C
         indicated she no longer wished to have contact with her mother  due
         to her behaviour at that meeting. C indicated that she nevertheless
         wished  to  maintain  contact  with  her  father  (the  appellant).
         However, N continued to attend contact meetings with  her  children
         and to behave in a manner that was evidently upsetting them.

         On the 10th  January  2012,  the  respondent  withdrew  her  second
         decision to deport the appellant (i.e. the decision made on the 8th
         September 2011; see paragraph 10, above).

         The local authority's  application  for  Care  Orders  was  finally
         adjudicated upon by His Honour Judge Jeremy Baker QC  (as  he  then
         was) on the 13th December 2012. During the course of his judgement,
         he made the findings of fact that we have attempted to summarise at
         paragraphs 10 and 12 of this determination. He also found that  the
         appellant had been  regularly  been  consuming  alcohol  to  excess
         whilst he was living at the family home, and that he had thereafter
         failed to comply with the local authority's requests for assistance
         at a time when his wife was struggling to cope  with  the  care  of
         their children.  Judge  Baker  nevertheless  concluded  that,  "the
         undoubted benefits of  the  children's  ongoing  contact  with  the
         Father are of such value that the ultimate disposal  of  this  case
         lies with the care of these children in the context of a  placement
         in long term foster care so as to facilitate [this]" (paragraph  69
         of  the  judgment).  The  local  authority  appealed  against  this
         decision on the ground that the paramount  interests  of  C  and  V
         required that they  should  be  placed  in  care  with  a  view  to
         adoption, rather than long-term foster care.

         On the 4th March 2013, the respondent  made  a  third  decision  to
         deport the appellant. Although we have  been  unable  to  find  any
         record of  it,  we  assume  that  this  decision  was  subsequently
         withdrawn so that the position could be reviewed in  light  of  the
         judgement of the Court of Appeal (below).

         On the 23rd July 2013, the Court of Appeal overturned the  decision
         of Judge Baker QC and ordered that C and V should be placed in  the
         care of the local authority with a view to  their  adoption  rather
         than long-term foster care (Re V (Children) [2013] EWCA  Civ  913).
         Whilst the Court of Appeal did not doubt that  the  children  would
         benefit from continuing to maintain contact with their  father,  it
         concluded that this was outweighed by the  significant  detrimental
         effect of their mother's attempts at renewed  contact,  which  they
         concluded would inevitably continue for so  long  as  the  children
         remained in foster care (see paragraphs 91 to 94 and paragraph  102
         of the judgements). The court has now ordered that,  pending  their
         adoption, the appellant should have monthly supervised contact of 1
         hour, reducing to bi-monthly contact in 2014.

         On the 21st October 2013, the respondent made her fourth and  final
         decision to deport the appellant. This decision is subject  to  the
         present appeal.

 3. The appellant had also appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  on  asylum
    grounds.  [35] the Tribunal found that the appellant's account  of  his
    reasons for leaving Sri Lanka had  not  been  credible.   Further,  the
    Tribunal found that "even if we were to take the appellant's account at
    face value, we would not be satisfied  the  appellant  is  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to Sri Lanka."  The appellant did not  fall  into
    any of the risk categories identified in GJ and Others (post-civil war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG UKUT 00319  (IAC).   The  Tribunal  found  that
    there was "no evidential basis" for believing that the appellant  would
    be recognised on his return to Sri  Lanka  as  an  individual  who  had
    attended at protests in London outside the Sri Lankan Embassy.  None of
    the findings of the Tribunal in respect of the asylum grounds have been
    challenged by the appellant.

 4. The Tribunal's analysis of the grounds under the Immigration Rules  (in
    particular, paragraph 399)  and  in  respect  of  Article  8  ECHR  are
    summarised at [38] and following:

         We have begun our consideration of the appellant's Article 8  claim
         by reference to the factors that are set out in paragraphs 398  and
         399 of the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 28, above).

         Whilst the appellant has  now  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
         approximately one-third of his life, his period of  residence  does
         not qualify for limited leave to remain under paragraph 399A of the
         Immigration Rules. We therefore turn to consider  the  requirements
         relating to family life as they are set out in paragraph 399(a).

         Despite Mrs  Fell's  cogent  arguments  to  the  contrary,  we  are
         satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship  with  each  of  his  children  and   that   this   is
         particularly strong  in  relation  to  C.  The  existence  of  this
         relationship was recognised by both Judge Baker and  the  Court  of
         Appeal, albeit that they attached different levels of importance to
         it. We are fortified in reaching this  conclusion  by  reading  the
         moving sentiments of love and affection that the children expressed
         for the appellant in the Christmas cards that they sent to  him  in
         December 2013. In our view, the existence of this  relationship  is
         unaffected by the fact that it  will  terminate  if  and  when  the
         children are placed for adoption. This is because we  are  required
         by Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
         to consider the circumstances that currently prevail, subject  only
         to those circumstances being  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
         decision that is the subject of the appeal.

         We are satisfied that although she is not a British citizen, C  had
         lived continuously in the United Kingdom for a period of at least 7
         years immediately preceding the decision. We are also satisfied, as
         was the decision-maker, that it would  not  be  reasonable  in  the
         circumstances for either C or V to leave the United Kingdom.

         In paragraph 22(d) of the decision letter, dated the  21st  October
         2013, the decision-maker states that  s/he  considered  that  there
         were "other care arrangements available for C in the UK". Precisely
         the same wording was employed when considering the position  of  V,
         at paragraph 30(d) of the letter. However, the reference to  "other
         care arrangements" is a misrepresentation of the  wording  of  sub-
         paragraph  399(a)(ii)(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  This   sub-
         paragraph in fact stipulates that there must be  "no  other  family
         member who is able to care for  the  child  in  the  UK"  [emphasis
         added]. In view of the fact that both Judge Baker and the Court  of
         Appeal have found that the  children's  mother  is  unfit  to  have
         contact with C and V, she is a fortiori unfit to care for  them  in
         the United Kingdom. Indeed, it was her very inability to  care  for
         the children that caused the  police  to  take  the  children  into
         emergency care on three  occasions,  and  subsequently  caused  the
         local authority to seek Care Orders with a view to placing them for
         adoption.

         In view of the above, we are satisfied that the appellant  has  met
         the requirements for consideration of discretionary leave to remain
         (not exceeding 30 months) under paragraph 399  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. We are therefore satisfied that the decision to  deport  him
         is not in accordance with those rules.

         However, if we are wrong to  hold  that  the  appellant  meets  the
         requirements of paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  we
         should make it clear that we are  also  satisfied  that  there  are
         "other factors" - not contemplated by the Immigration Rules  -  but
         which, in combination with  the  matters  already  considered,  are
         sufficient to outweigh the public interest in deportation (see  the
         concluding  words  to  paragraph  398,  above).  In  reaching  this
         conclusion, we have considered those factors that are  relevant  to
         an Article 8 assessment in deportation cases. These are set out  in
         paragraphs 57 and 58 of the judgement in  Uner  v  The  Netherlands
         (2007) 45 EHRR 14, and are as follows:

             -    the nature and seriousness of the offence committed by
                  the applicant;

             -    the length of the applicant's stay in the country from
                  which he or she is to be expelled;

             -    the time elapsed since the offence was committed and the
                  applicant's conduct during that period;

             -    the nationalities of the various persons concerned;

             -    the applicant's family situation, such as the length of
                  the marriage, and other factors expressing the
                  effectiveness of a couple's family life;

             -    whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time
                  when he or she entered into a family relationship;

             -    whether there are children of the marriage, and if so,
                  their age; and

             -    the seriousness of the difficulties which the spouse is
                  likely to encounter in the country to which the applicant
                  is to be expelled.

             -    the best interests and well-being of the children, in
                  particular the seriousness of the difficulties which any
                  children of the applicant are likely to encounter in the
                  country to which the applicant is to be expelled; and

             -    the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with the
                  host country and with the country of destination.

         We acknowledge that all but one of these considerations  have  been
         factored into the Immigration Rules with a  view  to  striking  the
         appropriate  balance  between  the  competing  public  and  private
         interests that are typically engaged in a case where deportation is
         being considered. However, "the time elapsed since the offence  was
         committed and the applicant's conduct during that period" does  not
         feature in the equation under  either  paragraph  398  or  399.  We
         accept that this may be because it is unlikely to be a  significant
         factor in the general run of cases. If so, it reinforces  our  view
         that that it is an exceptional  circumstance  that  is  capable  of
         outweighing  the   public   interest   in   deportation.   In   the
         circumstances of this case, we  consider  that  it  weighs  heavily
         against a decision to deport the appellant.  It  will  be  recalled
         that it is now almost  exactly  seven  years  since  the  appellant
         committed the offences (all on the same day) in question, and there
         is no suggestion that the  appellant  has  re-offended  since  that
         time. Moreover, we accept the submission of Mr Chippendale that the
         absence of offending over a period of seven years strongly suggests
         that the risk of the appellant re-offending is now minimal. This in
         turn considerably reduces what might otherwise have been the strong
         public interest in deportation.

         In view of the  fact  that  the  children  are  to  be  placed  for
         adoption, there is an argument for saying that  their  interest  in
         the appellant remaining in the United Kingdom is now insignificant.
         However,  this  argument  ignores  two  important   considerations.
         Firstly, adoption  will  only  take  place  (if  at  all)  at  some
         indeterminate point in the future when  suitable  adoptive  parents
         have been identified. In the meantime, the  children  are  entitled
         (and apparently wish) to maintain their limited  contact  with  the
         appellant, the benefits of which were acknowledged by the Court  of
         Appeal. Secondly, it ignores the  difficulties  that  the  children
         would face in  seeking  to  be  reunited  with  their  father  upon
         reaching the age of majority. These difficulties  arise  because  a
         deportation order will have the effect of excluding  the  appellant
         from the United Kingdom for a period of up to ten years. It is thus
         ironic that the respondent should have chosen to grant N  a  period
         of leave to remain on the basis of her relationship with  children,
         who (as is now clear) are unlikely to seek contact with her in  the
         future, whilst seeking to deport their father to whom  they  remain
         devoted.

 5. A number of the grounds were rejected at the permission stage by  Judge
    Garratt who, at [2] noted that:

         The grounds appeared to be in error in suggesting  that  the  panel
         misdirected themselves in law by finding that the appellant is  not
         the subject of the provisions  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  for
         automatic deportation.  The decision  appealed  against,  dated  21
         October 2013, related to removal on conducive grounds  because  the
         appellant had been convicted prior  to  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
         coming  into  force.   The  panel  also  correctly  considered  the
         provisions of paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules which
         applied to the appeal even if deportation was on conducive grounds.

 6. Likewise, Mr Steward, for the respondent, did not make any  submissions
    to me in respect of [4] and [5]  of  the  grounds  which,  in  summary,
    assert that the Tribunal had insufficient regard to  the  existence  or
    absence of "exceptional circumstances" in the facts of this  appeal  or
    to the public interest concerned with the removal of the appellant.   I
    find that the Tribunal was well aware of the public interest and  dealt
    with this at [45].  In any event, it is difficult to see  how,  if  the
    decision of the Tribunal in respect of the Immigration Rules appeal  is
    not flawed by legal error, the respondent might maintain the  challenge
    in respect of the public interest; that and other relevant factors  are
    incorporated within the Rules themselves.  Judge  Garratt  was  of  the
    opinion that the strongest and perhaps only  properly  arguable  ground
    was that at [3].  Judge Garratt summarised this as follows:

         However, it is arguable that the panel were in error in  concluding
         that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with his children when the decision of  the  Court  of
         Appeal, in the knowledge of the appellant's relationship  with  his
         children, was that such children should remain in care with a  view
         to adoption.

    In essence, the challenge is to the sustainability  of  the  Tribunal's
    findings at [46] which I have quoted above.  At the heart of this  part
    of the appeal is the Tribunal's finding at [40] that "in our view,  the
    existence of  [the  appellant's  relationship  with  the  children,  in
    particular with C] is unaffected by the fact that it will terminate  if
    and when the children are placed for adoption."  In my view, that is an
    entirely legitimate finding.  It is  not  logical  simply  to  conclude
    that, because a relationship may at some point in the future come to an
    end, it cannot be genuine and subsisting  prior  to  that  termination.
    Indeed, for example, a parent's  relationship  with  a  terminally  ill
    child would not be questioned simply because it  is  certain  that  the
    relationship will come to an end.  It should also be borne in mind  the
    maximum period of leave which might be given to the appellant under the
    Rules is 30 months whilst, in relation to Article 8 more generally,  it
    is open to the respondent to award a period of leave  to  remain  which
    would be commensurate with the adoption proceedings.

 7. In summary, the Tribunal's  finding  in  respect  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his children  is  not  flawed  by  any  legal
    error.  As a consequence, the Tribunal's decision to allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules should stand.  It follows  that  any  error
    which may have occurred in the Article 8 ECHR analysis would not affect
    the outcome of the appeal but  I  find  that  that  analysis  was  also
    legally sound.  At [6], the grounds take issue with the  weight  placed
    by the Tribunal [46] on the possible difficulties  the  children  would
    have in seeking to find their father after they reach  their  majority.
    I consider that the Tribunal should not have attached  any  significant
    weight to that consideration; there is no evidence at the present  time
    that they will seek to find their father in the future or, indeed, that
    they would be unable to do so.  However, even if the panel did arguably
    err in law in attaching weight  to  that  consideration,  it  does  not
    undermine the reasoning of the determination as a whole and  I decline
    to set their decision aside accordingly.

DECISION

 8. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 22 May 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
