
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00115/2019
      (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely by Skype for Business from   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Field House                                 |                              |
|On 15 February 2021                         |On 19 March 2021              |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     a s
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Kerr, Counsel, instructed by Karis Law
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is the re-making of the decision in this case. Whilst it  was  the
    Secretary of State who brought the appeal to the Upper Tribunal against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  now  that  I  have  set  that
    decision aside the parties  are  as  they  originally  were.  Thus,  Mr
    Selmani is once more the appellant and the Secretary of  State  is  the
    respondent.

 2. The full error of law decision, promulgated on  17  December  2020,  is
    appended to this re-making decision.

 3. The appellant is, as matters  stand,  a  British  citizen.  He  appeals
    against the respondent's decision, made on 25 October 2019, to  deprive
    him of that citizenship on the  basis  that  the  naturalisation  as  a
    British citizen was obtained by means of fraud or false  representation
    pursuant to section 40(3) of the British  Nationality  Act  1981.  This
    provides as follows:

         "40 Deprivation of citizenship.

             (1) In this section a reference to a person's "citizenship
             status " is a reference to his status as-

             (a) a British citizen

             ...

             (3) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
             citizenship status which results from his registration or
             naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
             registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

             (a)fraud,

             (b)false representation, or

             (c)concealment of a material fact."

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  5  September  2002  and
    claimed asylum soon thereafter. In doing so he gave his  correct  name,
    but stated his date of birth to be 10 March 1987 and his nationality to
    be Serbian. In fact, his correct date of birth was  10  September  1987
    and he was an Albanian citizen. These two  falsehoods  constituted  the
    basis of what is accepted to have  been  deception  employed  over  the
    course of time.

 5. The appellant's asylum claim was refused on 10 October  2002.  However,
    by virtue of his age he was granted what was  then  termed  exceptional
    leave to enter ("ELE") as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking  child.  This
    ELE was due to expire on 9 March 2005, a day before he turned 18.

 6. By an extension application made on 25  February  2005,  the  appellant
    sought further leave to remain. On 28 March 2007 he made an application
    for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  ("ILR"),  again  using  the   false
    information provided to the respondent upon entry to this country. As a
    result of the outstanding extension application made in February  2005,
    the appellant was brought into the ambit of the legacy programme and on
    13 March 2008 he completed a questionnaire to assist with that process.
    He again used the false date of birth and nationality.  By  this  time,
    the appellant was an adult.

 7. On 15 February 2013 the appellant was granted ILR. Later that  year  he
    made an initial application to naturalise as a British  citizen,  using
    the false information. This was refused on good character  grounds  due
    to  previous  criminal  convictions.  On  28  April   2014   a   second
    naturalisation application was made, using the same false  information.
    That application was granted  and  the  appellant  was  issued  with  a
    certificate of naturalisation on 5 June  2014.  It  was  only  sometime
    afterwards  and  following  investigation  that  the   respondent   was
    presented with information indicating that the appellant  had  provided
    false personal details in 2002 and had continued to put  these  forward
    at all stages.




The respondent's decision

 8. On 25 October 2019 the respondent made  the  decision  to  deprive  the
    appellant of his British citizenship. A detailed immigration history is
    set  out  in  the  decision  letter  with  reference  to  the   various
    applications made over time. The relevant parts of paragraphs  20,  21,
    and 23 of the letter read as follows:

         "20. If your true Albanian identity was  known  at  the  (sic)  you
         submitted an application for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  it  is
         likely that you (sic) have been refused and therefore not have  met
         the mandatory requirement for naturalisation. Your false  place  of
         birth, Serbia was material to  you  being  granted  ILR  (sic)  you
         persisted with the deception in your naturalisation application and
         ticked the box to indicate you had not done anything to suggest you
         was (sic) not of good character.

         21. ...It is  clear  that  you  would  have  been  refused  British
         citizenship under S.9.3 and 9.4 [of the  Nationality  Instructions]
         had the nationality caseworker been aware that you had presented  a
         false identity to  the  Home  Office  and  continued  to  use  that
         identity throughout your immigration history.

         ...

         23....Had your  true  details  and  information  relating  to  your
         deception been known, Indefinite Leave to  Remain  would  not  have
         been granted. Thus he would not have met the residence requirements
         needed to naturalise and deprivation is therefore applicable."

 9. It can be seen that the  respondent's  decision  not  only  linked  the
    deception to  the  grant  of  ILR,  but  also  to  the  good  character
    requirement applicable in naturalisation applications.

10. Having concluded that the appellant would not have been granted  either
    ILR or naturalisation as a British citizenship if the false information
    had been known about at the relevant time, the respondent  went  on  to
    decline to exercise discretion in his favour. In respect of  Article  8
    ECHR ("Article 8"), it was recognised that the appellant  was  married,
    had spent a lengthy time in this country and  that  he  had  a  British
    child. However, in all the circumstances  it  was  concluded  that  the
    deprivation  of  citizenship  would  not  constitute  a  violation   of
    protected Article 8 rights.



The evidence

11. When re-making the decision in this appeal, I have had  regard  to  the
    following evidence:

              a) the respondent's appeal bundle, under cover of letter dated
                 27 November 2019;




              b) the original appellant's bundle, indexed and  paginated  1-
                 45;




              c) a copy  of  the  most  recent  tenancy  agreement  for  the
                 appellant, a payslip from his employer, dated  12  February
                 2021, and the residence permit for his wife confirming that
                 she has leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  until  24
                 December 2021.

12. The appellant attended the remote hearing and  gave  oral  evidence  in
    English. I summarise that evidence here.

13. In evidence-in-chief, the appellant adopted his witness statement dated
    31 January 2020. This set  out  his  history  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    including his acceptance of the use of deception. He  provided  details
    of  his  family  circumstances,  his  employment,  and  general  living
    arrangements in this country.

14. The appellant told me that he now earns approximately �2000 a month and
    that his wife is not working as she looks after the couple's  two-year-
    old daughter. The appellant has been  'furloughed'  due  to  the  Covid
    pandemic and the family was now struggling a bit. The rent had gone up.
    If he was unable to work, the appellant told me that  he  thought  that
    they would become homeless. They have no savings. He believed that  his
    wife could work but any job would need to pay above the  minimum  wage.
    Her English was not particularly strong. The appellant  explained  that
    he had borrowed money from relatives and friends before and he was  not
    sure if he could do so again.

15. In cross-examination, the appellant confirmed that  his  wife  received
    Child Benefit for their daughter. His wife had  not  worked  in  United
    Kingdom, but has done so in Albania.

16. There was no re-examination.



Submissions
17. Ms Cunha relied on the respondent's decision letter. She emphasised the
    appellant's continuous use of deception throughout the process of
    obtaining ELE, ILR, and then British citizenship. In respect of the
    requisite causative link between the deception and the obtaining leave
    and then citizenship, she relied on paragraphs 60-64 of Sleiman
    (deprivation of citizenship; conduct) [2017] UKUT 367 (IAC). In the
    present case, there had been no concession by the respondent as to the
    absence of a causative link. She relied on the fact that the appellant
    had stated in his naturalisation application that he was of good
    character when this was not in fact the case. In respect of his ILR
    application, the appellant had stated that he had a fear of return to
    Serbia. This was untrue and if the deception had been known he would
    not have been granted that status.

18. On the issue of discretion, Ms Cunha submitted that the  appellant  had
    practised deception whilst an adult. There was nothing in the  case  to
    warrant the exercise of discretion in his favour.


19. Finally, in respect of Article 8, Ms Cunha relied on Hysaj (Deprivation
    of Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 128 (IAC) and submitted that the
    public interest outweighed any protected rights.

20. Mr Kerr relied on his skeleton argument, dated  14  February  2021.  He
    submitted that the appellant would have been granted ELE by  virtue  of
    his age, notwithstanding the false date of birth and  nationality.  The
    appellant would also have been granted ILR under the  legacy  programme
    notwithstanding the provision of false information. Any claimed risk on
    return to Serbia was immaterial to that grant of  leave.  Reliance  was
    placed on paragraphs 55.7.3 and 55.7.4 of Chapter 55 of the Nationality
    Instructions.

21. Mr  Kerr  referred  to  Annex  D  of  Chapter  18  of  the  Nationality
    Instructions at Annex T of the respondent's bundle. He  submitted  that
    if all naturalisation applications were to be refused pursuant to  this
    guidance, there would be no point in what is said in Chapter 55.

22. As to discretion, Mr Kerr submitted that  the  appellant  has  provided
    true information when confronted by the respondent and noted  that  the
    deception had started when the appellant was still a minor.

23. In respect of Article 8, Mr Kerr acknowledged what is  said  in  Hysaj,
    but urged me to take account of the timeframe stated by the  respondent
    in her decision letter, together with all other relevant factors  which
    included: the appellant's long residence in  the  United  Kingdom;  the
    presence  of  his  wife  and  British  child;  their   current   living
    arrangements; the absence of a decision by the respondent on whether to
    grant another form of leave or to remove the appellant from the  United
    Kingdom.  All-told,  Mr  Kerr   submitted   that   the   decision   was
    disproportionate and therefore unlawful.



Findings of fact

24. There are few, if any, material dispute as to the facts in this case.

25. The appellant's immigration history is as set out  in  paragraphs  4-7,
    above.

26. For the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  I  find  that  the  appellant  did
    dishonestly provide false information throughout his dealings with  the
    respondent until he was confronted with the allegation of deception, at
    which point he made a full and frank admission.

27. I find that the appellant is married and has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his wife, who is an Albanian citizen  with  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until 24 December 2021. I accept that  she
    has not worked whilst in this country, although I do find that she  has
    some experience of employment whilst  back  in  Albania.  The  evidence
    about her English language ability is somewhat vague, but I will accept
    that it is not particularly good. Having said that,  I  find  that  she
    would be willing and able to find work in  this  country  if  the  need
    arose. I note that she is permitted to work. There is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the appellant would not be able to look after the couple's
    daughter himself whilst his wife worked.

28. The appellant's daughter is a British citizen.

29. I accept that the  family  unit's  financial  circumstances  will  have
    become more difficult over the last year or so in light  of  the  Covid
    pandemic. This is true of a very large number of families in the United
    Kingdom (and  indeed  around  the  world).  I  accept  the  appellant's
    evidence that he has borrowed some money from  relatives  and  friends.
    Whilst he has raised a concern that he would not be able to procure any
    more financial support, there is no clear evidence to that effect.  For
    example, there is no evidence from relatives or  friends  stating  that
    they would not be prepared to help if the appellant was unable to work.
    It is more likely than not that some form of financial support would be
    forthcoming.

30. Overall, the appellant cannot show that it is more likely than not that
    he and his family would become  homeless  if  he  were  precluded  from
    working as a consequence of the deprivation of his British citizenship.

31. I find that the appellant, his wife, and their daughter are healthy.

32. There has been no suggestion that the appellant would not  be  entitled
    to Albanian citizenship, and I find that he is so entitled.



Conclusions

The first issue: causative links


33. In considering this issue I have directed myself to relevant  case-law,
    as referred to by the parties in their written and oral submissions.  I
    bear in mind that the respondent bears the burden of showing  that  the
    naturalisation as a British citizenship  was  obtained  "by  means  of"
    fraud or false representations.


34. As I stated in my error of law decision, the appellant would have  been
    granted the initial period of ELE whatever his  true  nationality  was.
    On any view, he was a minor at the time and the respondent's policy  at
    the relevant time indicated that a grant of leave was highly likely  to
    have been made even if it had been known that he was Albanian  and  not
    Serbian.

35. Therefore, no causative link between the deception  and  grant  of  ELE
    existed.

36. The position is different, however, in respect of the grant of ILR.

37. In my judgment, it is relevant that, prior to  the  decision  to  grant
    ILR, the appellant had practised the deception in respect  of  his  age
    and nationality on at least three further occasions: in the application
    for ILR on 28 March 2007; in the legacy questionnaire completed  on  13
    March 2008; and in the letter of 24 March 2009, in which  his  previous
    solicitors  chased  up  the  legacy  issue,  again  stating  the  false
    information and expressly confirming that the Appellant was  "a  person
    of good character".

38. Also of relevance is the point set out in the respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal relating to factors set out in Chapter  53
    of the guidance applicable to  the  question  of  whether  "exceptional
    circumstances" existed in  cases  being  considered  under  the  legacy
    programme. The first of the factors listed at paragraph 53.1.1 of  that
    guidance (current at the date of ILR decision) was  whether  there  was
    "evidence of deception practised at any stage in the process."  If  the
    respondent had been aware of the full facts at the time,  it  is  plain
    that there would have been such "evidence", and it is difficult to  see
    how it would have been "inevitable" (or  even  very  likely)  that  the
    grant of leave would have occurred notwithstanding this evidence.

39. Although I  take  account  of  Mr  Kerr's  description  of  the  legacy
    programme as constituting something of a "mopping up" route to  settled
    status, it is incorrect to regarded as a wholesale amnesty  in  respect
    of which no factors relating to deception would  have  been  likely  to
    bear material relevance to the outcome. In other  words,  knowledge  of
    deception practised by an individual within the  programme  would  have
    been, in my judgment, a  material  consideration  in  the  respondent's
    decision-making process.

40. The absence of a minute note from the  respondent  as  to  the  precise
    basis for the grant of ILR in 2013 does not take the  appellant's  case
    any further. It is an inescapable fact that the respondent was  unaware
    of the deception at the time she made that decision.

41. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant's deception
    would have had a material bearing on the decision to grant ILR.

42. Having said that, I acknowledge that the legacy programme  did  not  in
    the usual course of events involve the making  of  an  application  for
    ILR. Thus, it may be said that the grant of status to the appellant did
    not follow from an application in respect of  which  he  had  practised
    deception. The reason  why  I  have  set  out  my  conclusions  on  the
    appellant's conduct in the foregoing paragraphs is that he did in  fact
    make an application for ILR, albeit that it was not, strictly speaking,
    and necessary course of action.

43. For reasons which follow, these conclusions, whether  right  or  wrong,
    stand alone from what I  say  about  the  causative  link  between  the
    deception and the decision to naturalise the  appellant  as  a  British
    citizen. The establishment of a causative  link  for  the  purposes  of
    section 40(3) of the 1981 Act relates not to the grant of ILR,  but  to
    the obtaining of British citizenship through naturalisation.

44. Somewhat unusually, the specific requirements for naturalisation  as  a
    British citizen are set out in the primary legislation itself. Schedule
    1 to the  1981  Act  provides  for  a  residence  criterion  (paragraph
    1(1)(a));  the  need  to  show  good  character  (paragraph   1(1)(b));
    knowledge of the relevant language  and  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    (paragraph 1(1)(c) and (ca));  and  an  intention  to  reside  in  this
    country or engage in the  Crown  service  or  other  relevant  position
    (paragraph 1(1)(d)).

45. The "good character" criterion is thus plainly integral to the decision-
    making process. As a matter of logic, it falls  to  be  considered  not
    simply in light of an individual's past history, but also in respect of
    what they have stated in that application itself.

46. In the present case, the decision letter clearly makes reference to the
    good character criterion and there has been no subsequent concession by
    the respondent. In this way, this case can be  distinguished  from  the
    situation in Sleiman.

47. Annex D of Chapter 18 of the Nationality Instructions has been referred
    to previously. Section 8.2 includes  examples  where  dishonesty  would
    "normally" lead to a naturalisation application being refused. The last
    of these states:

           "providing  false  or  deliberately  misleading  information  at
           earlier stages of  the  immigration  application  process  (e.g.
           providing false bio-data, claiming to be a nationality they were
           not or  concealing  conviction  data).  Where  this  applies,  a
           refusal on the deception ground may also be merited."

48. At Section 9.3 it  is  stated  that  applications  will  "normally"  be
    refused where:

           "...there is evidence that a person has employed deception
          either:

           during the citizenship application process; or

           in a previous immigration application."

49. It can be seen from this guidance that deception practised  in  respect
    of previous immigration applications will be relevant, but that this is
    not a condition precedent for an application for naturalisation  to  be
    refused  on  good  character  grounds:  deception  in  respect  of  the
    naturalisation application itself can be sufficient.

50. I see no contradiction or tension between Annex D  of  Chapter  18  and
    Chapter 55 of the Nationality Instructions. The  former  give  guidance
    specifically on the issue of good character, the latter (insofar as  it
    has been  relied  on  before  me)  relates  in  the  main  to  previous
    immigration history.

51. Turning to the present case, the  previous  use  of  deception  by  the
    appellant, if known about at the time of  the  decision  to  grant  the
    naturalisation application, would in my judgment have been  a  material
    consideration and would have been likely to have altered the outcome of
    that application.

52. Even if the previous deception were  left  out  of  account,  the  fact
    remains that the appellant continued with  the  deception  when  making
    both of his naturalisation applications. If  the  respondent  had  been
    aware of that deception at the time of the decision, it is at the  very
    least more likely than not that this consideration  would  have  had  a
    material  impact  on  the  decision   to   grant   the   naturalisation
    application.

53. That he failed to admit the  dishonesty  when  the  first  of  the  two
    applications was rejected only adds to the overall significance of  his
    conduct on the good character requirement.

54. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the respondent has  shown
    a causative link between the appellant's deception and the decision  to
    naturalise him as a British citizen. Indeed, in my judgment the link is
    plain.



The second issue: discretion

55. In exercising my own  discretion,  I  have  regard  to  the  reasonably
    foreseeable consequences of deprivation, whilst at the  same  time  not
    engaging in a proleptic analysis (see Hysaj, at paragraph 35-37).

56. I have taken the following factors into account on the appellant's side
    of the equation:

              a) he was a minor when he arrived in United Kingdom  and  made
                 his asylum claim in 2002;




              b) he has been in the United Kingdom for a considerable period
                 of time;


              c) when confronted with his dishonesty, he admitted to this;


              d) he has a settled private and family life in  this  country,
                 including his British citizen child;

57. In the respondent's favour, I take account of the following:

              a) the importance of the public interest and the  respondent's
                 primary  responsibility   for   ensuring   that   this   is
                 maintained;




              b)  that  the  appellant  perpetuated  dishonesty  on  several
                 occasions when an adult;


              c)  the  appellant's  dishonesty  was   only   admitted   when
                 confronted by the respondent;


              d) that no material delay or "historic injustice" has occurred
                 in this case;


              e) the appellant  has  not  shown  that  the  consequences  of
                 deprivation would give rise to compelling  features  which,
                 taken in isolation or  together  with  all  other  factors,
                 warrant an exercise of discretion in his favour.

58. Having considered all relevant  matters,  I  conclude  that  discretion
    should not be exercised in the appellant's favour.  I  appreciate  that
    the deprivation of his British citizenship will  cause  disruption  and
    lead to anxiety, but in all the circumstances of this case  the  strong
    public interest clearly emerges  from  the  analysis  as  the  dominant
    factor.



The third issue: Article 8

59. The appellant has a private and family life in the United  Kingdom  and
    the respondent's decision interferes with those protected rights.

60. In my judgment, the decision is proportionate. In saying this I rely on
    the factors set out and considered under the second  issue,  above.  In
    addition, I take into account what is said in Hysaj, at paragraphs  117
    and 118. In the present case, the appellant will continue to live  with
    his wife and child. The child will be entitled to relevant  support  by
    virtue of his British citizenship. The  appellant's  wife  is  able  to
    work. A reduction in the family unit's financial resources and  overall
    circumstances will not, in isolation or on a cumulative  basis,  go  to
    outweigh the strong public interest in cases such as the present.

61. In short, the appellant is unable to show a sufficiently strong Article
    8 claim such as to permit him to succeed on this basis.



Additional observation

62. In this case, as in many others that I have come across, the respondent
    has set out a timeframe in her decision letter  in  order  to  "provide
    clarity regarding the period between loss of citizenship via service of
    a deprivation order and the further decision to remove, deport or grant
    leave." That timeframe is said to involve the making of  a  deprivation
    order within 4 weeks of the appellant becoming appeal rights exhausted,
    with a decision on whether to grant  leave  or  remove  him  to  follow
    within 8 weeks of the deprivation order being made. Mr  Kerr  expressed
    some concern at the hearing that in his experience these timeframes are
    not being complied with. Whilst that is not a matter for  me,  I  would
    emphasise the importance of expeditious decision-making in  cases  such
    as these. Although it may be said that the appellant  has  brought  the
    difficulties he faces upon himself, there are other family  members  to
    be considered, in particular a British citizen child.



Anonymity


63. No anonymity direction has been made thus far, and I see no reason to
    make one at this stage. The public interest in open justice is an
    extremely important principle. In this case, identification of the
    appellant and/or family members would not give rise to risk of harm.



Notice of Decision

64. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

65. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  16 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  16 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00115/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A S
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


The hearing of this appeal was conducted remotely by Skype for Business and
was recorded by the Upper Tribunal


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kerr, Counsel, instructed by Karis Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as they were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal; the Secretary of State is therefore once  more
    the Respondent and Mr Selmani is the Appellant.

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by  the  Respondent,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   McKinney   ("the   judge"),
    promulgated on 17 February 2020, by which she allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision to deprive him of his  British
    citizenship pursuant to section 40(3) of the  British  Nationality  Act
    1981, as amended ("the 1981 Act").  This provides as follows:

         "40 Deprivation of citizenship.

             (1) In this section a reference to a person's "citizenship
             status" is a reference to his status as-

             (a) a British citizen

             ...

             (3) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
             citizenship status which results from his registration or
             naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
             registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

             (a)fraud,

             (b)false representation, or

             (c)concealment of a material fact."

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  5  September  2002  and
    claimed asylum very soon thereafter.  In doing so he gave  his  correct
    name, but stated his date  of  birth  to  be  10  March  1987  and  his
    nationality to be Serbian.  In fact, his correct date of  birth  is  10
    September 1987 and he is an Albanian  citizen.   These  two  falsehoods
    constitute the basis of what is accepted to be deception employed  over
    the course of time.

 4. The Appellant's asylum claim was refused on 10 October 2002.   However,
    by virtue of his age he was granted what was  then  termed  exceptional
    leave to enter ("ELE") as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.   This
    ELE was due to expire on 9 March 2005, a day before he turned 18.

 5. By an extension application made on 25  February  2005,  the  Appellant
    sought  further  leave  to  remain.   On  28  March  2007  he  made  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain  ("ILR"),  again  using  the
    false information  provided  to  the  Respondent  upon  entry  to  this
    country.  As a result of the outstanding extension application made  in
    February 2005, the Appellant was brought into the ambit of  the  legacy
    programme and on 13 March 2008 he completed a questionnaire  to  assist
    with that  process.   He  again  used  the  false  date  of  birth  and
    nationality.  By this time, the Appellant was an adult.

 6. On 15 February 2013  the  Appellant  was  granted  ILR  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Later that year he made an initial application to  naturalise
    as a British citizen.  This was refused on good character  grounds  due
    to previous criminal convictions.  Once again,  false  information  was
    used in that application.  On 28 April  2014  a  second  naturalisation
    application  was  made,  using  the  same  false   information.    That
    application was granted and the Appellant was issued with a certificate
    of naturalisation on 5 June 2014.  It was only sometime afterwards  and
    following  investigation  that  the  Respondent  was   presented   with
    information indicating that the Appellant had provided  false  personal
    details in 2002 and had continued to put these forward at all stages.

The Respondent's decision

 7. On 25 October 2019 the  Respondent  made  a  decision  to  deprive  the
    Appellant of his British citizenship under section 40(3)  of  the  1981
    Act.  A detailed immigration history is set out in the decision  letter
    with reference  to  the  various  applications  made  over  time.   The
    relevant parts of paragraphs 20, 21, and  23  of  the  letter  read  as
    follows:

         "20. If your true Albanian identity was  known  at  the  (sic)  you
         submitted an application for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  it  is
         likely that you (sic) have been refused and therefore not have  met
         the mandatory requirement for naturalisation. Your false  place  of
         birth, Serbia was material to  you  being  granted  ILR  (sic)  you
         persisted with the deception in your naturalisation application and
         ticked the box to indicate you had not done anything to suggest you
         was (sic) not of good character.

         21. ...It is  clear  that  you  would  have  been  refused  British
         citizenship under S.9.3 and 9.4 [of the  Nationality  Instructions]
         had the nationality caseworker been aware that you had presented  a
         false identity to  the  Home  Office  and  continued  to  use  that
         identity throughout your immigration history.

         ...

         23....Had your  true  details  and  information  relating  to  your
         deception been known, Indefinite Leave to  Remain  would  not  have
         been granted. Thus he would not have met the residence requirements
         needed to naturalise and deprivation is therefore applicable."

 8. It can be seen that the  Respondent's  decision  not  only  linked  the
    deception to  the  grant  of  ILR,  but  also  to  the  good  character
    requirement applicable in naturalisation applications.

 9. Having concluded that the Appellant would not have been granted  either
    ILR or naturalisation as a British citizenship if the false information
    had been known about at the relevant time, the Respondent  went  on  to
    decline to exercise discretion in his favour. In respect of  Article  8
    ECHR ("Article 8"), it was recognised that the Appellant  was  married,
    had spent a lengthy time in this country and  that  he  had  a  British
    child.  However, in all the circumstances it  was  concluded  that  the
    deprivation  of  citizenship  would  not  constitute  a  violation   of
    protected Article 8 rights.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

10. The Appellant appealed and the case came before the judge on 31 January
    2020.  The judge referred  herself to the 1981  Act  and  a  number  of
    authorities relevant to the issues which fell to be  addressed  in  the
    appeal.  The essential self-directions are set out at [9]  -  [12]  and
    can be summarised thus: first, it was for the Respondent  to  establish
    the condition precedent under section 40(3) of the  1981  Act;  second,
    that if that condition existed, it was for the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    decide whether discretion should be exercised in the Appellant's favour
    in any event; third, if this did not assist the  Appellant,  Article  8
    should be addressed.

11. The judge summarised the submissions made by both  representatives  (Mr
    Kerr appeared for the Appellant).  The Presenting Officer relied on the
    decision letter  and  had  emphasised  the  use  of  deception  by  the
    Appellant once he had become an adult.  The Presenting Officer had been
    unable to provide a  minute  relating  to  the  decision  granting  the
    Appellant ILR in 2013.

12. Mr Kerr relied on a skeleton argument and submitted that the  incorrect
    date of birth relied on by the Appellant had made no difference to  the
    grant of either ELE or ILR.  The case was properly dealt with under the
    legacy programme  and  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  establish  the
    causative link  between  the  deception  and  the  grant  of  ILR.   In
    addition, the Respondent had  failed  to  establish  a  causative  link
    between  the  deception  and  the  naturalisation  decision.   Mr  Kerr
    submitted that even if a link  had  been  established,  the  Respondent
    should have exercised her discretion in the Appellant's  favour  and/or
    concluded that deprivation would violate  Article  8.   The  judge  was
    asked to so conclude.

13. At [23] the judge noted that the acceptance  on  the  Appellant's  part
    that he had perpetuated deception in respect of his reliance  on  false
    information in his dealings with the Respondent. She stated (correctly)
    that there must be a causative  link  between  the  deception  and  the
    acquisition of British citizenship.

14. At [24] the judge then concluded that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to
    prove the causative link between the use of the  false  representations
    and the acquisition of British citizenship.  In all the  circumstances,
    she found that the Appellant would have been granted  ELE  as  a  minor
    whatever his nationality and noted that the false date of birth in fact
    made him older than he was.

15. She moved on to consider the grant of ILR with reference to the  legacy
    programme.  She acknowledges that that programme was never intended  to
    be an "amnesty".  She clearly placed a good deal  of  reliance  upon  a
    report by the independent Chief Inspector of Borders  and  Immigration,
    John Vine, OBE, dated March - July 2012 ("the Vine report"),  in  which
    the Respondent's handling of legacy  cases  had  been  examined.   With
    particular reference to  paragraph  5.88  of  that  report,  the  judge
    considered that the "main criteria" used in the decision-making process
    under the programme did not expressly include the use of  deception  or
    false representations.  In her view, this indicated that the Respondent
    did not at that time consider that the  use  of  deception  would  have
    carried "much weight" when considering whether to grant  an  individual
    ILR.  Thus, the judge concluded that the Respondent had failed to  show
    a causative link between the Appellant's deception  and  the  grant  of
    that leave.  At [28] she stated as follows:

         "... I find the accuracy of his date of birth and  nationality  had
         no bearing on  his  grant  of  citizenship,  as  he  fulfilled  the
         criteria  for  being  able  to  naturalise.   I  do  not  find  the
         respondent has shown, on balance, a causative  link  to  prove  the
         deception used by the appellant was material to the acquisition  of
         his naturalisation."

16. In the next section of her decision, the judge considered discretionary
    considerations.  She makes particular reference  to  paragraphs  55.7.3
    and 55.7.4 of Chapter 55 of the Respondent's  policy  guidance  on  the
    deprivation of British citizenship. The judge referred at [30]  to  her
    previous conclusion that there was no nexus between the  deception  and
    grant of citizenship.  In the same paragraph she referred to the  delay
    in  the  Respondent  considering   the   Appellant's   2005   extension
    application and draws an analogy (using the term "similar") between the
    legacy programme and the historical family ILR concession.  In light of
    this, the judge concluded that the Respondent should have afforded  the
    Appellant the benefit of the Nationality Instructions when  considering
    whether or not to deprive him of his British citizenship.

17. A reference to "good character grounds" is made in [32], which reads:

         "The respondent states that because the  appellant  provided  false
         information, then he would not have been granted ILR and would have
         been refused naturalisation on  good  character  grounds.   I  have
         already found that the causative link is not been made  out  above,
         further  I  find  the  respondent's  submission  is   misconceived.
         Clearly according to her policy she envisages  circumstances  where
         applicants can retain  their  citizenship  despite  their  previous
         deception, otherwise a policy is rendered meaningless."

18.  Having  then  made  a  passing  reference  to  the  case  of   Sleiman
    (deprivation of citizenship; conduct) [2017] UKUT 36 (IAC),  the  judge
    goes in [34] to state as follows:

         "Having regard to the  respondent's  policy,  I  do  not  find  the
         mitigating features  of  the  appellant's  case  to  be  particular
         weighty,  justifying  an  exceptional  circumstance  mandating  the
         respondent to exercise her discretion differently.   I  do  however
         found that she should have exercised her discretion differently  in
         accordance with paragraphs 55.7.3 and 55.7.4 for the reasons I  set
         out above.  I do not find the false representations  the  appellant
         made had a direct bearing on the grant of his  citizenship.   I  do
         find the  ILR  he  was  granted,  was  on  a  basis  similar  to  a
         concession.   Hence  the  respondent  should   have   applied   the
         discretion in a policy and found the fact he previously lied  about
         his asylum claim irrelevant, because having regard to her decision-
         making criteria under the Legacy it would not have made a  material
         difference.".

19.  Finally,  the  judge  turned  to  consider  the  consequences  of  the
    deprivation order.  She concluded  that  deprivation  would  leave  the
    Appellant in a worse position than he found himself prior to  that;  in
    other words, deprivation of citizenship would not revive ILR.  He would
    be in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

20. Drawing these threads  together,  the  judge  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on three bases: first, that the condition precedent set  out  in
    section 40(3) of the 1981 Act had not been satisfied because there  was
    no  causative  link  between  the  deception  and  the  acquisition  of
    citizenship;  second,  that  discretion  should  be  exercised  in  the
    Appellant's favour; and third, that  the  consequences  of  deprivation
    would violate Article 8.

The Respondent's challenge

21. The  Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  primarily  attack  the  judge's
    assessment of the legacy programme and associated matters.  In essence,
    they assert as follows:

      i) the judge had erroneously conflated the legacy  programme  with  an
         amnesty;

     ii) the judge had failed to take all relevant matters into account when
         considering whether  the  deception  would  have  been  a  relevant
         consideration to the Respondent's decision-maker when granting ILR.
         In particular, she failed to take into account the  fact  that  the
         Appellant had put forward his  deception  even  after  becoming  an
         adult;

    iii) the judge was not rationally entitled to rely on paragraph 5.88  of
         the Vine report to conclude that the Appellant's accepted deception
         had no material bearing on the decision to grant ILR;

     iv) the judge's assessment of the discretion and Article 8  issues  was
         flawed.

22. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Haria on 17 April 2020.




23. In advance of the hearing Mr Kerr provided a rule 24 response which can
    be  summarised  as  follows.   In  seeking  to  challenge  the  judge's
    decision, the Respondent was effectively  disagreeing  with  a  factual
    assessment and that no error of law has  been  identified.   The  judge
    directed herself correctly in law and did not in fact treat the  legacy
    programme as an  "amnesty".  The  judge  had  properly  considered  the
    Respondent's Nationality Instructions as regards decisions  to  deprive
    an individual of their British citizenship.  In respect of  Article  8,
    Mr Kerr (realistically in my view) accepted  that  in  light  of  Hysaj
    (Deprivation of Citizenship: Delay) Albania [2020] UKUT 128  (IAC)  the
    judge did err in her assessment, but it is said that this is immaterial
    given the sustainability of  her  findings  on  the  causal  nexus  and
    discretion issues.

The hearing


24. At the outset of the hearing I raised a matter with the representatives
    which in my view was obvious on the face of the  judge's  decision  and
    highly pertinent to the question of whether she erred in law.




25.  The  good  character  requirement  is  a  crucial   element   of   all
    naturalisation applications.  A failure to satisfy this criterion  will
    result in an application being refused (see section 6 of the  1981  Act
    and paragraph 1 of schedule 1 thereto).  There was on my  part  a  real
    concern that the judge had failed to address, adequately or at all, the
    question of whether the deception perpetrated by the applicant  in  the
    naturalisation application itself would have had a material bearing  on
    the grant of citizenship.  Ms  Cunha  and  Mr  Kerr  provided  me  with
    helpful submissions on this issue, in addition to all others.




26. Ms Cunha relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  emphasised  certain
    aspects.  She submitted that the grant of ILR was not simply  based  on
    the  appellant's  age,  but  also  his  falsely  claimed   country   of
    nationality.  In respect  of  the  Vine  report,  she  referred  me  to
    additional passages following that relied on by the judge.  On the good
    character issue, she submitted that the judge had  failed  to  consider
    evidence of deception by the appellant when he was  an  adult  and  how
    this related to that requirement.


27. Mr Kerr relied on his rule 24 response.  He submitted that if the  true
    facts had been known to at the time of the ILR decision and  the  grant
    of  naturalisation,  it  was  not  "inevitable"  that  the   respective
    applications would have been refused.  Alternatively, the deception may
    not have played a "pivotal role" in those decisions.  The absence of  a
    minute note relating to the grant of ILR, there was  no  evidence  from
    the respondent to indicate whether  the  deception  would  have  had  a
    material effect.


28. As to the good character issue, Mr Kerr relied on what the  judge  said
    at [32].  Whilst this passage might  have  been  better  placed  in  an
    earlier part of her decision, the judge  had  taken  this  matter  into
    account.  The respondent's policy had an element of discretion built in
    so knowledge of the deception could not  "inevitably"  have  led  to  a
    refusal of the naturalisation application.


29. Mr Kerr submitted that even if the judge had gone wrong on  the  causal
    nexus issue relating to the condition  precedent,  a  decision  on  the
    exercise of discretion was sound.


30. Finally, he reiterated his acceptance  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    respect of her assessment of Article 8 in light of the  conclusions  in
    Hysaj.


31. Ms Cunha provided a brief reply.


32. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that if I were to find
    that the judge had erred in law and  that  her  decision  must  be  set
    aside, the remaking of the decision in this case  would  be  undertaken
    following a resumed hearing, conducted remotely.




Decision on error of law

33. After much thought I have concluded that the judge has materially erred
    in law, albeit not in respect of all the assertions put forward by  the
    Respondent and in part based on the good character issue which was only
    tangentially raised in the  grounds  of  appeal  by  reference  to  the
    deception practised once the Appellant became an adult.

34. The judge was entitled to have concluded that the Appellant would  have
    been granted the initial period of ELE whatever  his  true  nationality
    was.  On any view, he was a minor at the time and the  evidence  before
    the judge indicated that even if it had been known that he was Albanian
    and not Serbian, the Respondent's policy of granting limited  leave  to
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking children would have applied (see  [24]  of
    the judge's decision).

35. Having said that, the assessment of the grant of ILR is  erroneous  for
    the following reasons.

36. First, the judge failed to take a highly relevant matter into  account,
    namely the fact that  even  after  the  Appellant  had  turned  18,  he
    perpetuated the deception in respect of his age and nationality  on  at
    least three further occasions prior to the ILR decision being made:  in
    the application for ILR on 28  March  2007;  the  legacy  questionnaire
    completed on 13 March 2008; and in the letter  of  24  March  2009,  in
    which his previous solicitors chased up the legacy issue, again stating
    the false information and expressly confirming that the  Appellant  was
    "a person of good character".

37. Second, the Respondent is right  to  point  out  in  her  grounds  that
    relevant factors were set out in Chapter 53 of the guidance  applicable
    to the question of whether "exceptional circumstances" existed in cases
    being considered under the legacy programme.  This was  made  clear  by
    Ouseley J in Jaku and Others [2014] EWHC 605 (Admin).

38. The first of the factors listed at paragraph 53.1.1  of  that  guidance
    (current at the date of ILR decision) was whether there  was  "evidence
    of deception practised at any stage in the process."  If the Respondent
    had been aware of the full facts at the time, it is  plain  that  there
    would have been such "evidence", and it is very difficult to see how it
    would have been "inevitable" (or even very likely) that  the  grant  of
    leave would have occurred notwithstanding  this  evidence.   The  point
    here is that the judge failed to take this aspect of  the  matrix  into
    account.

39. Thus, whilst the judge stated that  the  legacy  programme  was  "never
    intended to be an amnesty", the failure to have regard to the  relevant
    consideration of casework guidance  applicable  to  cases  within  that
    cohort (including that of the appellant) had the effect of coming close
    to treating it as such.  In any event, the failure is an error.

40. Second, the judge erred when placing considerable reliance on paragraph
    5.88 of the Vine report.  Weight is of course a matter for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  However, the evidence upon which it is placed  must  be
    assessed in its proper context.  Here, the judge in my view  failed  to
    do this in three respects:  first,  she  has  effectively  treated  the
    report as  something  akin  to  a  casework  guidance  document,  being
    reflective of the respondent's approach to legacy cases: it plainly was
    not; second, as stated previously, she failed to have regard to Chapter
    53 when considering the report; third, she failed to  make  clear  that
    the section of the report relied on related to an analysis of  only  24
    cases identified for inspection.

41. The impact of these errors is that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    "main  criteria"  referred  to  in  the  Vine  report  meant  that  the
    respondent did  not  view  deception  or  false  representations  as  a
    carrying "much weight" in the decision-making process under the  legacy
    programme, is unsustainable.

42. The absence of a minute from the Respondent's file as  to  the  precise
    basis for the grant of ILR in 2013 does not save  this  aspect  of  the
    judge's analysis.  It is an inescapable fact that  the  Respondent  was
    unaware of the deception at  the  time  she  made  that  decision.   In
    seeking to establish the causative link between the deception  and  the
    grant of ILR the Respondent only needed to show that it was more likely
    than not that the dishonesty would have had a  direct  bearing  on  the
    decision in question.

43. In light of the foregoing, the judge's overall  conclusion  that  there
    was no causative link between the deception and the  grant  of  ILR  is
    flawed and cannot stand.

44. I turn now to the issue which  I  highlighted  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing, namely the significance of the "good character"  criterion  in
    respect of applications for naturalisation as a British citizen.

45. It is plainly integral to the decision-making process.  As a matter  of
    logic, it falls to be considered not simply in light of an individual's
    past history, but also in respect of what  they  have  stated  in  that
    application itself.  The criterion is  in  addition  to  the  residence
    criterion, which all applicants must satisfy.  In the present case, the
    decision letter clearly made reference to good character  and,  in  the
    absence of any concession by the Respondent, it was a live issue in the
    appeal.  It is apparent from the judge's  decision  that  she  did  not
    grapple with this important issue, at least in the section dealing with
    the causative link (it is referred to later on and I shall turn to this
    in due course).

46. It seems to me that when addressing the  good  character  criterion,  a
    judge must attempt to put themselves in the shoes of the decision-maker
    at the time the application is  decided  and  consider  the  import  of
    relevant guidance applicable to the application.

47. The relevant Nationality Instructions on the good character requirement
    in place at the time are  dated  2  October  2013  and  appear  in  the
    Respondent's bundle at Annex T (the full title  is  Nationality  Policy
    Guidance and Casework  Instruction,  Chapter  18,  Annex  D:  The  Good
    Character Requirement).  Section 8.2 includes examples where dishonesty
    would "normally" lead to an application  being  refused,  the  last  of
    these states:

             "providing false or  deliberately  misleading  information  at
             earlier stages of the immigration  application  process  (e.g.
             providing false bio-data, claiming to be  a  nationality  they
             were not or concealing conviction data).  Where this  applies,
             a refusal on the deception ground may also be merited."

48. At Section 9.3 it  is  stated  that  applications  will  "normally"  be
    refused where:

             "...there is evidence that a  person  has  employed  deception
             either:

                    a. during the citizenship application process; or




                    b. in a previous immigration application."

49. The judge failed to have regard to this important  guidance.   This  in
    itself must be an obvious error of law.   Beyond  that,  the  essential
    question which the judge failed to ask herself was: would knowledge  of
    the Appellant's deception at the time his application  was  decided  to
    have made a material  difference  to  the  Respondent's  assessment  of
    whether he was a person of good character?  That did not involve simply
    a  consideration  of  the  residence  criterion  or   indeed   of   the
    circumstances in which he was granted ELE, or  even  ILR.   It  had  to
    incorporate the perpetuation of the dishonest conduct by the  Appellant
    when he was an adult; his assertion in the  naturalisation  application
    itself of the false information; and that  he  was  a  person  of  good
    character.  Without answering that question for  myself,  it  is  clear
    that in light of the Respondent's  guidance,  the  judge's  failure  to
    address this matter constituted a clear and obvious error of law.

50. I turn to what is said in [32] of the decision, in which  reference  is
    made to  "good  character  grounds".   I  take  account  of  Mr  Kerr's
    submission that this passage would have sat better within  the  section
    on causative links and I appreciate that the structure of the  decision
    is not as important as its content.  However, the judge's consideration
    is nonetheless flawed.

51. What she says in [32] is, on a  proper  reading,  predicated  upon  her
    prior finding that there was no causative link  between  the  deception
    and the acquisition of citizenship.  If, as I have already found,  that
    conclusion was marred by error, then the premise upon which  the  judge
    considers good character in that paragraph is itself flawed.

52. Further, the last sentence of [32] does not cure the error.  It  is  of
    course  the  case  that  the  Nationality  Instructions   contained   a
    discretionary element.  However, by its nature this goes to  the  issue
    of whether discretion should be exercised in  an  individual's  favour,
    notwithstanding  the  establishment  of  the  causative  link   between
    perception and the acquisition of citizenship.  I  shall  consider  the
    discretion issue shortly.

53. Bringing all of the above  together,  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    causation issue is flawed.

54. I now turn to the judge's consideration of  the  issue  of  discretion.
    The mere existence of  a  discretion  is  not  the  same  as  it  being
    exercised  in  light  of  the  full  facts.   At  the   time   of   the
    naturalisation decision the Respondent was manifestly not in possession
    of the full facts.

55. Mr Kerr's alternative submission is that the  judge's  conclusions  are
    sound.  I disagree.  On a fair reading of [30] - [34] of her  decision,
    it is apparent that her  finding  that  there  was  no  causative  link
    between the deception and the grant of ILR and then the acquisition  of
    citizenship  played  a  significant  (if  not  crucial)  role  in   her
    assessment that discretion  should  be  exercised  in  the  appellant's
    favour.  For the reasons set out above, that finding is flawed and this
    has the  effect  of  undermining  the  conclusion  on  discretion.   In
    addition (and connected to what I  have  said  previously),  the  judge
    failed to take into account  the  instances  of  the  appellant  having
    practised deception when an adult.  The significance of such actions is
    reflected in paragraph 55.7.11.2 of the relevant guidance:

             "All adults  are  expected  to  take  responsibility  for  the
             information  they  provided  on  acquisition  of  ILR   and/or
             citizenship..."

             [Examples of situations not deemed to provide  mitigation  are
             set out, none of which are relevant to the appellant's case]

56. At paragraph 55.7.3 it is confirmed that deprivation action  "will  not
    be appropriate if the fraud, false representation or concealment  of  a
    material  fact  did  not  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  grant   of
    citizenship."  Here, I have concluded that the  judge's  assessment  of
    that  issue  is  erroneous.   Paragraph  55.7.4  does  not  assist  the
    appellant's case.  There it is stated that the fact a person  may  have
    previously lied about their asylum claim  "may"  be  irrelevant.   That
    does  not,  however,  deal  with  the  fact  that  the  appellant   had
    perpetuated his original lies after he  became  an  adult  and  in  the
    naturalisation application itself.

57. Taking  all  matters  into  account,  the  judge's  conclusion  on  the
    discretion issue is unsustainable.  In saying this,  I  am  not  simply
    disagreeing with her factual findings.  The errors arise from a failure
    to take relevant matters into account in respect of both the  causative
    link issue and that of discretion.

58. In respect of the Article 8 issue, as mentioned previously, Mr Kerr has
    realistically accepted that the judge did err in light of what is  said
    in Hysaj.  For the reasons set out in that decision, I agree.

59. Therefore, the judge's decision must be set aside.

Disposal

60. In terms of disposal, I propose to direct the parties to submit further
    written submissions and for a resumed hearing to be listed remotely  in
    due course.  The issues to be considered in the submissions and at  the
    hearing will be:

                i. the causative link between the admitted deception and the
                   grant  of  ILR  and/or   the   acquisition   of   British
                   citizenship;




               ii. if a causative link is established between the  deception
                   and acquisition of citizenship, whether discretion should
                   be exercised in the appellant's favour in any event;


              iii.  alternatively,  whether  Article  8   can   assist   the
                   appellant, based on the current case-law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is  set
aside.

This appeal shall be retained in the Upper  Tribunal  and  set  down  for  a
resumed hearing, to be conducted remotely

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the parties

   1) No later than 10 days from the date this decision  is  sent  out,  the
      appellant shall inform the Tribunal and the Respondent whether  it  is
      intended to call  the  Appellant  (or  anyone  else)  at  the  resumed
      hearing, and if so, whether an interpreter will be required;



   2) No later than 28 days after this decision is sent out,  the  Appellant
      shall file and serve in electronic and physical  form  a  consolidated
      bundle of all evidence relied on;


   3) No later than 28 days after this decision  sent  out,  the  Respondent
      shall (if applicable) file and serve in electronic and  physical  form
      any additional evidence relied on;



   4) No later than 10 days before the resumed hearing, the Appellant  shall
      file and serve in electronic and physical  form  a  skeleton  argument
      addressing all relevant matters;



   5) No later than 5 days before the resumed hearing, the Respondent  shall
      file and serve in electronic and physical  form  a  skeleton  argument
      addressing all relevant matters;


   6) With liberty to apply.




Signed      H Norton-Taylor       Date: 14 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
