
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DC/00003/2013
                                                               DC/00010/2013
                                                               DC/00004/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th June 2014                               |On 3rd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                                LORD MATTHEWS
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD



                                   Between

                            miss Mayada Sulaiman
                        mr naseer (Hussein) Sulaiman
                              mr hassan Sleiman

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Halstead, Counsel
     Mr Ian Macdonald QC
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are naturalised British citizens who  had  been  granted
    British overseas passports on the basis that their father was  born  in
    Nigeria in 1929 at a time when Nigeria  was  a  British  colony.   They
    appeal  against  the  decision  to  deprive  them  of   their   British
    citizenship under Section 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981.

 2. The judge of the  First-tier  tribunal  found  that  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities the Appellants and each of them acted fraudulently or  at
    the very least made a false representation and/or concealed a  material
    fact and that the decision to deprive them  of  their  citizenship  was
    rightly made.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the matter came before us.  A
    Rule 24 notice was lodged, in brief  terms,  opposing  the  Appellants'
    appeal and stating that the judge had directed himself appropriately.

 4. Mr Macdonald  QC  directed  us  to  various  documents  lodged  on  the
    Appellants' behalf.  With reference to paragraphs  31  and  32  of  the
    determination we were invited to find that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    apply the high standard of proof required as set out in Khawaja v  SSHD
    [1984] AC 74.  The standard of proof was on the Respondent and  it  was
    the civil standard of a balance of probabilities "to  a  high  degree".
    The judge did not apply that standard  in  paragraph  32  finding  only
    against the Appellants on a "balance of probabilities".  The judge  had
    said that to "tell an Entry Clearance Officer that you are Lebanese and
    then to tell the Secretary of State that you have never had  any  other
    nationality other than that of a BOC  (British  Overseas  Citizen)  was
    totally inconsistent. "

 5. However, as Mr Macdonald explained, this was a  false  antithesis.   At
    that time all three Appellants did have Lebanese passports.  There  had
    been no attempt to conceal that.  There was a time lag between the  two
    events.  It was quite clear that their father had been Lebanese at  one
    point.  The Appellants had simply continued using their  passports.  In
    addition, contrary to what the judge had said,  he  had  been  provided
    with witness statements which  gave  an  explanation  as  to  what  had
    happened.  When the judge said that they must have had their  passports
    reissued to them once in their lifetime (paragraph 31)  that  might  or
    might not be correct but there was no  information  on  that.   In  any
    event, there was no evidence that the Appellants had applied  deception
    of any kind and it was certainly not proved to the particular  standard
    required.  We were asked to conclude that there was an error of law, to
    set the decision aside and remake the decision allowing the appeals.

 6. For the Home Office, it was said that, while the  judge  had  mentioned
    the wrong standard of proof, his reasoning did not  reflect  that.   It
    was a complicated story.  The judge was entitled to make  the  findings
    he  did  make.   On  any  view  the  Appellants  clearly  had  a  close
    relationship with the Lebanon.  The narrative was not clear.  When  the
    judge said that the witnesses "could have provided witness  statements"
    it was accepted that he was wrong to conclude that they had not as they
    were on file and were available to the judge at the hearing.   However,
    even looking at those statements they did not offer any explanation  of
    how the Appellants became Lebanese.

 7. We reserved our decision.

 8. Plainly the standard of proof is an important factor in a case of  this
    nature.  The  judge  set  out  the  standard  at  paragraph  3  of  his
    determination noting that the Respondent "bears the burden  of  proving
    on a balance of probabilities that the Appellant in each case  obtained
    citizenship by fraud..."  We note he went on to say that the  Appellant
    in each case bore the burden of proving on a balance  of  probabilities
    that deprivation would constitute a disproportionate interference  with
    their Article 8 rights.  He found "on a balance of probabilities"  that
    the Appellants and each of them had acted fraudulently or had at  least
    made a false representation.  We were told by  Mr  Macdonald  that  the
    judge was referred to Khawaja but he does not mention it nor  does  he,
    more importantly, state that the burden was on the  Respondent  to  the
    standard mentioned but to a high degree.  In our view, looking  at  the
    language used by the judge, he was not applying the  distinct  standard
    of proof that he was bound to apply.  Not to apply the correct standard
    of proof was a material error in law.  Furthermore, when the judge said
    that "they could have provided witness statements" the  parties  before
    us were agreed that he did have three witness statements, the terms  of
    which he unfortunately appears to have overlooked.  This  is  important
    as when one looks at  the  terms  of  those  statements  they  are  all
    consistent with  the  proposition  that  the  Appellants  did  not  act
    fraudulently.  The judge was duty bound to  consider  the  explanations
    given and assess their weight but for whatever reason did  not  do  so,
    which is undoubtedly a further material  error  in  law.   Finally,  we
    should also note what the judge said in paragraph 31,  namely  that  in
    respect of the passports issued to them as children  they  "must"  have
    expired at least once in their lifetimes, which  means  that  they  had
    made applications for new passports which had been granted.   We  think
    this is a small point but  in  fact  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellants "must" have made applications for new passports and as such,
    absent any reference to appropriate background material, the judge  was
    speculating and his conclusion was also an error in law.

 9. Given these errors it is necessary to set the decision aside, which  we
    do, and we have decided that we can remake the decision on the basis of
    the evidence presented to us.

10. What is not in doubt is that the  three  Appellants  were  issued  with
    Lebanese passports.  Holding such a passport very much  indicates  that
    the Appellants are Lebanese.  The point made by the Appellants in  this
    case is that they genuinely believed that to be so - see the  terms  of
    their statements.  It was only at a later date that they obtained legal
    advice that this was not the true position and that they  should  lodge
    an application for registration as a British  citizen.   The  terms  of
    their statements portray the Appellants as acting  entirely  innocently
    and reasonably throughout and Mr Macdonald referred us to the terms  of
    the interview with the second Appellant when he was  asked  whether  he
    had ever held a British passport or travel document.  He answered  that
    this was the first time he was applying for a British passport and that
    he held a Lebanese passport.  He explained he travelled on  a  Lebanese
    passport.  He gave further  family  details.   None  of  these  details
    appear to us to be inaccurate.

11. In fact the account of the three Appellants is straightforward enough -
    they used  Lebanese  passports  to  which  they  considered  they  were
    entitled and as such there was no deception by them  before  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  It was after  that,  on  legal  advice,  that  they
    lodged their application.

12. From what we have been told the account of the Appellants may  well  be
    true.  However, that is not the test we have to apply.  It is up to the
    Respondent to show that the Appellants have acted dishonestly to a high
    degree of probability.  In our view, by a wide margin,  the  Respondent
    has failed to show any dishonesty and therefore has failed to discharge
    that burden.

13. It follows that these appeals must be allowed.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. We set aside the decision.

16. We remake the decision in the appeals by allowing them.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


