
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00018/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|at Field House                        |                                      |
|On 5th June 2017                      |On 9th June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between


                                    K J O
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent




 1. The appellant appealed against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 19 August 2016 to deprive him of his  British  Citizenship.   The
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal which allowed his appeal but
    following an error of law hearing on 22nd March 2017, at which material
    legal error was found, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision and
    resumed the matter  for  final  decision  before  me.   I  invited  the
    parties,  in  the  absence  of  any  objection,   to   submit   written
    representations.   Neither  party  submitted  any  objection  and  both
    parties made written submissions, that is IMK Solicitors on  behalf  of
    Mr O and Mr I Jarvis on behalf of the Secretary of State.

 2. The appellant was born in Ghana on [ ] 1967 and claims to have  entered
    the United Kingdom in 1983.  He was granted indefinite leave to  remain
    in 2002 on the basis of his Ghanaian passport  and  stamps  and  on  11
    October 2006 he was issued with a certificate of  naturalisation  as  a
    British citizen.  The appellant now has three children in the UK,  aged
    10, 14 and 15; they are British citizens and  in  full-time  education.
    Sadly his wife died in 2015.

 3. On 18 February 2009 the respondent wrote to the appellant  to  indicate
    that

         "The Secretary of State has reason to  believe  that  you  obtained
         your status as a  British  citizen  as  a  result  of  fraud.   The
         Secretary of State has received information that indicates you have
         used fake immigration stamps in your passport to acquire leave."

 4. The appellant was advised that as  a  result  of  the  information  the
    Secretary of State was considering the deprivation of  his  citizenship
    under Section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981.

 5. A letter with the same content was sent again to the  appellant  on  23
    February 2010 requesting evidence of the correct date of entry into the
    UK  and  proof  of  residence  in  the  UK.   There  followed   further
    correspondence but on 19 August 2016 the Secretary of  State  issued  a
    notice  of  decision  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  his  nationality
    considering  that  the  appellant  did  in  fact  obtain  his   British
    citizenship fraudulently stating:

         "On 11 January 2008 a department within the Home Office assessed  a
         Ghanaian passport issued to K J O born on [ ] 1967  and  found  the
         following with regard to this passport:

           . The passport serial  number  was  not  commensurate  with  the
             alleged date of issue;

           . The photograph contained on the passport did not suggest  that
             the holder was the age they claimed to be;

           . The  registration  of  the  perforated  holes  in  the  emboss
             impression over the photographs were incorrect;

           . The quality of the Ghanaian issuing office  ink  seal  was  of
             poor quality;

           . UK Immigration Officer's stamp 541 dated 11/12/1983 issues  at
             Heathrow Airport was of poor quality, there were  errors  with
             the font and registration of the text stamp"

 6. The appellant was advised of his right of appeal and that if the appeal
    was unsuccessful he would be served with a Deprivation Order  but  that
    subject to satisfactory checks he would be granted 30  months'  limited
    leave in recognition of the fact  that  he  could  not  be  removed  at
    present because there were barriers to his removal.

 7.  The  appellant  did  appeal  under  Section  40A(1)  of  the   British
    Nationality Act 1981.  There followed the decision from the  First-tier
    Tribunal, allowing the appealing, but, in which I found an error of law
    on the basis that the judge failed to give weight to the  Secretary  of
    State's expert report, and which was set aside, I now proceed  with  my
    deliberations.

Conclusions

 8. Section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981 (as  amended)  states
    as follows:


      (3)The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
      citizenship status which results from his registration or
      naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
      registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

      (a)fraud,

      (b)false representation, or

      (c)concealment of a material fact.


 9. The Secretary of State produced two reports from F M, employed  by  the
    Secretary of State, in relation to  the  appellant'  passport  and  the
    entry stamps therein.  The first report was  dated  14th  January  2008
    stating it was in relation to document number 'Photocopy of A285709'  -
    'issued 06/10/1983 @ Accra'.  At the close of  the  report  the  author
    recorded:-

        'Additional information: I am unable to comment on the authenticity
        of the bio-data pages in the photocopy of the passport.  However, I
        am able to conclude that the UK immigration  Officer's  stamp  from
        LHR TN3 number 541  dated  11/12/1983  is  counterfeit.  There  are
        errors with the font and registration within the stamp and it  does
        not conform to expected standards  of  a  genuine  impression.   It
        should therefore not be relied upon as evidence of lawful entry  to
        the UK.'

10. The second report was also from F M of the National Document Fraud Unit
    in Liverpool and dated 7th January 2016 and which found on  examination
    of the documentation that the passport was counterfeit.  The author  of
    both reports confirmed that since 2009 he was employed as a  Specialist
    Document Examiner by the National Document Fraud Unit of  UKBA.   Prior
    to that from October 2006 he had been employed as a  Document  Examiner
    by the Managed Migration  Forgery  Team.  He  had  received  specialist
    training in passport and ID card production processes  in  the  UK  and
    abroad, had, inter alia, been trained by Frontex (the  European  Unions
    Agency for Joint Border Guard Operations) and  in  September  2012  was
    awarded  a  post  graduate  Diploma  with  Distinction  in  'questioned
    document examination' (FSSocDip) by the  Forensic  Science  Society  in
    association with the University of Strathclyde.

11. The author or rather, expert in document fraud,  himself  has  provided
    training on security documents and in forgery detection techniques  for
    UKBA, HMRC, the Police and the Criminal Records Bureau.

12. He confirmed in his 2012 report that he examined the photocopy passport
    of the appellant

          'based on my examination upon my experience of Ghanaian passports
          of  this  type,  my  experience  of  UK  Immigration  Stamps  and
          information  held  locally.   I  also  made  use  of  a  specimen
          impression of Heathrow airport arrival stamp  541  from  terminal
          3'.

13. As he was in the employ of the Secretary of State, I am  not  persuaded
    that the lack of declaration is significant.   This expert clearly  has
    extensive training and expertise having worked in relevant fields  such
    as document forgery which make him unusually well qualified to  give  a
    report in such a specialist area.  He had  previously  worked  for  the
    Managed Migration Forgery Team.  His identity is  clear;  his  name  is
    given (although I have redacted it)  and  the  date  is  given  at  the
    conclusion of the report.  He also  identifies  that  he  has  received
    specialist training in the  field  of  document  examination  from  the
    National Document Fraud  Unit.   The  report  emanates  therefore  from
    someone highly trained in the specific and technical area  of  document
    forgery.

14. Such a specialist and comprehensive report as cited  in  detail  below,
    should not be lightly dismissed.  Even in the face of the  challenge  I
    find can be relied upon. It was previously noted that the  observations
    in the final report from the expert differed from those in the original
    short report and the conclusions of Section 5(ii) of the last paragraph
    were not part of the Forgery 2008 Report.  It was also argued that this
    report had been re-written and there were  no  original  notes  and  no
    production of the original report. That there  was  previously  a  more
    detailed report composed does not undermine the existence of the report
    composed by the same author. As the new report stated it superseded all
    previous reports. In the circumstances it was  irrelevant  whether  the
    evidence was based on the comparative analysis of the stamp in 2008 and
    2016. The reports produced are not inconsistent.

15. Not least the expert confirmed that the passport was not  issued  by  a
    competent authority as evidenced by the serial number of  the  passport
    issued. The serial number has not changed and the  one  used  not  been
    challenged. That evidence stands whether the document scrutinised is  a
    copy or not.

16. The fact that it was a photocopy of the stamp does not make a  material
    difference because the passport itself was considered  to  be  a  fake;
    indeed the stamp was also concluded to  be  deficient  because  of  its
    registration details.  The  expert  produced  a  comprehensive  report,
    which was cognisant of the fact that a photocopy was being assessed and
    because of his expertise it is  reasonable  to  assume  that  he  would
    declare if there was  insufficient  evidence,  on  which  to  base  his
    judgment if that were the case, and to assess the  genuineness  of  the
    passport and stamp.  Although the photocopy may hinder some observation
    the font is not such that would alter  by  photocopy  -  that  too  was
    criticised. Cumulatively the expert found the stamp to be false.

17. I do not have the expertise to  proffer  a  different  opinion  on  the
    report author's observation of the genuineness'  of  the  passport  and
    stamp and no further expert evidence was  produced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  The written submissions from the appellant's representative
    asserted that the author of the report needs to prove how he knows that
    Ghanaian  passports  are   issued   sequentially.    I   consider   his
    qualifications to have made that clear: as an expert as indeed he  made
    reference in his 'experience of Ghanaian passports of this type'.   The
    expert also  has  clearly  stated  that  the  passport  number  is  not
    commensurate with the purported date of issue and I  conclude  this  is
    also within his knowledge.

18. It is correct that the original passport  for  the  appellant  was  not
    available as it had been lost.  This, the  Secretary  of  State  argues
    'beggars belief' as it was lost immediately after the appellant  became
    aware that she intended to deprive him of his nationality.  However, at
    paragraph 5(i) the report  states:

         "Upon examination of the  questioned  photocopy  Ghanaian  passport
         A285709 I made the following observations:

          (i) that the passport serial number was not commensurate with the
          purported date of issue of 6 October 1983 in Accra.  To the  best
          of my knowledge Ghanaian passports are issued sequentially." (see
          paragraph 10 below).  That the photograph of the passport  holder
          did not have the appearance of being a 15 year old  child.   That
          the registration of the perforated holes in the two linear emboss
          impressions over the photograph was incorrect  -  they  were  not
          aligned to a straight edge as they should be.  That  the  quality
          of the Ghanaian issuing office ink seal on pages 1 and 4 was very
          poor'

           (ii) that the purported UK Immigration Officer Heathrow  airport
          terminal 3 stamp 541 dated 11/12/1983  on  page  6  was  of  poor
          overall quality , it did not conform to the  expected  design  or
          layout of the specimen impression an contained  errors  with  the
          font and registration of the text with the stamp/.

          In the light of the points made above, I conclude that  the  item
          used to make the above detailed reproduction of passport A 285709
          contained a counterfeit UK immigration  officer's  stamp  541  on
          page 6. The photocopy should not be relied upon  as  evidence  of
          the holder's lawful entry to the UK in 1983. Because  I  was  not
          furnished  with  the  original  passport,  I  and  am  unable  to
          definitively conclude on the overall authenticity of the passport
          itself. However, I  find  that  on  balance  on  the  balance  of
          probabilities that it was not issued by the competent authorities
          charged with the issuance of Ghanaian  passports  i.e.  the  same
          scenario described in paragraph 10.

    Pausing there, at paragraph 10 the expert also states:

         "In addition to my examination described at paragraph  5  above  on
         11/01/2008 I examined a second Ghanaian passport under my reference
         MMFT/2008/290.  the  Ghanaian  passport  in  question  was  A286061
         issued at Accra on 10/05/1983 held by one A O B  (married  name  O)
         the spouse of K J O.  Upon examination I found passport A286061 not
         to have been issued by the competent Ghanaian  authorities  and  to
         also contain a counterfeit Immigration  Officer's  stamp  541  from
         Heathrow Airport Terminal 3 dated 21/05/1983 on page 6.  Aside from
         the different date of arrival, the counterfeit stamp  is  identical
         to that examined in paragraph 5 above in the passport  of  K  J  O:
         Passport A286061 remains in my possession."

19. That the appellant had lost his own passport was  the  root  cause  for
    only being able to assess the copy.  There is no doubt that the  expert
    was aware that he received a monochrome photocopy of the passport which
    he was asked to examine.

20. Furthermore the expert, as demonstrated by paragraph 10, of the report,
    considered the Ghanaian passport and stamp of the appellant, which  was
    a photocopy, in the light of  the  wife's  passport  which  was  not  a
    photocopy.  He also examined the passport of the wife  which  evidently
    had not been lost.  It was open  to  the  expert,  with  his  field  of
    technical knowledge, to find that that  passport was also not issued by
    the competent Ghanaian authorities and stamp within that  passport  was
    also counterfeit. That was an original  passport  and  stamp  and  that
    finding does not appear to have been challenged. I therefore take  into
    account that the  original  stamp  in  the  original  passport  of  the
    deceased wife was produced but that too was considered to be a forgery.
    There was no element of photocopying in that instance.

21. Owing to the expertise of the author of the report and reference in the
    report to the serial number, the stamp  and  the  wife's  stamp,  I  am
    persuaded that the  passport  and  stamp  of  the  appellant  were  not
    genuine.   This was sufficient, on the balance of probabilities,  which
    is the correct legal standard, following B (Children) [2009]  UKSC,  to
    pass the evidential burden to the appellant.

22. There was absolutely no rebuttal evidence from the appellant save for a
    general assertion by the appellant recorded in the oral evidence before
    the First Tier Tribunal on 25th November 2016,  that  he  disputed  the
    passport and stamps were  fake  and  he  merely  maintained  they  were
    genuine.

23. In oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant  claimed
    that he had been standing next to the Immigration Officer who had given
    him the stamp but his evidence was that he had lost his passport  about
    eight years ago which was around the time  the  Home  Office  told  him
    about its concerns and it was submitted  that  the  passport  was  lost
    deliberately.   The  appellant's  bald  assertion,  without  more,   is
    insufficient to discharge the burden of proof which clearly has shifted
    to the appellant. As such I  find  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged the legal burden upon her.

24. I conclude that the passports and stamps of the appellant and his  wife
    were not genuine and were obtained by fraud.   As such the Secretary of
    State is entitled apply Section 40(3) of the BNA 1980.

25. I must also consider the point taken in relation  to  the  exercise  of
    discretion of the Secretary of  State  as  to  discretionary  deprival.
    Further to Arusha  and  Demushi  (deprivation  of  citizenship:  delay)
    [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC) the judge has power  to  consider  the  discretion
    exercised and not just review that exercise.  The Tribunal has  to  ask
    itself "does the evidence in the case establish  that  citizenship  was
    obtained by fraud".  If it does then  it  has  to  ask  "do  the  other
    circumstances of the case point to discretionary deprival"?  This  must
    include consideration of the public interest. As set out in Arusha  the
    appellant can raise general human  rights  grounds  but  they  must  be
    framed to deal with the breach alleged to be caused by the decision  to
    deprive the appellant of his nationality  and  giving  effect  to  that
    decision and not framed to deal with the  fiction  that  the  appellant
    would be removed.

26.  As set out in Deliallisi (British citizen: deprivation  appeal:  scope
    [2013]  UKUT  439  (IAC)  and  AB  (British  citizenship:  deprivation;
    Deliallisi considered) Nigeria [2016]  UKUT  451  in  an  appeal  under
    section 40A of the  British  Nationality  Act  1981,  the  Tribunal  is
    required  to  determine  the  reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of
    deprivation.  Although neither representative referred me to  the  case
    of Pirzada (Deprivation of citizenship: general principles) [2017] UKUT
    00196 (IAC), I follow the approach taken by the previously decided case
    of Deliallisi.   The analysis in Pirzada would suggest that Section  40
    (3) is otiose.  By way of addition the Home Office Policy Chapter 55 on
    Deprivation and Nullity of British Citizenship does not  consider  that
    Sections 40(2) and 40(3) are to be read together.  Further,  Deliallisi
    clearly envisaged the Tribunal being in  a  position  to  consider  the
    exercise of discretion.  As can be seen from the  decision  letter  the
    Secretary of State clearly considered the  appellant's  representations
    before exercising her discretion, indeed she refers  to  Section  40(5)
    (as amended) in her refusal letter.

27. The reasons for refusal letter clearly stated discretionary leave would
    be granted if his appeal was dismissed because of the barriers  to  his
    removal.

28. I take into account that there have  been  very  sad  circumstances  in
    respect of this appellant. Subsequent to the decision his wife had died
    in October 2015 and the appellant was left looking  after  three  young
    children which must entail significant compassionate factors.

29.  In  assessing  the  foreseeable  consequences,  I  consider  the  best
    interests of the children, B 15 years old, P 14 years old and  Pe  aged
    10 years old, as a  primary  consideration  under  Section  55  of  the
    Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  with  reference  to
    Ahmed and Others (deprivation of citizenship)  (Pakistan)  [2017]  UKUT
    118.  The best interests of the children are clearly to remain  in  the
    UK in a stable environment and to continue with their  educational  and
    social links as they have done to date.  Following  the  sad  death  of
    their mother their best interests must  lie  in  remaining  with  their
    father, their sole remaining parent.

30. I am not persuaded that the appellant advanced any firm  evidence  that
    deprivation  of  his  citizenship  and  in   place   the   mere   grant
    discretionary leave for 30 months, would hinder the children's  social,
    educational or familial welfare in any way or  seriously  affect  their
    best interests.  Clearly the transgression in the  fraud  of  obtaining
    leave by their father should not be visited on the children  but  there
    was no indication that their citizenships would be questioned and it is
    a matter for the appellant whether or not he advises  his  children  of
    his ongoing immigration status.

31. The appellant gave evidence that he owned his own home  but  since  the
    death of his wife he had to rely on public funds and  if  he  only  had
    leave to remain he may not be entitled to this and it would affect  his
    ability to travel with his children to see extended family  if  he  did
    not have a British passport.

32. Indeed no decision had been made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  to
    recourse to public funds, or whether the appellant  would  be  able  to
    claim benefits for the purpose of tax credit.  It cannot  be  the  case
    that the children's welfare would not be taken  into  account  on  that
    decision.  In  AB  the  question  of  benefits  and  accommodation  was
    considered, and, it was concluded, that legislation had been framed  to
    ensure that the United Kingdom did not breach the human rights of those
    with accommodation and care needs and that the Care Act  2014  gives  a
    Local Authority power to meet a person's care and support needs.  There
    was no indication that the appellant would be  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with no leave and as set out in AB mechanisms exist for the receipt  of
    accommodation and care following the  deprivation  of  citizenship.  As
    such I am not persuaded that the best interests of the  children  would
    be undermined. As  indicated  in  the  Error  of  Law  hearing  by  the
    Secretary of State because the grant of leave would be  dealt  with  by
    the Secretary of State post appeal, any  decision  as  to  recourse  to
    public funds in that respect would be dealt with  at  that  point.  Any
    such decision would be influenced by the  existence  of  the  children.
    The grant of discretionary leave does not affect  the  availability  of
    the children's father to them.

33. The nationality of the father would not make him unable to promote  the
    children's educational needs or  provide  for  their  welfare.   I  can
    understand that the father's status would be less secure  but  no  firm
    reason has been given why the father  not  having  British  citizenship
    would  significantly  affect  the   children.      The   children   had
    bereavement counselling and  he  had  been  prescribed  medication  for
    anxiety and depression but there is  no  indication  that  any  of  the
    family would be precluded from accessing the National Health System.  I
    do not accept that discretionary leave  is  likely  to  interfere  with
    travelling as the appellant can apply for travel documents.   That  the
    appellant will not be able to travel during 'renewal  periods'  of  his
    leave is rather an inconvenience than an uncertainty for the  children.
    It is up to the appellant to organise his travel accordingly  and  this
    logistical difficulty is just that; it does not undermine the Secretary
    of State's decision to deprive him of  his  British  citizenship.   The
    welfare of the children is a primary feature in this appeal  but  their
    best interests are not undermined as a foreseeable consequence  by  the
    deprivation of their father's citizenship  and  the  grant  of  limited
    leave instead.

34. The children's interests are not a 'trump' card as to the status to  be
    granted. The Policy at Chapter 55: Deprivation and Nullity  of  British
    Citizenship.  This clearly envisages that the appellant may be deprived
    of his citizenship on the basis of fraud and nothing indicated that the
    Secretary  of  State  failed  to  follow  the  correct  processes.  The
    Secretary of State's decision was in accordance  with  Paragraph  55.7.
    The appellant is not a minor and  his  length  of  residence  will  not
    prevent the deprivation. It was  clearly  decided  that  there  was  an
    intention to deceive and all adults should be held responsible for  his
    or her citizenship applications. In this case there was  no  mental  or
    physical impairment at the date of  the  application  and  no  coercion
    suggested.   The circumstances of the appellant that  is  the  children
    were considered as part of the consideration  under  the  Human  Rights
    Act.

35. The Secretary of  State  has  also  followed  her  own  'Asylum  Policy
    Instruction, Discretionary Leave' August  2015.  As  set  out  in  that
    policy at 3.1 discretionary leave only applies 'to  those  who  provide
    evidence of exceptional compassionate circumstances or there are  other
    compelling reasons to grant leave on a discretionary basis'.   That  in
    itself is a  concession  but  nothing  further  and  analogous  to  the
    examples set out in the  Policy  indicate  that  the  leave  should  be
    anything other than limited.

36. As set out at 5.1, 30 months  Discretionary  Leave  should  be  granted
    unless the UKBA  made  a  written  commitment  that  a  case  would  be
    considered either before 20th July 2011 or 9th July 2012 and failed  to
    do so or where there has been reconsideration of a decision made before
    either of those dates. Neither of those scenarios  applies.  Even  then
    the recommendation  is  that  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  should  be
    granted.   The Policy continues

    'If  the  caseworker  considers  that  there  are  other   exceptional,
    compelling reasons to depart from the policy of granting 30 months  DL,
    the  case  must  be  referred  to  a  senior  caseworker  for   further
    consideration. In all other cases 30 months (2.5 years) DL is  normally
    the appropriate period of leave to grant'.

    As I have found above,  there  are  no  other  or  further  exceptional
    compelling reasons in addition  to  those  granting  limited  leave  to
    justify a departure from the Policy  such  that  the  appellant  should
    retain citizenship.

37. The Secretary of State has demonstrated with cogent evidence that  this
    appellant has perpetrated a fraud to obtain his citizenship.  There  is
    a clear public interest in depriving those who exercise a fraud on  the
    immigration system, which is a criminal offence,  with  the  consequent
    benefits not least access to the welfare system and the National Health
    Service.  In the circumstance the appellant cannot be removed  for  his
    criminal behaviour rather he has been granted leave albeit limited.  He
    will be under an obligation to apply for further leave  but  ultimately
    it is open to him to apply for settlement after 10 years limited leave.
     His status will be kept under  review  and  on  these  facts  that  is
    justified.  I have considered all the evidence provided by the  parties
    and consider that it was open to the Secretary of State to exercise her
    discretion as she did and to proceed to deprive the  appellant  of  his
    citizenship.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because there are minors involved.



The appeal of KJO is dismissed on all grounds.


Signed           Helen  Rimington                    Date  Signed  5th  June
    2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
