
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00010/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Teams)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 21st July 2021                |On the 03rd August 2021              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Pipe


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was  born  in  1974.  She  appealed  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 8 January 2020 to give  notice
    of an intention to deprive the appellant  of  her  British  citizenship
    under section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981. The First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 2  February  2020,  allowed  her
    appeal. the Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are four grounds of appeal. However, Mr Howells, who appeared for
    the Secretary of State at the  Upper  Tribunal  initial  hearing,  made
    submissions only in respect of Grounds 1 and 3,  although  he  did  not
    formally withdraw Grounds 2 and 4.

 3. Ground 1: The appellant, who has been resident in  the  United  Kingdom
    since about 1995, became a British citizen on 24 January 2007.  In  her
    application for naturalisation, she did not disclose that she had  used
    two false identities during the period of her residence prior  to  2006
    when she submitted  her  application.  Section  40(3)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 provides:

         'The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
         citizenship status which results from his registration or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

         (a) fraud,

         (b) false representation, or

         (c) concealment of a material fact.'

    The First-tier Tribunal judge found at [16] that  'I  accept  that  the
    [appellant] did not feel the need to consult the guidance  document  in
    order to answer the questions appropriately.' In a series of  boxes  on
    the form at Q 7 and ticked by the appellant, she confirmed that she had
    'read and understood the guide Naturalisation as  a  British  Citizen'.
    That guide tells applicants, inter alia, that 'you must tell us if  you
    have practised deception in your dealings with the Home Office ... this
    will be taken into account in considering whether  you  meet  the  good
    character requirement.' The relevant question in the  form  appears  at
    4.11; 'Have you engaged in any other activities which might be relevant
    to the question of whether you are a person of good character?'

 4. The respondent submits that the judge has not referred to the fact that
    the appellant had ticked the box, indicating  that  she  had  read  the
    guidance, in reaching her finding that the appellant  lacked  the  mens
    rea for the use of deception [17].

 5. It is the case that the  judge  makes  no  specific  reference  to  the
    appellant's answer to Q 7.2. However, in my opinion, the judge has  not
    fallen  into  material  error  of  law.   First,   the   judge   states
    categorically [14] the she had  'considered  the  form  [completed  and
    signed  by  the  appellant]'.  She  will,  therefore,  have  seen   the
    appellant's answer to Q 7.2 and made her subsequent findings as to mens
    rea in that knowledge. The judge was not obliged to set out  in  detail
    each and every part of the completed form  which  she  had  taken  into
    account in reaching her findings. Secondly, I  do  not  consider  that,
    even if she had dealt in terms with Q 7.2, the judge would have reached
    a different conclusion. Having  read  the  form  and  the  guidance,  I
    consider that the judge would have made the same observations which she
    makes at [14]; whilst not exactly misleading, the questions at  section
    4 are poorly drafted  if  the  intention  is  to  indicate  clearly  to
    applicants that the use of false identities should be stated.  Question
    4.11 ('have you engaged in other activities...')  follows  directly  on
    from questions about crimes against humanity, war crimes and  terrorism
    which are all 'activities' rather different in kind from  the  adoption
    of a false nationality. As the judge says, the use of a false  identity
    hardly falls into  the  same  category  'as  terrorism  and  genocide.'
    Thirdly, it is, frankly, highly likely (and likely that the judge would
    have found) that the appellant has ticked the declaration that she  had
    read the form having not actually done so. The form was, as  the  judge
    observed, 'fairly straightforward' and it was open to the judge to find
    that the appellant assumed she knew what the  guidance  was  likely  to
    tell her (so therefore did not bother to read it).  These  observations
    all reinforce the judge's finding that the appellant  did  not  possess
    the mens rea to perpetrate a deception in this instance.  That  finding
    is not perverse, indeed, it was patently open to the judge and I see no
    good reason to interfere with it. As the House  of  Lords  observed  in
    SSHD v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 [30],  'Appellate  courts  should  not
    rush to find such misdirections [as to the  law]  simply  because  they
    might have reached a different conclusion on  the  facts  or  expressed
    themselves differently.'

 6. Ground 3: The Secretary of State also complains that the  judge  failed
    to deal with the  matter  of  the  appellant's  true  nationality.  The
    appellant  completed  the  naturalisation  form  stating  that  she  is
    Burundian. She had, however, also claimed to be Tanzanian and, when she
    had entered the United Kingdom, Ugandan.

 7. I agree with Mr Pope, who appeared before both the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal for the appellant, that the determination of the
    appellant's true nationality was not a precedent fact which  the  judge
    need to find in order to deal with the appeal before her. The  decision
    to deprive was based  on  the  use  of  false  identities  in  previous
    applications  and  the  failure  to  declare  this  when  applying  for
    naturalisation. The question of the appellant's  true  nationality  was
    also not, as Mr Pope submits, any part of  the  basis  upon  which  the
    Secretary of State put her case to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I shall not, in the circumstances, address Grounds 2 and 4 save to  say
    that I agree with the submissions made by Mr Pope in his R24  statement
    dated 16 July 2021 (see [11] and [15-16]).

 9. The judge did not err in law such that her decision  falls  to  be  set
    aside. Accordingly, I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.




    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed
Date 22 July 2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

























