
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00104/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 26 February 2021                 |On: 09 March 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               Kujtesa Ismajli
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Sobowale, instructed by Samad & Co Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant claims to be a national of the Republic of Serbia born  on  14
January 1978. She arrived in the UK on 3 September 2001 and  claimed  asylum
a few days later as an ethnic Albanian from Preshevo in Serbia and  attended
an interview on 11 October 2001. She claimed that her  father,  a  supporter
of the KLA, was killed in 1998, that her  mother  died  shortly  thereafter,
that she and her sister were brutally raped by  Serbian  soldiers  and  that
her sister died from her injuries, that the family  home  was  burned  down,
that she fled and went into hiding at her  aunt's  house  in  Macedonia  and
that she feared returning to Preshevo.

The appellant's claim was refused  on  24  October  2001  and  she  appealed
against that decision. At her  appeal  hearing,  on  23  January  2003,  her
evidence was that she had become pregnant since coming to the  UK  and  that
the father played no part in the child's life. She claimed  that  she  could
not return to Preshevo as she had nowhere to live and  no  family  or  other
contacts and would be treated as an outcast and rejected because  of  having
had a child out  of  wedlock.   She  would  be  persecuted  by  the  Serbian
authorities if  she  returned  to  Preshevo.  The  appellant's  account  was
accepted by the Tribunal and her appeal was allowed on the  basis  that  she
was a vulnerable single mother with a child born out of wedlock and with  no
support and nowhere to live and who would be at  risk  of  being  trafficked
into prostitution if she returned to Serbia.

On 20 February 2003 the appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain  as
a refugee. On 14 May 2003  she  applied  for  a  Refugee  Convention  travel
document in the same identity and she was issued with a travel  document  on
8 August 2003. On 19 March 2007 she made an application  for  naturalisation
as a British citizen, again in the same identity, stating that  her  parents
were Yugoslav nationals born in Preshevo, Serbia.

On 25 July 2007, an application was made at the British  Embassy  in  Tirana
by Fred Hila, born on 2 September 1972 in Shkoder, Albania,  accompanied  by
written representations from Rai Braitch Solicitors dated 27 June  2007,  in
which it was stated that he wished to enter  the  UK  to  join  his  spouse,
Kujtesa Ismajli, whom he had first met in Birmingham in  November  2001  and
married on 4 August 2003. It was  stated  that  their  relationship  started
shortly after they met and that they  had  resided  together  in  Birmingham
from May 2003 to August 2005 whilst they were both claiming asylum until  he
was returned to Albania  in  August  2005,  and  subsequently  whenever  the
sponsor visited him in Albania in 2005 and 2006. They had  a  son  together,
Mario Ismajli. It was stated further that Mr Hila had applied for asylum  in
the UK under a different name, as Victor Marku, and therefore  the  marriage
certificate was in that name. When Mr  Hila  was  interviewed,  however,  he
stated that his wife was from Albania and he produced an  Albanian  marriage
certificate showing that he had married  Mirela  Hila  on  31  May  1999  in
Albania, together  with  an  Albanian  birth  certificate  for  Mirela  Hila
showing that she was born on 14 January 1978 in Shkoder, Albania.

As a result, the respondent contacted the appellant by  letter  on  28  July
2008, and then again when there was  no  response,  on  25  September  2008,
advising her that information they had received from the British Embassy  in
Tirana showed that she was Mirela Hila born in Shkoder,  Albania,  and  that
she had therefore obtained settlement in the UK,  and  British  citizenship,
as a result of false representations. The appellant  was  advised  that  the
respondent was considering depriving her of her  British  citizenship  under
section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981 and  she  was  invited  to
make representations in response.

The appellant responded in a letter dated 9  October  2008  maintaining  her
claimed identity, denying that she was Mirela Hila  and  claiming  that  her
husband had given false information to the Embassy. In  a  letter  dated  16
October 2008 the respondent requested that the appellant provide  her  birth
certificate to confirm her  claimed  identity,  together  with  evidence  of
previous residence in Serbia.

On 8 February 2018 the respondent wrote  to  the  appellant  again,  stating
that Victor Marku had claimed asylum on 19 July 2002, that  his  application
was refused on 11 September  2002  and  that  she  had  then  sponsored  his
application for leave to remain application in 2004 which  was  subsequently
refused on 22 July 2005. He was removed from the UK on  4  August  2005  and
was later sponsored by the appellant in a subsequent application  for  entry
clearance in his true Albanian  identity,  Fred  Hila,  in  June  2007.  The
respondent noted from comparing photographs that Viktor Marku and Fred  Hila
were one  and  the  same  person.  Reference  was  made  to  the  respondent
reviewing her case and  again  considering  depriving  her  of  her  British
citizen status.

In a letter dated 26 February 2018, the appellant once  again  denied  being
Mirela Hila from Albania and maintained her claimed identity  as  a  Serbian
national. She claimed that she was married  to  Victor  Marku,  an  Albanian
national, but she did  not  know  why  her  husband  was  relying  on  false
documents giving her name as Mirela Hila and only became aware that  he  had
used the name Fred Hila after he was refused  entry  clearance  to  the  UK.
After that time, her second son was born and she had referred to  Fred  Hila
as her husband in his birth certificate, but prior  to  that  she  had  only
ever known him as Viktor Marku. It was stated further that the marriage  had
since broken down and therefore the appellant was unable to comment  further
on  the  allegations  made  on  the  basis  of   Viktor   Marku's   previous
applications. References were made to the appellant relying upon  Article  8
as she was the primary carer of two British national children.

The respondent, in a decision dated 26 September 2019, did  not  accept  the
appellant's claim to have had no knowledge of her husband  having  used  the
name Fred Hila and considered  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a  false
account  of  her  personal  history.  The  respondent  confirmed  being   in
possession of information from  the  General  Directorate  of  Civil  Status
Registry at the Ministry of Interior  of  Albania  which  showed  that  Fred
Hila's family composition consisted of himself, Mirela Hila, now Ejlli,  and
his parents, and that the identifying particulars provided for Mirela  Hila,
including  her  parents'  details,  matched  those  provided  on  the  birth
certificate and marriage certificates provided by Mr Hila during  his  entry
clearance application and  contained  the  photograph  of  the  same  person
naturalised as a British citizen as Kujtesa Ismajli,  a  Yugoslav  national.
The respondent considered  that  there  was  overwhelming  evidence  of  the
appellant's  deception  and   false   representations   and   rejected   the
appellant's attempts to explain  the  falsehoods  in  her  application.  The
respondent considered that it was clear that the appellant would  have  been
refused British citizenship had the nationality caseworker been  aware  that
she had made false representations in an attempt to conceal the truth  about
her identity. It was not accepted  that  there  was  a  plausible,  innocent
explanation for the misleading information which  led  to  the  decision  to
grant citizenship and it was considered  that  the  appellant  had  provided
information with the intention  of  obtaining  a  grant  of  citizenship  in
circumstances where her application would have been unsuccessful if she  had
told the truth.  The respondent therefore made a  decision  to  deprive  the
appellant of her British citizenship under section 40(3) of  the  1981  Act,
concluding that it was reasonable and proportionate to do so.

The appellant appealed against that decision under  section  40A(1)  of  the
British Nationality Act 1981. Her appeal was heard on  10  January  2020  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence. The appellant maintained the same  claim
during the appeal hearing, stating that she was a Serbian national and  that
she had met Viktor Marku in the UK, not knowing that his true name was  Fred
Hila. She denied having married him in Albania and refuted  the  genuineness
of the documents submitted by Mr Hila in  support  of  his  entry  clearance
application, claiming to have married him on 4 August 2003 in the UK and  to
have only found out his true identity as  Fred  Hila  during  her  visit  to
Albania in 2006. She denied any knowledge of Mirela Hila  and  claimed  that
her husband was relying on false documents. The  appellant  claimed  in  her
statement before the Tribunal that she had visited her  husband  in  Germany
in October 2010 whilst he was waiting for a decision on his entry  clearance
application and their second son was conceived then and was born in  the  UK
on 28 July 2011. Her relationship with her husband ended  in  2015,  because
she could no longer live with someone who was relying on false documents  to
support his application.

The judge found that the burden  of  proving  fraud  had  been  met  by  the
respondent. He considered that the most  significant  document  showing  the
appellant's true identity was the birth certificate produced by Mr Hila,  at
T2 of the respondent's appeal bundle, which  gave  her  date  of  birth  and
named her parents, and he rejected the appellant's claim  that  that  was  a
false document. The judge  considered  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
provide an innocent explanation and had failed to satisfy the minimum  level
of plausibility. He considered there to be no basis  for  finding  that  she
was stateless, but concluded  that  she  was  and  remained  a  national  of
Albania who had a husband and a home in Albania, who had returned there  for
a cumulative period of 128 days between August 2005 and September  2006  and
who could return there now. The judge found that  it  was  proportionate  to
deprive the appellant of  her  British  citizenship  and  he  dismissed  the
appeal in a decision promulgated on 30 January 2020.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on the  following  grounds:
first, that the judge had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  and  wrongly
considered  the  limited  evidence  given  by  the  appellant's  husband  as
sufficient to demonstrate deception on the part of  the  appellant;  second,
that there were inadequate reasons given  for  finding  that  the  documents
relied upon by the respondent were reliable; third that there was a  failure
to consider the appellant's  challenge  to  the  reliability  of  the  birth
certificate produced by her husband; and fourth that the judge  had  wrongly
applied the burden of proof by effectively reversing it.

Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 13 May 2020.


Hearing and Submissions

The matter then came before me for a remote hearing  by  way  of  skype  for
business   and both parties made submissions.

Mr Sobowale relied on his grounds of appeal and expanded upon  the  grounds.
He submitted that the judge had  failed  to  address  the  burden  of  proof
correctly and had  given  inadequate  reasons  as  to  why  the  documentary
evidence from the respondent was reliable.  The  respondent  relied  upon  a
birth certificate and marriage certificate submitted by  appellant's  former
partner, the former of which had a photograph of the appellant  as  a  grown
woman  stapled  to  it  and  referred  to  the  year  as  1974  whereas  the
appellant's date of birth was said  to  be  1978  and  was  thus  manifestly
deficient. The appellant's former husband was known to have  produced  false
documents previously and there was therefore no reason  for  the  respondent
to accept  his  evidence  as  reliable.  With  regard  to  the  respondent's
reference to the appellant failing to obtain her Serbian birth  certificate,
it had always been the appellant's case that her town  in  Serbia  had  been
destroyed and therefore she could not obtain any  documents.  In  any  event
the burden  of  proof  lay  upon  the  respondent  and  not  the  appellant.
Furthermore, the  respondent  had  failed  to  respond  to  the  appellant's
solicitors request for disclosure of the documents  upon  which  she  relied
and the delay was therefore the fault of the respondent not  the  appellant.
The  respondent  ought  to  have  taken  the  documents  produced   by   the
appellant's former husband to the  Albanian  Embassy  for  verification.  In
accordance    with    the    guidance     in     QC     (verification     of
documents; Mibanga duty) China [2021] UKUT 33, the respondent had a duty to
investigate as she was relying  upon  the  birth  certificate  and  marriage
certificate as core documents. Had she done so, she would  have  established
that the documents were not genuine. The respondent had therefore failed  to
meet the burden of proof.

Mr Melvin relied on the rule 24 response and submitted that the  appellant's
grounds had no merit. Contrary to the assertion made by the  appellant,  the
respondent did place documents before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  those,
together the oral evidence and the appellant's flat denial of  the  Albanian
identity without adducing supporting evidence was sufficient for the  burden
of proof to have been met by the  respondent.  The  appellant  had  made  no
attempt to  verify  her  Serbian  nationality.  The  judge's  findings  were
sustainable in law.

In response Mr Sobowale submitted that the respondent had  tried  to  verify
the contents of the documents but had failed to  seek  verification  of  the
documents themselves. Comparable photographs were  not  available  from  the
Albanian Embassy, from the TIMS system, yet the respondent had a  photograph
from the birth certificate and could have sent it to  the  Albanian  Embassy
to verify that it was the same person. The appellant's  case  was  that  the
lady living in Albania with Fred Hila was someone else and not her.

Both parties agreed that, in the event of the decision being  set  aside  by
reason of an error of law, I could  re-make  the  decision  without  further
documentation or evidence.


Discussion and Conclusions

The sole issue in this case is whether the judge was  entitled  to  conclude
that the respondent had  made  out  her  case  that  the  appellant  was  an
Albanian national, Mirela Hila, the person claimed by Fred Hila  to  be  his
wife, rather than Kujtesa Ismajli, the person who had been recognised  as  a
refugee from Serbia and subsequently granted British citizenship.

The case presented by Mr Sobowale was that the documentary  evidence  relied
upon by the respondent was not sufficiently reliable to meet the  burden  of
proof and that the judge was wrong not to have found as  such.  The  reasons
put forward by Mr Sobowale for so concluding were  that  the  documents  had
been produced by a person who was known to have relied  on  false  documents
previously, that the documents had not been verified by the respondent  with
the Albanian Embassy as they ought to have been, that the birth  certificate
was deficient as it was based on a registration year  of  1974  yet  gave  a
date of birth in 1978 and was  a  handwritten,  copied  document  which  was
accompanied by a photograph of the appellant as a grown woman.

However, the contents of the birth certificate produced by  the  appellant's
former husband, which contained the same  photograph  as  that  attached  to
Kujtesa Ismaeli's  application for naturalisation as a  British  citizen  at
M11 of the  respondent's  appeal  bundle,   were  verified  by  the  British
Embassy in Tirana, in a letter dated  1  March  2018,  at  Annex  D  of  the
respondent's appeal bundle, as consistent with the guidance in  QC  (China).
That letter was accompanied by a copy of the family certificate and a  typed
birth certificate for Mirela Ejlli (previously  Hila)  containing  the  same
details as that provided in  the  handwritten  birth  certificate  from  the
appellant's former husband. It is not entirely clear from  the  letter  from
the Embassy whether or not a photograph was attached  -  whilst  the  letter
stated that  a  comparison  photograph  from  the  TIMS  (Total  Information
Management System) was not provided, reference was  also  made  to  bio-data
with a photograph of the subject. Nevertheless, it is clearly not the  case,
as Mr Sobowale submitted, that the respondent simply accepted  the  evidence
from Mr Hila.

It was Mr Sobowale's submission, with regard to that  verification  process,
that the respondent had verified the contents of the documents but that  did
not establish that the appellant was the  person  named  in  the  documents.
However, as noted by the judge at [15], the appellant, despite  being  asked
twice, failed to provide any explanation as  to  why  her  previous  husband
would have submitted false documents at his entry clearance interview,  when
it was of no benefit to him to contradict  the  basis  upon  which  she  had
secured British citizenship. Furthermore,  there  were  clearly  many  other
reasons for concluding that the appellant was the same person  as  named  in
the birth certificate produced by  her  former  husband.  Her  husband  also
produced a marriage certificate, at page T3, which gave  the  same  parents'
names and date and place of birth for his wife as the birth certificate  and
gave the year of the marriage in Albania as 1999, as he had  stated  at  his
entry clearance interview, although the judge  quite  properly  acknowledged
at [18] that the  weight  that  could  be  accorded  to  that  document  was
limited, since it had not been translated.

In addition, the appellant had, since 2008, been  repeatedly  asked  by  the
respondent to provide her Serbian birth certificate  or  other  evidence  of
her Serbian nationality, but had failed to do so.  The  respondent  produced
evidence of facilities available from the Serbian  Embassy  in  the  UK  for
obtaining identity documents and evidence of  nationality  and,  aside  from
claiming that her town had been destroyed in  the  fighting,  the  appellant
did not make any attempt to support her claim, a point properly made by  the
judge at [20] and [21] of his decision. Mr  Sobowale's  submission  in  that
regard was that it  was  the  respondent  who  bore  the  burden  of  proof.
However, as the judge properly found,  the  appellant  bore  the  burden  of
providing an 'innocent explanation' in response to what was  found  to  have
been initially adequately demonstrated by the respondent. As  the  appellant
was claiming to be a Serbian national  it  was  clearly  in  her  interests,
given the serious allegation  made  against  her,  to  at  least  make  some
efforts to seek evidence which could support her claim.

All of these were  matters  fully  considered  by  the  judge  who  directed
himself properly on the burden  and  standard  of  proof  and  followed  the
correct approach, as is apparent from [5] and [16] to [22] of his  decision.
The appellant has done no more than assert  that  she  is  Serbian  but  has
provided nothing further to  rebut  the  significant  evidence  against  her
other than to deny the allegations made. On the basis of the  findings  made
by the judge on the evidence I accept that he  was  entitled  to  reach  the
conclusions that he did and  properly  concluded  that  the  respondent  was
entitled to pursue deprivation action.

However even if I were to find an insufficiency of reasoning in the  judge's
decision (which I do not), I would reach the same conclusions if I  were  to
re-make the decision myself, as there are additional matters  to  which  the
judge  did  not  specifically  refer  but  which   clearly   undermine   the
reliability of the appellant's claim further.

At [26]  of  the  refusal  decision,  the  respondent  identified  that  the
appellant's denial of having knowledge of her husband's use of the  identity
Fred Hila prior to the  refusal  of  his  entry  clearance  application  was
contradicted by the representations made by her solicitors on 27 June  2007.
That is indeed the case, and in fact the  appellant's  own  statement  of  7
January 2020, submitted for the appeal hearing, at  [4],  also  contradicted
that claim. The appellant has not sought to provide any proper  response  to
that. I note further that the respondent also referred, in a letter dated  8
February 2018 at Z2 of  the  appeal  bundle,  to  photographs  of  the  same
person,  namely  the  appellant,  sponsoring  both   the   entry   clearance
application of Fred Hila in June 2007, but also an application for leave  to
remain for Viktor Marku in 2004, which was  refused  on  22  July  2005.  In
their response of 26 February 2018 the  appellant's  solicitors  claimed  to
know nothing of Viktor Marku who was not their client, yet it was  the  same
solicitors (albeit under a different reference number) who  made  the  entry
clearance application on 27 June 2007 referring to both Fed Hila and  Viktor
Marku.

Another matter which appears to have  been  overlooked  is  the  fact  that,
aside from the issue of the appellant's identity and nationality, the  basis
upon which her appeal was allowed in the First-tier Tribunal on  29  January
2003 included the fact that she would be treated as an outcast on return  to
Serbia, having produced a child out of wedlock,  and  that  the  father  had
played no part in the child's life and she would be returning  as  a  single
woman without any support. That was wholly contradicted  by  her  subsequent
evidence that she was in a relationship with Mr Marku/ Hila in the  UK  from
October 2001 and was living with him at the time their son  Mario  was  born
on 14 July 2002 and at the time of the appeal in  January  2003,  until  his
return to Albania in 2005. Accordingly, the reliability of  the  appellant's
claim before the First-tier Tribunal in January 2003 has  to  be  viewed  in
the  light  of  that  further  contradiction,  which  adds  weight  to   the
respondent's assertion that the entire basis of her claim  in  January  2003
was false.

Accordingly, there are additional reasons, beyond those identified by  Judge
Lawrence,  for  concluding  that  the  respondent  was  entitled  to  pursue
deprivation action against the appellant, but in any event  I  am  satisfied
that the judge was entitled to reach the decision that he did on  the  basis
of his own findings.

The grounds made no challenge to the judge's decision  on  any  other  basis
besides the allegation of deception and fraud and I  consider  that  he  was
fully entitled to make the decision that  he  did.  There  are  no  material
errors of law in his decision.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:       S Kebede                                1 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede



