
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DC/00091/2019
     DC/00127/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2020 and 14 July 2021          |On 11 October 2021            |
|Written submissions received on 22 and 30     |                              |
|March 2021                                    |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                  ZA AND ba
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For BA and ZA:    Ms S. Naik, QC, and Ms M. Sardar (23 November 2021) and
     Mr P. Saini (14 July 2021), counsel, instructed by Oliver & Hasani
For the Secretary of State:     Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. These proceedings concern the scope of a tribunal's jurisdiction in  an
    appeal under section 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981 ("the 1981
    Act") against a decision to make an order depriving a person  of  their
    British citizenship under section 40(3) of that Act, in  light  of  the
    Supreme Court's judgment in R (oao Begum) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2021] UKSC 7.



Procedural background

 2. ZA and BA are joint  Albanian-British  citizens.   They  are  wife  and
    husband respectively.  They  naturalised  as  British  citizens  on  18
    December 2009 and 10 August 2012 respectively.  On 22 August  2019  and
    14 November 2019, the Secretary of State notified  ZA  and  BA  of  her
    decision to deprive each of them of their British citizenship  pursuant
    to section 40(3) of the 1981 Act.  They each appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  Their appeals were heard separately, for  reasons  that  are
    not clear.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 7 January 2020 following a hearing  on  24
    October 2019, Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  dismissed  ZA's  appeal.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 29 January 2020,  following  a  hearing  on  15
    January 2020, Tribunal Judge Howorth allowed BA's appeal.  ZA  appealed
    against the decision of Judge Chohan.  The Secretary of State  appealed
    against Judge Howorth's decision. Permission to appeal was  granted  in
    respect of both sets of proceedings.

 4. The appeals were linked in this tribunal by the order of Upper Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul.  We heard the linked appeals on 23 November 2020  (error
    of law hearing) and on 14 July 2021 (resumed hearing).  On 23  November
    2020, ZA and BA were represented by Ms S. Naik, QC, and on 14 July 2021
    they were represented by Mr P. Saini, counsel. The Secretary  of  State
    was represented by Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer,
    throughout.

 5. On 26 February 2021, shortly before  we  were  due  to  promulgate  our
    "error of law" decision, the Supreme Court handed down its judgment  in
    Begum,  concerning  the  role  of  the  Special   Immigration   Appeals
    Commission ("SIAC") in an appeal against a decision to deprive a person
    of their British citizenship under section 40(2) of the 1981  Act.   We
    permitted the parties to make post-hearing submissions  in  writing  on
    the impact, if any, of the judgment on the role of a tribunal  in  this
    jurisdiction during an appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act. We are
    grateful for Ms Naik's additional written submissions on behalf  of  ZA
    and BA, received on 22 March 2021, and those of Ms Cunha, on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State, received on 30  March  2021.  In  addition,  Mr
    Saini and Ms Cunha provided skeleton arguments ahead of the hearing  on
    14 July 2021 addressing the  issue  further,  for  which  we  are  also
    grateful.

 6. In our "error of law" decision promulgated on 30 April 2021,  we  found
    that, on both the pre- and post-Begum understanding of the  role  of  a
    tribunal on an appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act, the  decisions
    of Judge Chohan and Judge Howorth involved the making of  an  error  of
    law, and set the decisions aide, preserving Judge Chohan's findings  of
    fact.  We summarise our reasons for doing so at paragraphs 88  and  89,
    below.

 7. We directed that the appeals be reheard in this tribunal  and  set  out
    our reasons for dismissing both appeals in this decision, following the
    resumed hearing on 14 July 2021.

Factual background

 8. ZA and BA arrived in this country in 2000.  BA claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis that he was a Macedonian citizen of Albanian ethnicity who was at
    risk of being persecuted as a result of  the  conflict  in  the  former
    Yugoslavia.  ZA was listed as a dependent to the claim,  on  the  basis
    that she, too, was a citizen of Macedonia.

 9. The claim to be Macedonian was false, and had been made, as BA  and  ZA
    now accept, in order to deceive the Secretary of State into recognising
    the family as  refugees,  with  BA  as  the  lead  claimant.   In  this
    decision, we refer to the false claim by ZA and BA to be Macedonian  as
    "the Macedonian deception".

10. The Secretary of State initially incorrectly treated BA's asylum  claim
    as having  been  withdrawn,  but  later  rectified  the  position,  and
    informed BA that the claim remained pending.   On  28  June  2007,  the
    Secretary of State  wrote  to  BA  highlighting  a  statement  made  to
    Parliament in July 2006 by  the  then  Home  Secretary  concerning  the
    backlog of "unresolved asylum cases", stating that Home Department  had
    commenced "a programme to deal with the legacy cases  such  as  yours".
    The letter invited BA to  complete  a  Legacy  Casework  questionnaire.
    This BA did on 3 July 2007, again stating  that  his  nationality,  and
    that of ZA and their two children, each of whom had been born  in  this
    country in February 2001 and June 2002, was "Macedonian".

11. BA's questionnaire response highlighted the length of time BA  and  the
    family had  been  waiting  for  his  asylum  claim  to  be  determined,
    contending that the delay had breached their rights under Article 8  of
    the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  ("the  ECHR").   BA  also
    highlighted how his asylum application had been  "wrongly  refused  and
    later  withdrawn",  referring  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  earlier
    mistaken assertion that the claim had been withdrawn as outlined above.

12. On 7 March 2008, the Secretary of State informed BA that  he,  ZA,  and
    their two children, were each being granted indefinite leave to remain.
    The letter stated:

            "Your case has been reviewed. Having fully considered the
            information you have provided, and because of the individual
            circumstances of your case, it has been decided to grant you
            indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom. This leave
            has been granted exceptionally, outside the immigration rules.
            This is due to your length of residence in the United Kingdom.

            Your dependents listed below have been granted leave in
            line..."

    The letter proceeded to list ZA, and  the  couple's  two  children,  as
    dependents.  It specified each of their  nationalities  as  "Macedonian
    (Former Yugoslav Republic of)".

13. On 12 October 2009, ZA applied to naturalise as a British citizen.  She
    was granted British citizenship on 18 December 2009, in her identity as
    ZA, with her given date of birth, on the basis she  had  been  born  in
    Gradec, Macedonia (Former Yugoslav Republic of).

14. On 13 April 2012, BA applied to naturalise as a  British  citizen,  and
    was granted British citizenship on 10 August 2012, in the  identity  he
    provided which purported that he had also  been  born  in  Gradec.   An
    earlier application for naturalisation, dated 22  September  2009,  had
    been refused, as BA  had  an  unspent  conviction,  so  his  successful
    citizenship application was his second application.

15. In her decision letters dated 22  August  and  14  November  2019,  the
    Secretary  of  State  informed  ZA  and  BA  that  as   a   result   of
    investigations which revealed their  true  (Albanian)  identities,  she
    considered that they had engaged in fraud that was  material  to  their
    acquisition of British citizenship.  She considered that  it  would  be
    appropriate to exercise her discretion to deprive  ZA and BA  of  their
    citizenship, that to do so would not breach their rights under  Article
    8 of the ECHR, would be compatible with the  best  interests  of  their
    minor children, and would not render them stateless.

16. In ZA's decision, having set out the facts  as  summarised  above,  the
    Secretary of State said the following, at [14]:

            "You made an application to naturalise as a British citizen
            which was received by the Home Office on 12 October 2009.
            Within this you gave your details as [ZA] born 2 June 1978 in
            Gradec, Macedonia.  You failed to declare any previous names...
            Section 3 dealt with the good character requirement.  Question
            3.12 asked if you had engaged in any other activities which
            might indicate that you may not be considered a person of good
            character.  You answered 'No' to this.  You confirmed you had
            read the guide Naturalisation as a British Citizen.  You signed
            the declaration acknowledging you were aware that to give false
            information knowingly or recklessly is a criminal offence and
            declaring that the information in the application was correct.
            On this basis you were granted British citizenship and
            naturalised on 18 December 2009 in the identity of [ZA] born 2
            June 1978 in Gradec, Macedonia (Former Yugoslav Republic of)."

17.  The  decision  outlined  the   representations   advanced   by   those
    representing ZA against deprivation.  ZA claimed that her  husband  was
    advised by other Albanians that the family would be returned to Albania
    if their true identities were known.   The  family  had  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for over 18 years.  Leave was  granted  under  a  legacy
    regime, and the asylum claim was not relevant to that grant, which  was
    based on the length of the family's  residence,  and  was  akin  to  an
    amnesty.  Deprivation would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with
    ZA's ECHR rights due to the impact on the family and  children.   There
    had been delay on the part of the Secretary of State.

18. The decision rejected the mitigation proffered.  Under chapter 55.7.8.4
    of the Nationality Instructions, the fact that an adult was advised  by
    a relative or agent to give false information does  not  indicate  that
    they were not complicit in  the  deception.   All  adults  are  legally
    responsible for their own citizenship  applications.   Under  paragraph
    55.7.6, length of residence in the UK alone  will  not  normally  be  a
    reason not to deprive a person of their citizenship.  It  was  accepted
    that ZA's identity details were not the "deciding factor" in the  grant
    of indefinite leave to remain:

            "However, it is unreasonable to attempt to separate the details
            provided in the asylum claim from the grant of ILR.  The length
            of your residence would never have been accrued had you been
            honest about your identity when making your asylum claim as you
            would almost certainly have been returned to Albania and so
            this deception can be seen to be material to the subsequent
            grant or ILR."

19. In relation to the claimed consequences of deprivation,  having  quoted
    from Ahmed and Others (deprivation  of  citizenship)  [2017]  UKUT  118
    (IAC) at [30] to the effect that a deprivation order does not equate to
    a removal decision, the decision stated:

            "Once deprivation action is taken you will be considered for
            any relevant leave and at this point Article 8 arguments will
            be considered. There is no reason to believe deprivation will
            have any particular effect on your children given this action
            relates solely to yourself."

20. Then at [24], the decision stated:

            "The deception you have practised also counts against your good
            character. Question 3.12 in your naturalisation form asked if
            you had engaged in any other activities which might indicate
            that you may not be considered a person of good character. You
            answered 'No' to this. You confirmed you had read the guide
            Naturalisation as a British Citizen. In the guide the following
            advice is given, "You must say whether you have been involved
            in anything which might indicate that you are not of good
            character. You must give information about any of these
            activities no matter how long ago this was. Checks will be made
            in all cases and your application may fail and your fee will
            not fully be refunded if you make an untruthful declaration. If
            you are in any doubt about whether you have done something or
            it has been alleged that you have done something which might
            lead us to think that you are not of good character you should
            say so."  your answer here is further deception as this clearly
            gives you the opportunity to state your prior deception
            regarding your identity. Chapter 18, annex D of the nationality
            instructions in force at the time contained guidance for
            caseworkers regarding the good character requirement. Section
            9.1 advised that any attempt to lie or conceal the truth should
            count heavily against the applicant. So, had the case worker
            known of your prior and continued deception your application
            for citizenship would certainly have been refused on good
            character grounds."

21. As to the exercise of discretion, the  Secretary  of  State  considered
    that,  notwithstanding  the  representations  made  on  behalf  of  ZA,
    deprivation  would  be  both   reasonable   and   proportionate.   Upon
    deprivation, any immigration status held prior  to  naturalising  as  a
    British citizen would not be restored, but the  decision  itself  would
    not  require  ZA  to  leave  the   country.    "Accordingly,   although
    deprivation may culminate in a  decision  to  remove  you,  it  is  not
    necessary to take into account the impact that removal  would  have  on
    you and your family members."  See [28].

22. At [31], in relation to the best interests  of  the  appellant's  minor
    children, the letter states;

            "Deprivation of your citizenship (as distinct from removal or
            deportation) will not, in itself, have a significant effect on
            the best interests of your children. It would neither impact on
            their or your husband's status in the United Kingdom, nor is
            there any evidence that it will impact on their education,
            housing, financial support or contact with you. Whilst it is
            acknowledged that deprivation may have an emotional impact on
            your children, taking into account the seriousness of the
            fraud, misrepresentation or concealment of material facts, it
            is a reasonable and balanced step to take."

23. The letter continued to outline why no  issues  arose  in  relation  to
    statelessness, and in relation to the practicalities of the process  of
    deprivation, at [34]:

            "consideration may also be given on whether a limited form of
            leave can be given. A decision on this matter will follow once
            the deprivation order is made."

    And at [35]:

            "In order to provide clarity regarding the period between loss
            of citizenship via service of a deprivation order and the
            further decision to remove, deport or grant leave, the
            Secretary of State notes this will be relatively short:

             . a deprivation order will be made within four  weeks  of  your
               appeal  rights  being  exhausted,  or  receipt   of   written
               confirmation from you that you will not appeal this decision,
               whichever is the sooner.

             . within 8 weeks from the deprivation order being made, subject
               to any representations you make, a further decision  will  be
               made either to  remove  you  from  United  Kingdom,  commence
               deportation action... or issue leave."

24. The decision in relation to  BA  took  a  substantially  similar  form.
    Similar representations seeking to resist deprivation were made  by  BA
    as had been made by ZA, and the Secretary of State  responded  to  like
    effect.   BA  had  been  an  adult  at  the  time  he  made  his  false
    representations to the Home Office , and he maintained that deceit  for
    18 years. In relation to the  legacy  programme,  it  would  have  been
    possible to have  returned  him  to  the  relatively  safe  country  of
    Albania. The grant of indefinite leave to remain was made  under  false
    pretences. The length of residence would never have been accrued had BA
    been honest about his genuine identity when  he  claimed  asylum.   The
    deception was thus material to the subsequent grant of indefinite leave
    to remain. The legacy regime was not, as had been suggested by  BA,  an
    amnesty.  Similarly,  BA  had   declared   on   his   application   for
    naturalisation that he was of good character,  despite  his  fabricated
    identity and history of deception. Had he told the truth, it was highly
    likely that he would have been refused citizenship  on  good  character
    grounds. The deception was thus material in two respects. First, it led
    to the grant of indefinite leave to remain. Secondly,  he  would  never
    have been deemed to  be  of  good  character  had  the  deception  been
    revealed.  The  remainder  of  the  letter  made  identical  points  in
    relation to Article 8, statelessness, and the possibility of  leave  to
    remain being granted in the future as had been made in ZA's letter.

LEGAL FRAMEWORK

25. In light of Begum, it is necessary first  to  address  the  role  of  a
    tribunal of this jurisdiction in an appeal under  section  40A  of  the
    1981 Act.

26. A person may acquire naturalisation as a British citizen in  accordance
    with section 6(1) of the 1981 Act:

            "6. - Acquisition by naturalisation.

            (1)  If, on an application for naturalisation as a British
            citizen made by a person of full age and capacity, the
            Secretary of State is satisfied that the applicant fulfils the
            requirements of Schedule 1 for naturalisation as such a citizen
            under this subsection, he may, if he thinks fit, grant to him a
            certificate of naturalisation as such a citizen."

27. Schedule 1 to the 1981 Act sets out the requirements for naturalisation
    as a British citizen. This includes at paragraph 1(1)(b) "that he is of
    good character ". Good character is not defined  under  the  1981  Act.
    The Secretary of State has adopted guidance from time to  time  on  the
    meaning of the term.

28. Section 40 of the 1981 Act empowers the Secretary of State to deprive a
    person of their British citizenship in certain circumstances:

            "(2)  The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
            citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
            deprivation is conducive to the public good.

            (3)   The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
            citizenship status which results from his registration or
            naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
            registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

                  (a)  fraud,

                  (b)  false representation, or

                  (c)  concealment of a material fact."

    The criteria in section 40(2) and (3) operate as a condition  precedent
    to the Secretary of State's exercise of her power to deprive  a  person
    of their citizenship.  The power  to  deprive  is  discretionary  ("the
    Secretary of State may"), with the consequence that  the  Secretary  of
    State must decide whether to exercise the power to deprive, even if she
    is satisfied that a statutory condition precedent to doing so is met.

29. There is a right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of her intention to  exercise  the  power
    under section 40, rather than the deprivation order itself: see section
    40A(1).   It  follows  that,  during  the  currency  of   any   pending
    proceedings challenging a decision to make  a  deprivation  order,  the
    individual concerned will remain a British citizen.

The role of a tribunal in an appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act

30. The proceedings in Begum concerned a decision of the Secretary of State
    to deprive a British citizen of her citizenship under section 40(2)  of
    the 1981 Act, on the basis that the Secretary of  State  was  satisfied
    that deprivation was conducive to the public good on national  security
    grounds.   The  appeal  was  originally  heard  by   SIAC   (before   a
    constitution  which  featured  a  member  of   the   panel   in   these
    proceedings), as the Secretary of State had certified that the decision
    was taken in reliance upon information which, in  his  opinion,  should
    not be made public in the interests of national security, under section
    40A(2) of the 1981 Act.

31. Prior to the Supreme Court's judgment in Begum, it was settled law,  as
    summarised in KV  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 2483 at [6], that if on appeal a tribunal is
    satisfied that a condition precedent in section 40(3)  is  established,
    it  was  then  necessary  to  ask  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion to deprive the appellant of British  citizenship  should  be
    exercised differently.

32. In KV the Court of Appeal outlined the approach taken by this  tribunal
    in Deliallisi (British Citizen: deprivation appeal; Scope) [2013]  UKUT
    439 (IAC) and BA (deprivation of citizenship: Appeals) [2018]  UKUT  85
    (IAC) concerning appeals under section 40A.  The  relevant  extract  of
    the Headnote to Deliallisi provides:

            "(1)  An appeal under section 40A of the British Nationality
            Act 1981 against a decision to deprive a person of British
            citizenship requires the Tribunal to consider whether the
            Secretary of State's discretionary decision to deprive should
            be exercised differently. This will involve (but not be limited
            to) ECHR Article 8 issues, as well as the question whether
            deprivation would be a disproportionate interference with a
            person's EU rights." (Emphasis added)

33. This approach was reflected in BA, the Headnote to which states:

            "(1)  In an appeal under section 40A of the British Nationality
            Act 1981, the Tribunal must first establish whether the
            relevant condition precedent in section 40(2) or (3) exists for
            the exercise of the Secretary of State's discretion to deprive
            a person (P) of British citizenship.

            (2)   In a section 40(2) case, the fact that the Secretary of
            State is satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public
            good is to be given very significant weight and will almost
            inevitably be determinative of that issue.

            (3)   In a section 40(3) case, the Tribunal must establish
            whether one or more of the means described in subsection
            (3)(a), (b) and (c) were used by P in order to obtain British
            citizenship. As held in Pirzada (Deprivation of citizenship:
            general principles) [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC) the deception must
            have motivated the acquisition of that citizenship.

            (4)   In both section 40(2) and (3) cases, the fact that the
            Secretary of State has decided in the exercise of her
            discretion to deprive P of British citizenship will in practice
            mean the Tribunal can allow P's appeal only if satisfied that
            the reasonably foreseeable consequence of deprivation would
            violate the obligations of the United Kingdom government under
            the Human Rights Act 1998 and/or that there is some exceptional
            feature of the case which means the discretion in the
            subsection concerned should be exercised differently.

            (5)   As can be seen from AB (British citizenship: deprivation:
            Deliallisi considered) (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 451 (IAC), the
            stronger P's case appears to the Tribunal to be for resisting
            any future (post-deprivation) removal on ECHR grounds, the less
            likely it will be that P's removal from the United Kingdom will
            be one of the foreseeable consequences of deprivation.

            (6)   The appeal is to be determined by reference to the
            evidence adduced to the Tribunal, whether or not the same
            evidence was before the Secretary of State when she made her
            decision to deprive."

34. It appears that there was no  dispute  between  the  parties  in  those
    proceedings as to that being the correct approach.  See Leggat  LJ,  at
    [6], with emphasis added:

            "I would endorse the following principles which are articulated
            in [Deliallisi and BA] and which I did not understand to be in
            dispute on this appeal".

35. The principles then summarised by Leggat LJ, at [6(1)]  and  following,
    were as follows:

            (1)   Like an appeal under section 82 of the Nationality,
            Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, an appeal under section 40A of
            the 1981 Act is not a review of the Secretary of State's
            decision but a full reconsideration of the decision whether to
            deprive the appellant of British citizenship.

            (2)   It is thus for the tribunal to find the relevant facts on
            the basis of the evidence adduced to the tribunal, whether or
            not that evidence was before the Secretary of State when
            deciding to make a deprivation order.

            (3)   The tribunal must first establish whether the relevant
            condition precedent specified in section 40(2) or (3) exists
            for the exercise of the discretion whether to deprive the
            appellant of British citizenship. In a section 40(3) case, this
            requires the tribunal to establish whether citizenship was
            obtained by one or more of the means specified in that
            subsection.

            (4)   If the condition precedent is established, the tribunal
            has then to ask whether the Secretary of State's discretion to
            deprive the appellant of British citizenship should be
            exercised differently. For this purpose, the tribunal must
            first determine the reasonably foreseeable consequences of
            deprivation.

            (5)   If the rights of the appellant or any other relevant
            person under article 8 of the European Convention on Human
            Rights are engaged, the tribunal will have to decide whether
            depriving the appellant of British citizenship would constitute
            a disproportionate interference with those rights. But even if
            article 8 is not engaged, the tribunal must still consider
            whether the discretion should be exercised differently.

            (6)   As it is the Secretary of State who has been charged by
            Parliament with responsibility for making decisions concerning
            deprivation of citizenship, insofar as the Secretary of State
            has considered the relevant facts, the Secretary of State's
            view and any published policy regarding how the discretion
            should be exercised should normally be accorded considerable
            weight (in which regard see Ali v Secretary of State for the
            Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799).

36. In Begum, the Supreme Court reversed the approach at sub-paragraph  (1)
    in relation to appeals to SIAC, in  the  context  of  an  appeal  under
    section 2B of the Special  Immigration  Appeals  Act  1997  ("the  1997
    Act"), which makes provision for a right of appeal to SIAC in certified
    national security cases in lieu of the right of appeal to the  tribunal
    conferred by section 40A of the 1981 Act in non-certified  cases.   The
    court held that the appellate role of  SIAC  in  an  appeal  against  a
    decision under section 40(2) of the 1981 Act is confined to  one  which
    more readily correlates with a conventional public law review standard.



37. In our judgment, the Begum approach extends to an appeal under  section
    40A to the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal against decisions
    taken under section 40(2) and (3).  We reject the submissions that this
    aspect of Begum was confined to SIAC appeals, or conduciveness  appeals
    under section 40(2), for the following reasons.

38. First, at [40]  the  Supreme  Court  prefaced  its  discussion  of  the
    statutory  framework   governing   appeals   against   deprivation   of
    citizenship decisions to SIAC with the observation  that  there  is  no
    statutory provision governing the grounds of appeal on which an  appeal
    under section 2B may be brought, the matters to be considered,  or  how
    the appeal should be determined.  It added:

            "The same appears to be true of an appeal to the Tribunal under
            section 40A of the 1981 Act."

    The starting point is that there  is  no  express  statutory  provision
    governing the role of the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal  in
    an appeal  under  section  40A,  just  as  there  is  no  corresponding
    provision governing the same process in  SIAC.   Many  of  the  general
    principles set out by the Supreme Court when  discerning  the  role  of
    SIAC on an appeal against a section 40(2) decision will, therefore,  be
    relevant to an appeal to the tribunal under section 40A.

39. Secondly, at [43] and following the court was critical of the reasoning
    of this tribunal in Deliallisi and  BA,  in  particular  the  following
    extract taken from [31] of Deliallisi:

            "If the legislature confers a right of appeal against a
            decision, then, in the absence of express wording limiting the
            nature of that appeal, it should be treated as requiring the
            appellate body to exercise afresh any judgement or discretion
            employed in reaching the decision against which the appeal is
            brought."

    (In this decision, we use the term "full-merits" in the  context  of  a
    deprivation of citizenship appeal to encapsulate the Deliallisi and  BA
    standards of review.)

40. The Supreme Court's criticism of Deliallisi's full-merits approach  was
    multi-faceted, at [43]:

        a. Whereas the tribunal in Deliallisi had purported to find support
           for the full-merits approach in Arusha and Demushi  (deprivation
           of citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC), it had:

                  "mistakenly understood the judgment in that case  to  have
                  'approved'  (para  28)  remarks  made  by  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal, which the Upper Tribunal had in  reality  merely
                  recorded (see paras 11 and 14 of its judgment)."

        b. The tribunal had mistakenly treated a ministerial statement made
           to Parliament during the passage of the Nationality, Immigration
           and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") concerning the scope of the
           rights of appeal under section  40A  and  2B  as  revealing  the
           parliamentary intention behind  the  legislation,  in  a  manner
           disapproved by the House of Lords in Wilson v First County Trust
           Ltd (No. 2) [2004] 1 AC 816 at [58].  There,  Lord  Nicholls  of
           Birkenhead said:

                  "A clear and unambiguous ministerial statement is part  of
                  the background to the legislation. In the  words  of  Lord
                  Browne-Wilkinson in Pepper v Hart [1993] AC 593, 635, such
                  statements 'are as much background  to  the  enactment  of
                  legislation as white papers  and  Parliamentary  reports'.
                  But they are no more than part of  the  background.  As  I
                  emphasised in R v Secretary of State for the  Environment,
                  Transport and the Regions, Ex parte Spath Holme Ltd [2001]
                  2 AC 349,  399,  however  such  statements  are  made  and
                  however explicit they may  be,  they  cannot  control  the
                  meaning of an Act of Parliament."

        c. The tribunal had conflated the apparently justiciable nature  of
           decisions under section 40 with the entitlement of a tribunal to
           conduct a full-merits  review,  relying  upon  Jacobs,  Tribunal
           Practice and Procedure (2nd Edition).  The Supreme Court held:

                  "[T]he  [tribunal's]  apparent  reasoning,  that  (1)   an
                  appellate  body's  ability  to  re-take  a   discretionary
                  decision  is  excluded  if  the  subject-matter  is   non-
                  justiciable, and (2) the subject-matter of  this  decision
                  is not non-justiciable, therefore (3) this decision can be
                  re-taken by the appellate body, is fallacious. It  depends
                  on the unstated premise that an appellate body can  always
                  re-take a discretionary decision unless the subject-matter
                  is non-justiciable: a premise which, as  explained  below,
                  is incorrect."

41. In BA, this tribunal considered that it had found support for the full-
    merits approach to the determination of a deprivation appeal in  Ali  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60.   "However,"
    noted Lord Reed at [45], "that  decision  was  not  concerned  with  an
    appeal under section 40A, but with an immigration appeal subject to the
    pre-[Immigration Act 2014] version of section 84 of the 2002 Act... and
    was therefore not in point."

42. The Supreme Court's criticism of  Deliallisi  and  BA  was  significant
    because they  were  cases  concerning  appeals  against  section  40(3)
    decisions.  That disposes of the argument that  Begum  is  confined  to
    section 40(2) national security cases, although we  will  consider  the
    additional arguments in any event.

43. The court observed  at  [46]  that  the  approach  of  the  authorities
    concerning appellate tribunals or courts when considering discretionary
    decisions by administrative  decision  makers  varied,  reflecting  the
    decision appealed against and the relevant statutory  provisions.   See
    the discussion of John Dee Ltd v Comrs of Customs and Excise [1995] STC
    941 and Customs and Excise Comrs  v  J  H  Corbitt  (Numismatists)  Ltd
    [1981] AC 22 at [47] and [48] respectively.

44. In Customs and Excise Comrs v J H Corbitt (Numismatists) Ltd [1981]  AC
    22 at 60, it was significant that the  governing  legislation  required
    the VAT Tribunal to, "consider whether the Commissioners had acted in a
    way in which no reasonable panel of Commissioners could have  acted  or
    whether they had taken into  account  some  irrelevant  matter  or  had
    disregarded something to which they should  have  given  weight."   The
    principle was not confined to the  tax  context,  "but  turned  on  the
    nature of the discretion and the fact that it had been confided to  the
    primary decision maker" [48].

45. Significantly for present purposes, at  [66]  the  court  analysed  the
    wording of section 40(2), which provides:

            "(2) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
            citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
            deprivation is conducive to the public good."

    Lord Reed continued:

            "The opening words ('The Secretary of State may...') indicate
            that decisions under section 40(2) are made by the Secretary of
            State in the exercise of his discretion. The discretion is one
            which Parliament has confided to the Secretary of State. In the
            absence of any provision to the contrary, it must therefore be
            exercised by the Secretary of State and by no one else. There
            is no indication in either the 1981 Act or the 1997 Act, in its
            present form, that Parliament intended the discretion to be
            exercised by or at the direction of SIAC. SIAC can, however,
            review the Secretary of State's exercise of his discretion and
            set it aside in cases where an appeal is allowed, as explained
            below."

46. In her written submissions,  despite  accepting  the  existence  of  an
    apparent tension between KV (Sri Lanka) and Begum (see paragraph 9), Ms
    Naik contends that a different approach is required  in  section  40(3)
    cases, thereby distinguishing Begum, and preserving KV's endorsement of
    Deliallisi and BA.  Decisions as to what is "conducive  to  the  public
    good" in the national security context are, she submits,  the  paradigm
    example of decisions which may properly be said to be the  preserve  of
    the  Secretary  of  State.   The  public  interest  in  section   40(3)
    deprivations differs from that at play  in  national  security  section
    40(2) cases.  By contrast, the expertise  to  determine  section  40(3)
    matters is not the preserve of the Secretary of State, and  a  tribunal
    will not be subject to  the  same  institutional  and  competence-based
    constraints as SIAC would be in  an  appeal  against  a  section  40(2)
    decision.  The public interest underpinning section 40(3),  submits  Ms
    Naik, is the integrity of the citizenship process.  That  is  a  matter
    that a tribunal "is better suited to consider"  and  is  "well-used  to
    considering, for example, whether or not deception has taken place, and
    whether or not such deception is  material"  (see  paragraph  13).   Mr
    Saini advanced essentially the same point in his own written  and  oral
    submissions: see paragraph 17 and following.

47. Mr Saini also relied on R (oao Steinfield and Keidan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for International  Development  (in  substitution  for  the  Home
    Secretary and the Education Secretary) [2018] UKSC 32 as authority  for
    the proposition that "the concept of giving deference [to questions  of
    special weight relating to matters primarily within  the  institutional
    competence of the executive] accorded to state's [sic]  in  interfering
    with fundamental rights" at [28] and [29]:  see  paragraph  18  of  his
    skeleton   argument.    Steinfield's   case   concerned   the   claimed
    justification for the exclusion  of  heterosexual  couples  from  civil
    partnerships under Article 14 ECHR and is of no assistance  to  ZA  and
    BA.  The extract relied upon by Mr Saini concerned whether  the  margin
    of appreciation enjoyed by states parties to the  ECHR  in  proceedings
    before the European Court of Human Rights  ("the  ECtHR")  extended  to
    national authorities  resisting  challenges  brought  on  ECHR  grounds
    before domestic courts.  As held by Lord Kerr at [28]:

            "...the approach of the ECtHR to the question of what margin of
            appreciation member states should be accorded is not mirrored
            by the exercise which a national court is required to carry out
            in deciding whether an interference with a Convention right is
            justified."

48. We accept that the Supreme Court in Steinfield touched  upon  the  need
    for appropriate judicial deference towards certain decisions  taken  by
    the executive, with the effect that "a measure of  latitude  should  be
    permitted in appropriate  cases"  (see  [29]).   While  we  agree  that
    national security decisions are  the  paradigm  example  of  situations
    attracting "a measure of latitude" on the part of the courts,  it  does
    not follow that decisions taken by the executive which do not fall into
    that category are without more subject to a full merits-based review on
    appeal.

49. We accept the that the institutional competence  of  the  Secretary  of
    State in national security matters will necessarily require  any  court
    or tribunal to adopt a deferential approach to the Secretary of State's
    assessments of such matters  in  any  statutory  appeal.   Non-national
    security decisions taken on conduciveness grounds under  section  40(2)
    will require a similarly  deferential  approach.   Determining  whether
    something is "conducive to the public good" falls squarely  within  the
    Secretary of State's institutional competence.  See  paragraph  (2)  of
    the Headnote to BA, concerning, by  definition,  non-national  security
    matters:

            "In a section 40(2) case, the fact that the Secretary of State
            is satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public good
            is to be given very significant weight and will almost
            inevitably be determinative of that issue."

50. However, we reject the  premise  of  Ms  Naik's  submission,  and  that
    advanced by Mr Saini to the same effect, that decisions  under  section
    40(3) are entirely within the competence of a court  or  tribunal  such
    that the KV (Sri Lanka) full merits approach remains good law:

        a. First, the primary decision maker under  section  40(3)  is  the
           Secretary of State, not a  tribunal:  "the  Secretary  of  State
           may..."  The wording  in  section  40(3)  is  identical  to  the
           operative wording in section 40(2) which was instrumental in the
           Supreme Court holding that SIAC is not entitled to step into the
           shoes of the Secretary of State.  As the court noted at [67]  of
           Begum:

                  "The existence of a right of appeal against the  Secretary
                  of State's decision enables his  conclusion  that  he  was
                  satisfied to be challenged. It does not, however,  convert
                  the statutory requirement that the Secretary of State must
                  be  satisfied  into  a  requirement  that  SIAC  must   be
                  satisfied."

           By the same token, that approach must apply to  appeals  against
           section 40(3) decisions before the tribunal.

        b. Secondly, the operative decision to  be  taken  is  whether  the
           Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the  registration  or
           naturalisation  was  obtained   by   means   of   fraud,   false
           representation, or concealment of a material fact, not whether a
           tribunal is satisfied.  Ms Naik's submissions, and the  parallel
           submissions of Mr Saini,  conflate  the  justiciability  of  the
           underlying subject matter with the standard of review, which  is
           precisely  the  "fallacious"  approach  adopted  in   Deliallisi
           deprecated by the Supreme Court at  [43]:  see  paragraph  [40],
           above.  The fact that this tribunal and the First-tier  Tribunal
           have substantial  experience  in  determining  the  presence  of
           dishonesty, fraud or misrepresentations in some  (usually  human
           rights)  contexts,  or  even  ascribing  weight  to  the  public
           interest in the maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls
           (see section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act), does not entitle it to re-
           take a decision which Parliament has confided in  the  Secretary
           of State.

        c.  Thirdly,  given  it  is  the  Secretary  of  State  who  grants
           certificates  of  naturalisation  or  causes   persons   to   be
           registered as British citizens, the Secretary  of  State  is  as
           well placed, if not better placed, to determine  whether  fraud,
           false representation or the concealment of  some  material  fact
           was an operative factor in causing her to do so.  The  Secretary
           of State has both the institutional competence  and  the  public
           interest obligation to act as guardian of the integrity  of  the
           citizenship process, rendering her the pre-eminent authority  on
           section 40(3) matters.  We reject Ms Naik's submission that  the
           tribunal is "better suited" to consider these  matters.   It  is
           not.  See,  for  example,  Hysaj  (Deprivation  of  Citizenship:
           Delay) [2020] UKUT 128 (IAC) at [31]:  "It  is  the  respondent,
           rather than the  Tribunal,  who  is  primarily  responsible  for
           determining and safeguarding the public interest in  maintaining
           the integrity of the rights flowing from British citizenship."

        d. Finally, this was precisely the argument rejected by the Supreme
           Court at [43] of Begum, as outlined at paragraph 40.c, above

51. Drawing this aspect of our analysis together, the operative criteria to
    which the Secretary of State is subject are  identical  in  subsections
    (2) and (3), such that the reasoning of the  Supreme  Court  must  read
    across to appeals to the tribunal.  In both provisions, the role of the
    Secretary of State is the same: "the Secretary of State may by order...
    if the Secretary of State is satisfied  that..."   Precisely  the  same
    discretion is confided to the Secretary of State  as  with  a  decision
    under section 40(2).  There is nothing to suggest that, notwithstanding
    the identical wording in section 40(3), a tribunal must stray into full
    merits territory.  Both provisions reflect the institutional competence
    and obligations of the Secretary of State in  relation  to  citizenship
    matters.

52. Before we conclude on this point, we must address a submission made  by
    Ms Naik and Mr Saini that KV (Sri Lanka) was  not  citied  in  argument
    before  the  Supreme  Court  in  Begum.   Underhill  LJ  made   similar
    observations in Laci v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2021] EWCA Civ 769 at [40] in a Postscript addressing  the  import  of
    Begum in a deprivation appeal, in circumstances  when  Begum  had  been
    handed down after the Court of Appeal's hearing on 21 January 2021, but
    before the judgment was handed down, on 20 May 2021.

53. In Laci, the Albanian appellant had arrived in  the  UK  aged  16,  but
    purported to be a 14 year old Yugoslav national from Kosovo,  providing
    false  details  as  to  his  parents'  nationalities  to  support   the
    deception.  He claimed asylum on that basis.  The  claim  was  refused,
    but he was granted exceptional leave to remain,  and  later  indefinite
    leave to remain, subsequently naturalising as a British citizen, all in
    his false Yugoslav identity.  The appellant's mother later applied  for
    entry clearance to visit him using her true identity, leading  in  2009
    to the Secretary of State informing the appellant that she  had  reason
    to believe that he had obtained his citizenship by  deception,  seeking
    representations in response, which he  provided.   After  a  nine  year
    delay, the Secretary of State decided to deprive the appellant  of  his
    British citizenship.  In the lengthy interim period, the appellant  had
    renewed  his  British  passport  in  his  assumed   identity,   without
    difficulty, and had assumed no further  action  would  be  taken.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal   against   the
    deprivation of his citizenship.  That decision was overturned  by  this
    tribunal, and later restored by the Court of Appeal.

54. The operative reasoning in Laci raised no new issue of principle.   The
    central issue was whether the First-tier Tribunal had been entitled  to
    allow the appeal, on the basis of the law as understood prior to Begum.
     On any view, the facts were unique, and the delay by the Secretary  of
    State had been "remarkable" (see [8]),  as  Underhill  LJ  stressed  at
    [83]:

            "I should emphasise that this decision should not be
            interpreted as meaning that an indulgent view can be taken
            towards migrants who obtain British citizenship on the basis of
            a lie. On the contrary, in all ordinary circumstances they can
            expect to have it withdrawn. It is only because of the
            exceptional combination of circumstances in the present case
            that the FTT was entitled to come to the decision that it did."

55. For present purposes, further details of the case-specific analysis  in
    Laci  are  not  necessary.   What  is  significant,  however,  is   the
    Postscript at [40] of the judgment of Underhill  LJ.   Having  outlined
    the  key  authorities  concerning  the  deprivation   of   citizenship,
    Underhill LJ said, with emphasis added:

            "Postscript. When this judgment was circulated to counsel in
            draft, [counsel for the Secretary of State] Mr Malik drew our
            attention to the decision of the Supreme Court in R (Begum) v
            Special Immigration Appeals Commission [2021] UKSC 7, [2021] 2
            WLR 556, which was handed down subsequent to the argument
            before us. Begum concerns a decision taken by the Secretary of
            State to deprive the appellant of her nationality under section
            40(2) of the 1981 Act. At paras. 32-81 of his judgment, with
            which the other Justices agreed, Lord Reed discusses the nature
            of an appeal to SIAC under section 2B of the Special
            Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997, which is the
            equivalent of section 40A; and in that connection he discusses
            both Deliallisi and BA (though not KV, to which the Court does
            not appear to have referred). His conclusion is that while
            section 2B provides for an appeal rather than a review SIAC
            should approach its task on (to paraphrase) essentially
            Wednesbury principles, save that it was obliged to determine
            for itself whether the decision was compatible with the
            obligations of the decision-maker under the Human Rights Act
            1998 (see para. 68). It may be that that reasoning is not
            confined to section 2B or to cases falling under section 40(2),
            in which case some of statements quoted above about the correct
            approach to appeals under section 40A in the case of decisions
            under section 40(3) will require qualification. But I do not
            think that that is something on which I should express a view
            here. Begum does not bear directly on the actual grounds of
            appeal before us, and Mr Malik made it plain that he did not
            wish to advance any fresh ground based on it. Rather, he was
            rightly concerned that we should be aware of it in the context
            of the more general review of the law in the preceding
            paragraphs. I confine myself to saying that anything said in
            the authorities reviewed above about the scope of an appeal
            under section 40A should be read subject to the decision in
            Begum."

56. Pausing here, in his preceding review of the authorities concerning the
    deprivation of citizenship, Underhill LJ repeatedly underlined the need
    to read the existing authorities subject to the discussion of Begum  at
    [40] of his judgment: see [24] and [37] concerning BA; [27], concerning
    Leggat LJ's summary of the relevant legal principles at [6] of KV  (Sri
    Lanka);  [30], concerning [16] of KV (Sri Lanka)  in  which  Leggat  LJ
    held that, in an appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act, the tribunal
    has to decide "...not just whether it would  be  rational  to  make  [a
    deprivation] order but whether it would be right to do so";  and  [32],
    concerning the scope of the proportionality assessment in a deprivation
    appeal in light of the dicta of Lord  Mance,  Lord  Carnwath  and  Lord
    Sumption in Pham v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2015]
    UKSC 19.  It is plain that the Court of Appeal considered that many  of
    the existing authorities may not  have  survived  the  Supreme  Court's
    judgment in Begum.

57. Against that background, we return to the submissions of Ms Naik and Mr
    Saini, and the observation of Underhill LJ at [40]  of  Laci,  that  KV
    (Sri Lanka) does not appear to have been cited to the Supreme Court  in
    Begum.  At the hearing on 14 July 2021, Ms Cunha informed us  that  her
    instructions were that KV  (Sri  Lanka)  had  not  been  cited  by  the
    Secretary of State before the Supreme Court in Begum because it was not
    relevant to the issues before the court on that occasion; it  contained
    no operative analysis over and above that which featured in  Deliallisi
    and BA, and merely restated the principles enunciated in those cases as
    common ground.

58. We recall that KV (Sri Lanka) did not concern the role of an  appellate
    court or tribunal in relation to reviewing  a  decision  under  section
    40(3).  Its focus was whether the EU law doctrine of proportionality is
    engaged by a deprivation decision ([13] to [20]); which party bears the
    burden  of  proving  stateless  ([21]  to   [27]);   the   meaning   of
    statelessness ([28] - [30]) and matters relating to the  proof  of  Sri
    Lankan law specifically and foreign law generally ([31] to [40]).    As
    we have summarised at paragraphs 31 to 35, above, it was common  ground
    in those proceedings  that  the  approach  in  Deliallisi  and  BA  was
    correct.  There was no dispute in KV as to what were then thought to be
    the relevant principles governing an appeal against  a  decision  taken
    pursuant to section 40 of the 1981 Act, which Leggat LJ  summarised  at
    [6] of KV.  In doing so, Leggat LJ summarised, and  adopted  wholesale,
    the conclusions of Deliallisi and BA.  Indeed, as Underhill LJ  himself
    observed at [35] of Laci, the summary of what was common ground  in  KV
    was not the result of argument.

59. Nothing in the submissions of Ms Naik or Mr Saini demonstrated that the
    Court of Appeal's analysis in KV (Sri  Lanka)  added  to,  or  differed
    from, that which featured in Deliallisi and BA.  The reader of KV  (Sri
    Lanka) will search in vain for any analysis additional to that found in
    those authorities of  this  tribunal.   It  follows  that  the  Supreme
    Court's analysis - and criticism - of Deliallisi and  BA  applies  with
    equal force to KV (Sri Lanka)'s endorsement of those  authorities,  and
    its ensuing summary of the applicable principles  on  an  appeal  under
    section 40A.  It follows that nothing turns on the fact  that  KV  (Sri
    Lanka) does not appear to  have  been  cited  in  argument  before  the
    Supreme Court in Begum.

60. Mr Saini additionally submits that, if Begum necessitated  a  departure
    from the full merits approach, the Court of Appeal in Laci  would  have
    considered itself bound to resolve the appeal  before  it  through  the
    lens of Begum.  By virtue of the fact it did not, submits Mr Saini,  it
    demonstrates that the KV (Sri Lanka) full merits approach remains  good
    law which binds this tribunal.  We disagree.  It appears that the Court
    of Appeal in Laci did not hear argument on the Begum point  (see  [40]:
    Begum  "was  handed  down  subsequent  to  the  argument  before  us").
    Significantly, the court in Laci did underline - on five occasions (see
    [56], above) - the need to read the existing authorities concerning the
    deprivation of citizenship as subject to Begum.  In addition,  at  [40]
    the court observed that the reasoning in Begum may not be  confined  to
    appeals under section 2B of the 1997 Act, or to appeals  under  section
    40(2) of the 1981 Act, thereby indicating that the earlier  authorities
    may need to be revisited.  In our judgment, there is  nothing  in  Laci
    that requires us to continue to  treat  the  full  merits  approach  as
    binding; it does not survive the Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  Begum,
    which does bind us.  In any event, in Laci the Secretary of State chose
    not to advance a fresh ground based upon Begum, which was only drawn to
    the Court of Appeal's attention at  a  relatively  late  stage  in  the
    chronology of  the  proceedings,  namely  when  a  draft  judgment  was
    circulated under embargo terms.  On any view, that would be a very late
    stage at which to seek to advance a significantly different case.   The
    Secretary of State did not  proactively  draw  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    attention to Begum despite the fact it was handed  down  shortly  after
    the hearing in Laci, so it would be surprising if, having waited  until
    a draft judgment was circulated, the Secretary of State then sought  to
    adopt a completely different approach in  light  of  Begum,  especially
    given the court's own repeated exhortations to procedural rigour.

61. Mr Saini also submits that the position of the Secretary  of  State  in
    these proceedings is inconsistent with that which she took  before  the
    Court  of  Appeal  in  Laci.   Whereas  Ms  Cunha's  written  and  oral
    submissions invited us to depart from the full merits approach in light
    of Begum, leading counsel for the Secretary of State in Laci  did  not.
    Further, submits Mr Saini, the Court of Appeal in Laci highlighted what
    it  considered  to  be  the  inconsistent  or  incomplete  citation  of
    authorities by the parties to deprivation of  citizenship  appeals,  in
    particular the Secretary of State: see  [85].   In  our  judgment,  the
    claimed "inconsistency" does not tie our hands.  In any event, the  two
    situations may readily be distinguished; whereas in Laci the  Secretary
    of State drew the Court of Appeal's attention to Begum at a  relatively
    late stage in the proceedings, in these proceedings this tribunal  drew
    the attention of the parties to Begum,  specifically  inviting  further
    submissions on the import of the case, at a stage in the appeal process
    where it was clear that the  decision of the First-tier Tribunal  would
    have to be remade (in our analysis of the decisions of the FTT,  below,
    we set out why, even in the absence of Begum,  we  would  have  allowed
    both appeals).  For the reasons set out below, even  on  the  pre-Begum
    understanding of the law,  we  would  have  allowed  each  appeal,  and
    directed that the decisions be remade  in  this  tribunal,  albeit  for
    different reasons.  It is necessary for this tribunal to determine  the
    import of Begum, regardless of the position the Secretary of State  has
    taken in these - or other - proceedings.

62. A further argument advanced by Mr Saini in favour of retaining the full
    merits approach notwithstanding Begum was that a "review only" approach
    to  the  role   of   a   tribunal   would   have   corresponding,   and
    disadvantageous, consequences for other appeals.  Mr  Saini  cites  the
    Secretary of State's discretion-based decision making in Part 9 of  the
    Immigration Rules, the General Grounds for Refusal.  See  paragraph  24
    of his skeleton argument, stating that this approach:

            "...would mean that appeals challenging discretion exercised on
            general grounds in respect of appeals concerning falsity in a
            previous application i.e. in ETS TOEIC cases such as SM & Qadir
            (ETS -  Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC), or
            where discretion has been  exercised to refuse on the basis
            that the migrant's character, conduct and associations are
            undesirable as in Balajigari & Ors v Secretary of State for the
            Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 673 would not permit the
            Tribunal to consider the exercise of discretion for  itself (or
            take into account new evidence) and would be left with a review-
            only approach.  This would follow because these appeals fall
            into the same bracket as section 40(3)  appeals because they
            also concern the same subject matter of allegations of falsity
            and  also fall into the category of cases identified by Lord
            Reed at [68]: '...appellate courts and tribunals cannot
            generally decide how a statutory discretion conferred upon the
            primary decision-maker ought to have been exercised, or
            exercise the discretion themselves, in the absence of any
            statutory provision authorising them to do so...'"

63. We disagree.  The examples cited by Mr Saini relate to situations where
    the Secretary of State's reliance on the general grounds for refusal in
    the Immigration Rules engages the Article 8 rights  of  the  individual
    concerned, principally on account of the risk of removal  which  flowed
    from  the  curtailment  or  refusal  decisions  in  those  cases:   see
    Balajigari at [91].  Where the prospect of removal so  engages  Article
    8, even in the context of judicial review, a  court  or  tribunal  must
    decide for itself where the relevant criteria are met by  conducting  a
    full merits review of that aspect of the  decision,  including  through
    the admission of post-decision evidence: see  Balajigari  at  [92]  and
    [104].   As we set out in further depth below, there is no dispute that
    where a deprivation decision engages Article 8 of the ECHR, a  tribunal
    must engage in a full merits-review of that aspect of the decision, and
    decide for itself the proportionality of the proposed course of action.



64. The authorities cited by Mr Saini do not demonstrate  that  it  is  the
    character of the allegation (namely dishonesty) that engages Article 8,
    but rather, in the  context  of  those  authorities,  the  prospect  of
    removal consequential to a decision taken under the general grounds for
    refusal.  In our judgment, that a decision taken to make an order under
    section 40(3) is based on allegations of fraud,  false  representations
    or the concealment of a material fact  cannot,  without  more,  entitle
    appellate tribunals or courts to adopt an expansive approach  to  their
    statutory jurisdiction "in  the  absence  of  any  statutory  provision
    authorising them to do so", to adopt Lord Reed's terminology at [68] of
    Begum, as quoted by Mr Saini.

65. In a deprivation of citizenship appeal, it is not necessary  to  engage
    in a full proleptic  assessment  of  the  Article  8  compatibility  of
    removal: see Aziz v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1884 at [26], per Sales LJ, as he then was.   While  the  ECHR
    may be engaged in relation to some aspects of a decision to  deprive  a
    person  of  their  British  citizenship,  as  we  address  below,   the
    deprivation order does not engage Article 8 in the  terms  required  to
    engage a full merits review on all issues, as would be the  case  in  a
    Balajigari situation.

66. Mr Saini also submits that if section 40A appeals were confined to  the
    narrow Begum approach, that would not  admit  the  possibility  of  the
    appellant being  able  to  rely  on  post-decision  material,  for  the
    appellate review would be restricted to assessment of the material that
    was before the  Secretary  of  State  at  the  time  of  the  decision,
    consistent with judicial review principles.  Further,  it  would  place
    the tribunal in an artificial position, of not being able  to  consider
    post-decision material to the extent it concerned non-ECHR matters, but
    to the extent (and only  to  the  extent)  that  the  decision  engaged
    Article 8, the tribunal could consider those matters.  Thus, submits Mr
    Saini, a  tribunal  would  have  to  "turn  a  blind  eye"  to  certain
    evidential matters of which it was seized for certain  purposes,  while
    considering those same materials for other, limited ECHR purposes.

67. While we initially considered this to  be  a  superficially  attractive
    submission, we do not consider that there is anything to the point.

68. Proceedings under section 40A have appellate  characteristics  and  are
    not subject to the formal procedural constraints that feature  in  pure
    judicial review proceedings, such as the deprecation of rolling review.
     Mr Saini's submissions concerning the difficulties presented by  post-
    decision material are founded on the premise that anything other than a
    full merits review renders section 40A appeals to be nothing other than
    a supervisory jurisdiction.  As Lord Reed held in Begum  at  [69],  the
    jurisdiction of SIAC "is appellate, and  references  to  a  supervisory
    jurisdiction  in  this  context  are  capable  of  being  a  source  of
    confusion."  The same is true of  appeals  under  section  40A  to  the
    tribunal.

69. In practical terms, if an appellant in a section 40A  appeal  seeks  to
    rely on post-decision material, such as a broader explanation of  their
    actions leading to the alleged  deception,  or  seeks  to  dispute  the
    materiality of  the  deception,  or  to  highlight  additional  matters
    relating to the consequences of deprivation,  those  materials  may  be
    considered by the Secretary of State ahead  of  an  appeal  before  the
    tribunal in any event, thereby preserving the Secretary of State's role
    as the primary decision maker.  In practical terms, while an  appellant
    will have been presented with  the  opportunity  to  address  all  such
    matters before the Secretary of State's decision,  we  accept  that  an
    appeal is likely to generate further material by way of explanation  or
    refutation, as typically takes place in most appeals in  this  Chamber.
    We do  not  consider  that  to  present  a  difficulty.   As  a  public
    authority, the Secretary of State is under a public law  duty  to  keep
    her decisions under review by  reference  to  any  additional  relevant
    materials placed before her.  Any post-decision materials  relied  upon
    by an appellant in proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal  will  be
    provided to the Secretary of State as part of  the  appellate  process,
    enabling her to review or maintain her decision in the light  of  those
    materials.  Good practice in  litigation  before  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber requires the Secretary of State to review  decisions  in
    light of the prospect of litigation in any event.

70. It would not be necessary for a further, formal written decision to  be
    taken; all that is necessary is for the Secretary of State to  continue
    to be "satisfied" that the relevant criteria in section 40(3)  continue
    to be met and that the exercise of the power remains appropriate.   The
    review process may continue even once appeal  proceedings  are  active.
    Two  scenarios  are  readily  apparent.   The  Secretary   of   State's
    representative before the tribunal, in practice a  presenting  officer,
    will have the opportunity to  consider  any  material  provided  by  an
    appellant in order to inform the Secretary of State's position  at  the
    hearing.  Alternatively, an adjournment may be sought by the  Secretary
    of State to enable proper consideration by the  relevant  case  working
    team of the additional materials, particularly where  the  tribunal  is
    satisfied that there is good reason to admit late  materials  that  the
    Secretary of State has not already  had  a  reasonable  opportunity  to
    consider.  Such a process is largely on a statutory footing in relation
    to appeals under section 82 of the 2002 Act by virtue of the  Secretary
    of State's consent being required in relation to  "new  matters"  under
    section 85(5).  While the "new matter" regime does not apply to appeals
    under section 40A of the 1981 Act (section 85 of the 2002 Act is not  a
    provision that is applied to section 40A appeals by section  40A(3)  of
    the 1981 Act), it demonstrates that, even in full merits  human  rights
    appeals, provision is made for the Secretary of State to be the primary
    decision maker when considering a new matter upon  which  an  appellant
    seeks to rely for the first time.  Of course, there are many points  in
    relation to which the "new matter" regime and other features of appeals
    under the 2002 Act may be distinguished from appeals under section  40A
    of the 1981 Act, and a degree of caution is required when comparing two
    very different appellate regimes, but for present purposes this feature
    of 2002 Act appeals demonstrates that there  can  be  no  objection  in
    principle or practice to ensuring that the Secretary of  State  remains
    the primary decision maker in appeals before the tribunal.

71. Mr Saini made the bold submission that  [35]  of  the  Supreme  Court's
    judgment in Begum was decided per incuriam, for it failed to  recognise
    that the amendments made to the 2002  Act's  appellate  regime  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 were made  "under  the  mistaken  impression  that
    appeals against deprivation [decisions] are to be considered  as  human
    rights claims..." (skeleton argument, paragraph  27).   At  [35],  Lord
    Reid said:

            "The parties are however in agreement that section 2(2) of the
            1997 Act should be understood as applying to an appeal which
            lies to SIAC in circumstances where an appeal would otherwise
            lie to the Tribunal under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act; and
            that is how I also construe the provision."

72. We can deal with this point shortly.  At [32] to  [37]  of  Begum  Lord
    Reed was not addressing the appellate regime for deprivation decisions;
    he was addressing Ms Begum's appeal against the refusal  of  her  human
    rights claim made as part of her application for leave to enter,  which
    was another of the decisions  under  challenge  in  those  proceedings.
    Section 2(2) of the 1997 Act applies certain provisions of the 2002 Act
    to appeals to SIAC that would ordinarily be brought before the tribunal
    under section 82 of that Act.  See the final sentence of [35]: "On that
    basis, the provisions of the 2002 Act which are listed in section  2(2)
    of the 1997 Act apply to Ms Begum's appeal against the refusal  of  her
    human rights claim as part of the [leave to enter] decision."

73. Lord Reed prefaced his subsequent discussion of deprivation appeals  in
    these terms, at [38]:

            "Appeals against deprivation decisions have an entirely
            separate history, such decisions not being 'immigration
            decisions' as that expression was understood prior to the
            [Immigration Act 2014]. Rights of appeal were first introduced
            by section 4(1) of the 2002 Act, which substituted a new
            section 40 and section 40A for the original section 40 of the
            1981 Act with effect from 1 April 2003."

    Section 2(2) appeals correspond to the appeals regime under section  82
    of the 2002 Act, and the legislative history to those provisions is not
    relevant to the jurisdiction of SIAC or a tribunal on an  appeal  under
    section 40A of the 1981 Act.

74. Finally, Mr Saini submitted that because the power in section 40(3)  is
    only engaged on a precedent fact basis,  a  tribunal  must  decide  for
    itself whether the relevant criteria are met.  See paragraph 32 of  his
    skeleton argument: the engagement of section 40(3) is  "a  question  of
    precedent fact going to jurisdiction  and  so  to  be  decided  by  the
    court..."  Mr Saini  relied  on  a  series  of  authorities  concerning
    precedent facts involving public law challenges to executive  decisions
    in circumstances where the decision  had  grave  consequences  for  the
    individual concerned.  In Khawaja v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [1984] AC 74, the precedent fact  decision  related  to  the
    exercise of detention powers; as noted by Sir Clive Lewis  in  Judicial
    Remedies in Public Law, 6th Ed, at [13-006], "dicta in Khawaja  suggest
    that the presumption should be that facts are jurisdictional  in  cases
    involving interference with liberty,  unless  Parliament  has  made  it
    clear that  review  should  be  supervisory  and  residual  only."   In
    Khawaja, the House of Lords departed from one of its earlier  decisions
    in which it read and applied the statutory power to detain an  "illegal
    entrant" as though it were exercisable where an immigration officer had
    reasonable grounds to believe that  the  individual  concerned  was  an
    "illegal entrant", reviewable only on Wednesbury grounds.  The relevant
    legislation featured no such  proviso:  the  legislation  required  the
    individual to be an "illegal entrant".  The former approach, held  Lord
    Scarman at page 109E:

            "deprives those subjected to the power [to detain] of that
            degree of judicial protection which I think can be shown to
            have been the policy of our law to afford to persons with whose
            liberty the executive is seeking to interfere."

    And at 111F:

            "If Parliament intends to exclude effective judicial review of
            the exercise of a power in restraint of liberty, it must make
            its meaning crystal clear."

75. It was thus in that context that the  House  in  Khawaja  held  that  a
    precedent fact jurisdiction existed.

76. In R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Onibiyo [1996]
    QB 768, also relied upon by Mr Saini, at 784 Sir  Thomas  Bingham,  MR,
    was concerned with the exercise of an administrative immigration  power
    ungoverned by a statutory right of appeal,  and  specifically  prefaced
    his analysis with the observation that, "the role of the court  in  the
    immigration  field   varies,   depending   on   the   legislative   and
    administrative context".  The legislative and administrative context to
    appeals under section 40A is very different, as we set out above.

77. In the  precedent  fact  authorities  relied  upon  by  Mr  Saini,  the
    availability of the power in question was  anchored  to  the  objective
    existence of a factual state of affairs, such as, in  Khawaja,  whether
    the individual concerned was an illegal entrant, which the court had to
    determine in accordance with the principles set out above.  Mr  Saini's
    submission conflates those cases with a  proper  understanding  of  the
    present scenario, where the section 40(3) power  is  exercisable  where
    "the Secretary of State is satisfied"  that  certain  factual  criteria
    have been met.  As such,  Mr  Saini's  submission  seeks  to  omit  the
    requirement that the Secretary  of  State  must  be  satisfied  of  the
    presence of fraud, false representations or concealment of  a  material
    fact, and give effect to section 40(3) as though that requirement  were
    not present.

78. Parliament has provided that, if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied
    that one of the criteria in section 40(3) is met, she may exercise  the
    power to deprive a person of their British citizenship.  The  1981  Act
    provides for a right of appeal.  The logical conclusion of  Mr  Saini's
    submissions is that any  power  exercisable  by  reference  to  factual
    criteria being met is automatically, and without more, a precedent fact
    of the sort that entitles a court or tribunal to stand in the shoes  of
    the decision maker and assess for itself whether the  factual  criteria
    are met.   That cannot be right; a tribunal must determine whether  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to conclude that  any  of  the  section
    40(3) criteria were met, but may not assume the primary decision making
    role itself simply because the assessment of  the  Secretary  of  State
    entails factual considerations.

Conclusion on the role of a tribunal in proceedings  brought  under  section
40A of the 1981 Act

79. In our judgment, pursuant to the Supreme Court's judgment in Begum,  we
    respectfully consider KV (Sri Lanka) and the preceding  authorities  to
    have  been  wrongly  decided,  insofar  as  the  full  merits  approach
    summarised at [6] by Leggat LJ are inconsistent with Begum.

80. It follows that the judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  Begum  marks  a
    return to the approach adopted by the Vice President of  this  tribunal
    in Pirzada (Deprivation of citizenship: general principles) [2017] UKUT
    196 (IAC) at [9], quoted at [44].  In Pirzada, the Vice President  held
    that:

            "There is no suggestion that a Tribunal has the power to
            consider whether it is satisfied of any of the matters set out
            in sub-ss (2) or (3); nor is there any suggestion that the
            Tribunal can itself exercise the Secretary of State's
            discretion."

81. In conclusion, therefore, we consider the following extract from  Begum
    to underline the applicability of the court's approach to section 40(2)
    to section 40(3) appeals.  Lord Reed held at [68]:

            "...appellate courts and tribunals cannot generally decide how
            a statutory discretion conferred upon the primary decision-
            maker ought to have been exercised, or exercise the discretion
            themselves, in the absence of any statutory provision
            authorising them to do so (such as existed, in relation to
            appeals under section 2 of the 1997 Act, under section 4(1) of
            the 1997 Act as originally enacted, and under sections 84-86 of
            the 2002 Act prior to their amendment in 2014: see paras 34 and
            36 above). They are in general restricted to considering
            whether the decision-maker has acted in a way in which no
            reasonable decision-maker could have acted, or whether he has
            taken into account some irrelevant matter or has disregarded
            something to which he should have given weight, or has erred on
            a point of law: an issue which encompasses the consideration of
            factual questions, as appears, in the context of statutory
            appeals, from Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) v Bairstow [1956] AC
            14. They must also determine for themselves the compatibility
            of the decision with the obligations of the decision-maker
            under the Human Rights Act, where such a question arises."

82. As to the specific task to be performed by the tribunal, [71] of  Begum
    applies with equal force to appeals in this jurisdiction:

            "SIAC has a number of important functions to perform on an
            appeal against a decision under section 40(2). First, it can
            assess whether the Secretary of State has acted in a way in
            which no reasonable Secretary of State could have acted, or has
            taken into account some irrelevant matter, or has disregarded
            something to which he should have given weight, or has been
            guilty of some procedural impropriety. In doing so, SIAC has to
            bear in mind the serious nature of a deprivation of
            citizenship, and the severity of the consequences which can
            flow from such a decision. Secondly, it can consider whether
            the Secretary of State has erred in law, including whether he
            has made findings of fact which are unsupported by any evidence
            or are based upon a view of the evidence which could not
            reasonably be held. Thirdly, it can determine whether the
            Secretary of State has complied with section 40(4), which
            provides that the Secretary of State may not make an order
            under section 40(2) "if he is satisfied that the order would
            make a person stateless". Fourthly, it can consider whether the
            Secretary of State has acted in breach of any other legal
            principles applicable to his decision, such as the obligation
            arising in appropriate cases under section 6 of the Human
            Rights Act. In carrying out those functions, SIAC may well have
            to consider relevant evidence. It has to bear in mind that some
            decisions may involve considerations which are not justiciable,
            and that due weight has to be given to the findings,
            evaluations and policies of the Secretary of State, as Lord
            Hoffmann explained in Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated in A.
            In reviewing compliance with the Human Rights Act, it has to
            make its own independent assessment."

83. The general nature of the language adopted by His Lordship leads us  to
    conclude that he was making points of general application, and did  not
    seek to confine his analysis to appeals against section 40(3) decisions
    before SIAC.  The role of a tribunal in an appeal  against  a  decision
    under section 40(2) or (3) of the 1981 Act is that summarised  at  [71]
    of Begum.  There can  be  no  suggestion  that  the  Deliallisi  or  BA
    approaches survive.

Statutory condition precedent

84. Sleiman is  a  leading,  pre-Begum  Upper  Tribunal  authority  on  the
    satisfaction of a statutory condition precedent in section 40(3).  This
    tribunal held that there must be a causal link between the fraud, false
    representation, or concealment of a material fact and the  decision  to
    grant citizenship, when section 40(3) is relied upon by  the  Secretary
    of State.  The Headnote to the decision reads:

            "In an appeal against a decision to deprive a person of a
            citizenship status, in assessing whether the appellant obtained
            registration or naturalisation 'by means of' fraud, false
            representation, or concealment of a material fact, the impugned
            behaviour must be directly material to the decision to grant
            citizenship."

     We consider the principle enunciated in the  Headnote  should  be  read
    with the following modifications, to underline the departure  from  the
    full merits approach in light of Begum:

            In an appeal against a decision to deprive a person of a
            citizenship status, in assessing whether there were grounds
            which rationally entitled the Secretary of State to be
            satisfied that the appellant obtained registration or
            naturalisation "by means of" fraud, false representation, or
            concealment of a material fact, a Tribunal must consider
            whether the Secretary of State was entitled to conclude that
            the impugned behaviour was directly material to the decision to
            grant citizenship. The considerations relevant to that
            assessment are restricted to considering whether the Secretary
            of State has acted in a way in which no reasonable Secretary of
            State could have acted, or whether the Secretary of State has
            taken into account some irrelevant matter or has disregarded
            something to which the Secretary of State should have given
            weight, or has erred on a point of law, including making an
            error of law when arriving at a finding of fact.

Deprivation of citizenship and the ECHR

85.  As  the  Supreme  Court  held  in  Begum,   the   Strasbourg   court's
    jurisprudence concerning the deprivation of citizenship was  "limited".
    See [64]:

            "A more limited approach has been adopted in cases concerned
            with deprivation of citizenship. The European Court of Human
            Rights has accepted that an arbitrary denial or deprivation of
            citizenship may, in certain circumstances, raise an issue under
            article 8. In determining whether there is a breach of that
            article, the Court has addressed whether the revocation was
            arbitrary (not whether it was proportionate), and what the
            consequences of revocation were for the applicant. In
            determining arbitrariness, the Court considers whether the
            deprivation was in accordance with the law, whether the
            authorities acted diligently and swiftly, and whether the
            person deprived of citizenship was afforded the procedural
            safeguards required by article 8: see, for example, K2 v United
            Kingdom (2017) 64 EHRR SE18, paras 49-50 and 54-61."

Reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation

86. Pursuant to the KV(Sri Lanka) understanding of the legal framework,  it
    was also necessary  for  the  tribunal  to  determine  for  itself  the
    reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation,  when  determining,
    again for itself, whether the Secretary of State's discretion should be
    exercised differently. That  includes  consideration  of  issues  under
    Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  although,  pursuant  to  Aziz  and  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1884 at [29]
    and following,  it  is  not  necessary  to  conduct  a  full  proleptic
    assessment of whether deportation, or by  analogy  removal,  will  take
    place.  There will  be  other,  more  immediate,  consequences  of  the
    deprivation of citizenship, which a tribunal should be  satisfied  that
    the Secretary of State has properly taken into account.

87. There is no dispute that, where the Convention is engaged  as  set  out
    above, a tribunal must decide  for  itself  the  compatibility  of  the
    decision with the United Kingdom's ECHR obligations.

DECISIONS OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

88. We explained in our error of law decision promulgated on 30 April  2021
    that, even on the pre-Begum understanding of the  law,  we  would  have
    found that both judges erred.  In ZA's case, we rejected ZA's challenge
    to Judge Chohan's findings of fact  that  her  deception  was  directly
    linked to the acquisition of her British citizenship on  the  basis  of
    the well-established jurisprudence concerning the approach of appellate
    courts and tribunals to findings of  fact  reached  by  first  instance
    judges (see, for example, Henderson v Foxworth Investments  Ltd  [2014]
    UKSC 41; [2014] 1 WLR 2600 at [62]).   On  the  evidence  before  Judge
    Chohan, he was entitled to conclude that ZA's  deception  was  directly
    material to the acquisition of her citizenship.  By  her  role  in  the
    Macedonian  deception,  ZA  rendered  herself  irremovable,  until  the
    Secretary of State had considered the asylum claim to which she  was  a
    dependent.  As a result of rendering herself irremovable, ZA  was  able
    to accrue residence that led to her being granted indefinite  leave  to
    remain, itself a prerequisite to a grant of British citizenship.  Those
    findings were entirely within the range of findings  properly  open  to
    Judge Chohan,  and  we  preserved  them.   However,  the  judge  failed
    properly  to  consider  the  impact  of  ZA  being  deprived   of   her
    citizenship, and to that extent his decision involved the making  of  a
    material error of law.

89. We found that Judge Howorth reached contradictory findings.  On the one
    hand, he found that BA's deception was not  directly  material  to  his
    acquisition of British citizenship.  On the other, he  found  that  had
    the Secretary of State known of the  BA's  history  of  deception,  she
    would have  refused  his  citizenship  application  on  good  character
    grounds.  The two findings could not be reconciled and, moreover,  made
    it impossible to preserve any of the judge's findings of fact.  We  set
    the decision aside in its entirety.

90. Begum, of course, declared the law as  it  has  always  been.   Neither
    judge adopted a Begum-compliant approach, for  entirely  understandable
    reasons.  The judgment in Begum did not save  either  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal; in respect of Judge Chohan, the  consideration  of
    the Secretary of State's exercise of  discretion  was  cursory.   Judge
    Howorth's contradictory  findings  of  fact  by  definition  failed  to
    address whether the Secretary of State had been  entitled  to  conclude
    that a section 40(3) condition precedent was met.

Postscript

91. Following the preparation of this judgment  in  draft  but  before  its
    promulgation, Ciceri (deprivation of citizenship  appeals:  principles)
    [2021] UKUT 238 (IAC) was reported.  We are fortified that the approach
    taken by the Presidential panel in that matter is  entirely  consistent
    with that we have adopted here.

REMAKING THE DECISIONS OF THE FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL

92. We heard the resumed hearings in both appeals on  14  July  2021.   The
    hearings proceeded on submissions alone; none of the parties sought  to
    adduce new evidence, or rely on any oral testimony.

Submissions on behalf of ZA and BA

93. Mr Saini submitted that the condition precedent in  section  40(3)  had
    not been met; the Secretary of  State  had  not  established  that  the
    appellants'  deception  was  material  to   the   decision   to   grant
    citizenship, and so could not meet the Sleiman requirement  that  there
    must be a direct link between the deception and the  grant  of  British
    citizenship.  The false representations concerned BA's  name,  date  of
    birth, and nationality, which  were  factors  that  were  not  directly
    material to the decision to grant citizenship.  As  in  Sleiman,  where
    the Secretary of State's delay "broke  the  chain  of  causation",  the
    fraud of these appellants was not directly material to the decision  to
    grant citizenship to them, the appellants  in  these  proceedings  were
    only granted indefinite leave to remain as a result of the Secretary of
    State's legacy programme, as a result of the length of their residence,
    rather than their earlier  deception.   It  cannot  be  said  that  the
    appellants rendered themselves irremovable; that approach presumes  the
    appellants were aware that they could not be removed while their  claim
    was pending, that they were responsible for  the  inordinate  delay  in
    their claim being decided, and that  their  removal  would  have  taken
    place in the interim.  To that end, Mr Saini relied on [63] of  Sleiman
    where Judge Kopieczek held:

            "...there is some validity to the argument on behalf of the
            appellant to the effect that grants of leave under Legacy were
            made in cases where individuals had no right (otherwise) to be
            in the UK, and no doubt included many whose asylum claims were
            false."

    The appellants were  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  first  and
    foremost due to their length of residence, and  their  "irremovability"
    was immaterial because, had they made a genuine  human  rights  or  any
    other claim, those claims would have been unresolved,  and  subject  to
    the legacy scheme in precisely the same way.

94.  Mr  Saini  also  submits  that  under  paragraph  9.5.2  of  the  2012
    Nationality Instructions, BA's application for  citizenship  would  not
    have been refused, as the deception was not directly  material  to  the
    grant of indefinite leave to remain, as confirmed by  Example  B.   The
    2012 instructions provided:

            "9.5 Evidence of fraud in the immigration and nationality
            process

            9.5.1 Where there is evidence to suggest that an applicant has
            employed fraud either:

            . during the citizenship application process or

            . in previous immigration application processes and

            . in both cases the fraud was directly material to the
            acquisition of immigration leave or to the application for
            citizenship

            caseworkers should refuse the application unless the
            circumstances in 9.5.2 apply. In such cases, the applicant
            should be advised that an application for citizenship made
            within 10 years from the date of refusal on these grounds would
            be unlikely to be successful.

            9.5.2 Where deception has been employed on a previous
            immigration application and was identified and dismissed by
            UKBA or was factually immaterial to the grant of leave,
            caseworkers should not use that deception as a reason by itself
            to refuse the application under section 9.5.1.

            Examples:

            [...]

            B. Mr B applied for asylum on the same grounds as Mr A.
            However, he was not granted ILR on the basis of a successful
            refugee claim. He was instead granted ILR under a Family
            Concession to which a consideration of nationality was not the
            primary factor. The deception was not therefore material to the
            grant of ILR as regardless of that fact that he claimed to be
            Kosovan on entry to the UK Mr B would in any case have been
            granted ILR under the Concession as a result of his family
            arrangements. In this scenario UKBA has already disregarded the
            claimed nationality of the individual as being immaterial to
            the grant of ILR under the Concession. It would therefore be
            perverse to assert that a previously disregarded fact could be
            relevant at a later date to a consideration of good character.
            Nationality on the date of application is, in any case,
            irrelevant to the naturalisation consideration." (emphasis
            added)

95. Mr Saini submits that, not only are the appellants' cases  are  on  all
    fours with 'Example B', but that the Nationality Instructions' emphasis
    on the irrelevancy of citizenship at the date of naturalisation further
    strengthens the appellants' cases before this tribunal.

96. For those reasons, submits Mr Saini, the condition precedent in section
    40(3) has not been  met  in  relation  to  either  appellant,  and  the
    question of whether the Secretary of State was entitled to exercise her
    discretion to invoke the paragraph simply does not arise.

97. Even on the more restrictive, post-Begum  approach,  Mr  Saini  submits
    that the Secretary of State was  not  entitled  to  be  satisfied  that
    section 40(3) was engaged.   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  grant
    indefinite leave to remain to the appellants  on  the  basis  of  their
    false nationality claim, the truth of which was never addressed by  the
    Secretary of State at the time.  The feigned Macedonian nationality did
    not result in a grant of leave.  It was not connected at the time,  and
    the Secretary of State cannot rationally  treat  it  as  though  it  is
    connected now.

98. Mr Saini submits that the exposure of the appellants  to  the  "hostile
    environment"  in  the  period  following  the  deprivation   of   their
    citizenship before they are  granted  some  form  of  leave  to  remain
    engages Article 8 and would be a disproportionate breach of it.  During
    that period, it would be a criminal offence for the appellants to work.
      They  would  be  prohibited  from  securing  a  residential   tenancy
    agreement, and subject to a range of other  measures.   The  appellants
    would be "reduced" to relying on a ten year path  to  settlement.   The
    best interests of their minor children  would  be  adversely  impacted.
    The appellants' length of residence, 21 years, is clearly a  factor  of
    some relevance.  Prior to a change in 2014, the  Secretary  of  State's
    policy was that she would not normally deprive someone of their British
    citizenship where they had resided in the UK for  more  than  14  years
    (see Hysaj at [82] for a summary of the policy).  These appellants have
    suffered at the hands of the Secretary of State's inaction  and  delay.
    Deprivation of their citizenship would be disproportionate.

99. For the Secretary of State, Ms Cunha submits that the  appellants  have
    "continuously  employed  dishonesty  in  their  interactions  with  the
    [Secretary  of  State's]  officials."   The   appellants'   submissions
    misunderstand the nature of the 2007 legacy concession, which was not a
    general amnesty, as outlined in R (oao Geraldo) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 2763 (Admin) at [40].

100. Ms Cunha submits that by declaring to the Secretary of State that  they
    were of good character in their indefinite leave to remain and  British
    citizenship applications, the appellants each concealed a fact that was
    clearly material to the grant of citizenship.  Nor can it be said  that
    the Secretary of State's approach was characterised by the  delay  that
    has featured in some deprivation cases, such  as  that  in  Laci.   The
    appellants were informed of  the  possibility  of  their  status  being
    reviewed in January 2019, ahead of formal decisions taken on 22  August
    2019 and 14 November 2019 respectively.  They do not enjoy a legitimate
    expectation to be treated in any other way; the only  such  expectation
    they enjoy is that they "would be treated in accordance  with  the  law
    and policy in place at the time the relevant decision was made"  (Hysaj
    at [65]).  Ms Cunha recalls that at the hearing on  23  November  2020,
    she confirmed that ZA would be granted some form of  leave  to  remain,
    and it would be open to BA to apply for leave, too.

Discussion

101. We have no hesitation in concluding that the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to  be  satisfied  that  each  appellant  had  obtained  their
    naturalisation  as  British  citizens  by   means   of   fraud,   false
    representation or the concealment of a material fact, for the following
    reasons.

102. By way of a  preliminary  observation,  in  relation  to  ZA,  we  have
    already preserved  Judge  Chohan's  findings  that  the  deception  was
    material, for the reasons we summarise at  [88],  above.   However,  in
    light of the extensive submissions made by Mr Saini concerning both  ZA
    and BA (in relation to whom no findings of  fact  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal have been preserved), we will consider the full spectrum of Mr
    Saini's submissions in any event.

103. We reject Mr Saini's submissions that  the  legacy  scheme  "broke  the
    chain of causation" between the grant of ZA and BA's  citizenship.   It
    amount to a disagreement with the Secretary of State's conclusions, and
    do not demonstrate that no reasonable Secretary  of  State  could  have
    arrived at that decision, nor that it was infected by some  other  form
    of error.

104. For the same reasons we  rejected  ZA's  challenge  to  Judge  Chohan's
    findings that her deception was directly material to the grant  of  her
    citizenship, the Secretary of State was entitled to conclude that  BA's
    citizenship was obtained by means of fraud, false representation or the
    concealment of a material fact.  The appellants' length  of  residence,
    which led to their grants of  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  itself  a
    condition precedent for the acquisition of British  citizenship,  could
    not have been accrued had they been honest about their identity at  the
    time they made  their  asylum  claims.   Deception  of  the  sort  that
    features in this case often began some time ago, and took the  form  of
    an initial act (here, the  Macedonian  deception)  which  provided  the
    foundation for a series of other events taking place.

105. Contrary to Mr Saini's submissions that there is no evidence  that  the
    appellants knew that making a false asylum claim  would  have  rendered
    themselves irremovable, the  appellants'  own  representations  to  the
    Secretary of State in response  to  her  "minded  to"  letters  do  not
    support that contention.  In ZA's representations dated 6 June 2019, it
    was said on her behalf at page 2:

            "Our client's instructions are that her husband, [BA] was
            advised by other Albanians to claim asylum under false details
            as otherwise he would have been returned to his country of
            origin." (emphasis added)

    See paragraph 7 of ZA's statement to similar effect.

106. Similarly, on behalf of BA it was said in his  representations  to  the
    Secretary of State dated 11 February 2019, at page 3:

            "Our client's instructions are that when he arrived in the UK,
            he was advised by other Albanians to claim asylum under false
            details, as otherwise he would be removed to his country of
            origin." (emphasis added)

    See paragraph 7 of BA's statement dated  15  January  2020  to  similar
    effect.

107. It simply cannot be said that neither appellant knew that by  making  a
    false claim they would render themselves  irremovable.   On  their  own
    cases, that is precisely why they did  so.   It  achieved  the  desired
    effect: they were not removed.  The Secretary of State was entitled  to
    ascribe significance to the appellants' false asylum  claims  rendering
    them irremovable as being material to  their  eventual  acquisition  of
    citizenship.

108. We consider Mr Saini's additional submission  on  the  "irremovability"
    point to be speculation; it is nothing to the point that the appellants
    did not know how long it would take  for  their  (false)  claim  to  be
    processed.  The point is that they made  a  false  claim  precisely  in
    order to render themselves irremovable, and the plan  worked  to  their
    advantage.  That it took the Secretary of State a  considerable  period
    of time to deal with them under  the  legacy  scheme,  rather  than  by
    engaging with the  facts  of  their  claims,  does  not  undermine  the
    Secretary of State's ability to be satisfied as to the  materiality  of
    their deception to the acquisition of their citizenship.

109. Nor does [63] of Sleiman assist the appellants, contrary to Mr  Saini's
    submissions.  There, Judge Kopieczek merely stated that there was "some
    validity" to the argument that grants of  leave  were  made  under  the
    legacy scheme to people including those who had made false claims.  The
    mere fact that there may be "some validity" to that argument  does  not
    demonstrate that, in reaching the conclusion she did, the Secretary  of
    State arrived at a view that no reasonable  Secretary  of  State  could
    have reached.  This extract from Sleiman merely provides  some  support
    for  a  contrary  view,  which,  properly  understood,   would   be   a
    disagreement with the Secretary of State's position in  these  appeals,
    rather than demonstrating  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  was
    irrational.

110. Mr Saini's  reliance  on  paragraph  9.5.2.  of  the  2012  Nationality
    Instructions (see paragraph 94, above) is misplaced.   Putting  to  one
    side the fact that the 2012 version of the guidance could  be  relevant
    only to the decision to grant nationality to  BA,  the  example  relied
    upon in that paragraph concerns the impact  of  previously  disregarded
    deception.  By contrast, the deception in the present  matter  was  not
    previously disregarded.  It was never disclosed  to  the  Secretary  of
    State such that she had the option to consider whether to disregard  it
    at an earlier stage.  It is in that context that  the  guidance  states
    that  "nationality  on  the  date  of  application  is,  in  any  case,
    irrelevant...", and the guidance is clearly of no  assistance  to  BA's
    attempt to demonstrate that the Secretary of State reached  a  view  no
    reasonable Secretary of State  could  have  arrived  at,  or  that  she
    disregarded some relevant matter.

111. There is a further, and very significant, reason why the  Secretary  of
    State was entitled to conclude that  the  appellants'  citizenship  was
    acquired by means of the concealment of a material  fact.   Had  either
    appellant revealed to the Secretary of  State  at  the  time  of  their
    citizenship applications their earlier and  persistent  deception,  the
    Secretary of State would plainly  have  been  entitled  to  refuse  the
    applications on good  character  grounds.   Each  appellant  failed  to
    disclose their earlier  dishonesty  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  and
    declared when applying for naturalisation that they had  disclosed  all
    relevant  information.   They  each  declared  in   their   citizenship
    applications that they had not  engaged  in  any  activities  that  may
    indicate that they were not persons of good character (question 3.12 on
    each form, in the Good character section).  In light of their deception
    concerning their true identities, the answers to those  questions  were
    plainly false.

112. We reject Mr Saini's  submission  that  paragraph  9.5.2  of  the  2012
    Nationality Instructions (referred to at paragraph 94,  above)  assists
    BA's case.

113. First, the guidance  is  intended  to  aid  the  Secretary  of  State's
    officials with  their  application  of  the  statutory  good  character
    requirement.  As Stanley Burnton LJ held in Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department v SK (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 16 at [36],  there  is
    no power for the  Secretary  of  State  to  waive  the  statutory  good
    character requirement.  The Nationality Instructions cannot require the
    Secretary of State to accept the good character  of  an  applicant  who
    could not sensibly be regarded as such.   The  Instructions  should  be
    read, interpreted and applied against that background.

114. Secondly, Example B in the 2012 instructions  concerned  leave  granted
    pursuant to a "family concession".  BA was not granted leave under  the
    family concession, but rather due  to  his  outstanding,  false  asylum
    claim.  His false asylum claim rendered him irremovable, until  it  was
    finally determined.  The grant of leave was nothing  to  do  with  BA's
    family circumstances.

115. Thirdly, properly understood, the paragraph 9.5.2 exceptions  contained
    in the 2012 instructions concerned  previously  disregarded  deception.
    Example B amplifies the meaning of paragraph 9.5.2; so  much  is  clear
    where the example refers to "the UKBA" (the UK Borders Agency, formerly
    part  of  the  Secretary  of  State's   department)   having   "already
    disregarded the claimed nationality."  The subsequent reference to  the
    perversity of seeking to  revive  the  significance  of  a  "previously
    disregarded fact" underlines the need for such deception to  have  been
    identified and dealt with at a prior point.

116. This extract from the 2012 guidance was  considered  in  R  (oao  Ylian
    Rushiti and Adriatik Laci) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2014] EWHC 3931 by Popplewell J, as he  then  was,  in  the  following
    terms, at [47]:

            "The example given in that subparagraph can only sensibly be
            understood as assuming that when the ILR application is made by
            Mr B, the deception is known to the immigration authorities and
            disregarded as immaterial to the decision based on the family
            concession. The reasoning set out is that because the deception
            has been consciously disregarded in granting ILR, it would be
            'perverse' to take it into account when considering good
            character upon the subsequent naturalisation application... But
            on any view it could not be said to be perverse to take into
            account a deception when considering good character if in an
            earlier application for ILR the deception was unknown, even if
            the deception were immaterial. If the paragraph were to be
            interpreted as effectively wiping the slate clean once the ILR
            decision had been made it would be an unlawful fetter on the
            Secretary of State's discretion: it would be perverse NOT to
            take into account a prior deception of which the immigration
            authorities became aware for the first time only when
            considering good character under a naturalisation application."
            (emphasis original).

117. Of course, when responding to that questionnaire,  BA  did  not  reveal
    his prior deception to the Secretary of State.  Instead, he  maintained
    the deception, highlighting the continuing delay in  the  consideration
    of his asylum claim.

118. It follows that we reject Mr Saini's  submissions  that,  even  on  the
    narrow post-Begum approach, the Secretary of State was not entitled  to
    regard section 40(3) as having been met in the case of each  appellant.
    She was.  Each appellant deceived the Secretary of State into  treating
    them as though they were subject to outstanding asylum claims,  thereby
    rendering themselves irremovable.  The Secretary of State was  entitled
    to conclude that that was material to  each  being  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain and subsequently British citizenship.  The  appellants'
    every engagement with the Secretary of State  for  over  18  years  was
    based on the dishonest  premise  of  the  Macedonian  deception.   Each
    appellant plainly knew what  they  were  doing,  as  their  solicitors'
    representations to the Secretary of State made clear: the false  claims
    were made to render them irremovable and avoid return to Albania.   The
    Secretary  of  State  was  plainly  entitled  to  conclude  that  their
    citizenship was obtained by means of  fraud  or  false  representation.
    Further, the Secretary of State was  also  entitled  to  conclude  that
    their citizenship was obtained by virtue of the concealment of material
    facts, namely the non-disclosure, by each appellant, of  their  earlier
    deception at the point of their applications for  British  citizenship.
    Had they disclosed their past deception to the Secretary of State,  she
    would have been entitled to refuse the applications on  good  character
    grounds.  The Secretary of State was plainly entitled to  be  satisfied
    that their citizenship was obtained by means of the  concealment  of  a
    material fact, namely the fact of their prior deception.

119. The question then arises as to  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to exercise her discretion  to  decide  to  invoke  the  power
    contained in section 40(3), in relation to each appellant.

120. We conclude that she  was.   There  is  a  strong  public  interest  in
    ensuring that those who obtain British citizenship by dishonest  means;
    only exceptionally will it be right  for  a  person  who  has  obtained
    British citizenship by deception to be allowed to retain it  (see  Laci
    at [37]).  Nothing has been advanced to the Secretary of State  in  the
    case of either appellant which demonstrates that there were exceptional
    circumstances such that  it  was  irrational,  unlawful  or  Wednesbury
    unreasonable for her to decide to exercise  the  powers  under  section
    40(3) in these cases.

Best interests of AA

121. Only one of the appellants' children is still a minor, AA, born in  May
    2012.  We accept that  there  will  be  a  process  of  adjustment  and
    difficulty upon the deprivation of  AA's  parents'  citizenship.   AA's
    best interests would be for the status quo to be  maintained,  and  for
    her parents to retain their British nationality.

Article 8 ECHR

122. A striking feature of these proceedings is  that  the  appellants  have
    not sought to adduce additional, contemporary evidence of  the  claimed
    Article 8 impact of the deprivation decisions.  The materials  we  have
    are those prepared for the proceedings before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in late 2019 (ZA) and early 2020 (BA).  We therefore base our Article 8
    analysis, which we must conduct for ourselves, on the materials already
    provided.

123. We accept that Article 8 private life rights of the appellants will  be
    engaged by their exposure to the so-called  "hostile  environment",  in
    the period between the deprivation orders being made, and a decision on
    subsequent leave to remain, or (if leave is  not  granted)  during  the
    period for which any in-country appeal  is  pending.   The  deprivation
    orders will place the appellants in a worse position than they were  in
    had they never naturalised as British in the first place, and  remained
    as  holders  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain.    However,   such   an
    interference will only be limited.  We recall that Ms  Cunha  indicated
    that it would be likely that ZA would be granted some form of leave, if
    she were to make an  application  to  the  Secretary  of  State.   BA's
    decision letter provides that he, too, will be able to apply for leave,
    although if that application  is  unsuccessful,  he  may  face  removal
    proceedings.  At that stage, of course, a full Article 8 assessment  of
    BA's removal may take place.  Thus there will only be a limited  period
    during which both ZA and BA will be without leave, following which  ZA,
    at least, will be granted some form of discretionary leave outside  the
    rules.  If ZA chooses to make an application for leave, the leave  that
    will later be granted to her will mitigate the otherwise  harsh  impact
    on BA of the hostile environment.  ZA will be able to  access  many  of
    the services that may become  inaccessible  to  BA  during  the  period
    before he is granted leave, or made  subject  to  removal  proceedings.
    For example, if BA's and ZA's banking services are withdrawn,  ZA  will
    be able to resume access to such services upon being granted leave.  ZA
    will then resume the ability to,  for  example,  secure  a  residential
    tenancy or obtain a driving licence, should the need to  do  so  arise.
    This will mitigate much of the otherwise harsh impact that the  hostile
    environment would entail if the  family  were  exposed  to  it  for  an
    indefinite period.

124. We do not accept that the ECHR is engaged in relation to the  remaining
    aspects of the deprivation decision.  There can be no  suggestion  that
    the decision has been arbitrary, not in accordance with  the  law,  nor
    not subject to the procedural safeguards required by  Article  8.   The
    decisions to  deprive  each  appellant  were  rationally  open  to  the
    Secretary of State, were in accordance with  the  law,  and  have  been
    subject to the appellate scrutiny of these proceedings.

125. It is, of course, common ground that  we  do  not  need  to  conduct  a
    proleptic Article 8 assessment of the appellants' prospective  removal.
    To the limited  extent  that  the  deprivation  decisions  will  engage
    Article 8 of the Convention, we  consider  the  interference  with  the
    appellants' private life rights, and those of their children, including
    their minor child AA, to be a proportionate interference when  assessed
    against the  public  interest  in  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the
    conferral of British citizenship.  As this tribunal held  in  Hysaj  at
    [110]:

            "There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the public interest
            in maintaining the integrity of the system by which foreign
            nationals are naturalised and permitted to enjoy the benefits
            of British citizenship."

126. We consider that  the  cumulative  force  of  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining the integrity of the system for the  conferral  of  British
    citizenship, combined with the dishonesty of these appellants, and  its
    duration, is sufficient to outweigh the best  interests  of  AA.   This
    decision will not require either of her parents to leave  the  country,
    and to the extent that their removal becomes a possibility,  they  will
    each be able to make human rights claims to resist removal at the time,
    which  will  attract  the  full  panoply  of  procedural   protections,
    including a right of appeal.  In relation to ZA,  it  is  unlikely  she
    will be removed in any event, given Ms Cunha's concession that, if  she
    were to apply for leave to remain, it is likely she  would  be  granted
    such leave.

Conclusion

127. For these  reasons,  we  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to be satisfied that ZA and BA's British citizenship had  been
    obtained by means of fraud, false representation or the concealment  of
    a material fact for the purposes of section 40(3) of the 1981 Act.  The
    separate decisions to deprive each of them of their British citizenship
    do not require them to leave the UK, and to the extent they  amount  to
    an interference with their rights under Article 8  of  the  ECHR,  such
    interferences are proportionate.

128. Both appeals are dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Chohan involved the making of an  error  of  law.   We
set aside the decision, subject to the findings of  fact  preserved  as  set
out in the body of this decision.  We  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing
ZA's appeal.

The decision of Judge Howorth involved the making of an error  of  law.   We
set the decision aside with no findings of fact preserved.   We  remake  the
decision by dismissing BA's appeal.



Signed   Stephen H Smith                Date 23 September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


