
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00058/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 26 August 2021                    |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 22 July 2021                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                SHABAN CEVANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

 1. At the outset of the hearing before me, Ms  Foot  who  represented  the
    appellant sought  an  anonymity  direction  under  rule  14(1)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).  The basis of that application was that the appellant has a 2
    year old daughter.  The case concerns the appellant  obtaining  British
    citizenship by fraud  (which  he  accepts)  and  that  this  may  cause
    problems for his child in the Albanian community.

 2. On behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Bates  opposed  the  making  of  an
    anonymity  order  pointing  out  that  the  proceedings  had  not  been
    anonymised to this point and there was no evidence to support the claim
    that the fact that  the  appellant  had  obtained  his  nationality  by
    deception would cause problems for his child in the Albanian community.

 3. I indicated that I would make a  decision  on  the  application  in  my
    written decision on  the  appeal  which  I  now  do.   In  reaching  my
    decision, I take into account the UTIAC President's Guidance Note  2013
    No 1 on anonymity orders.  I bear in mind the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's child and I note that the presumption is in favour of 'open
    justice' (see Smith (appealable decision; PTA requirements;  anonymity)
    [2019] UKUT 00216 (IAC) at [68]).

 4. I have found helpful the approach of the UT in  Hysaj  (Deprivation  of
    Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 128 (IAC) at [120]-[122]:

         "120.    We are mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No 1  concerned  with
         the issuing of an anonymity  direction  and  we  observe  that  the
         starting point for  consideration  of  such  a  direction  in  this
         Chamber of the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts and  tribunals,  is
         open justice. The principle of open justice is fundamental  to  the
         common law. The rationale for this is to protect the rights of  the
         parties  and  also   to   maintain   public   confidence   in   the
         administration of  justice.  Revelation  of  the  identity  of  the
         parties is an important part of open justice: Re: Guardian News  &
         Media Ltd [2010] UKSC 1; [2010] 2 AC 697.

         121. Paragraph 18 of the Guidance Note confirms that  the  identity
         of children whether they are  appellants  or  the  children  of  an
         appellant (or otherwise concerned with the proceedings),  will  not
         normally be disclosed nor will their school,  the  names  of  their
         teacher or any social worker or health professional with whom  they
         are concerned, unless there are good reasons in  the  interests  of
         justice to do so. We observe that we  have  not  named  either  the
         appellant's wife or their children and  no  reference  is  made  to
         where the family reside, the ages of the children  or  what  school
         they attend.

         122. Even in cases involving exploration of intimate details of  an
         appellant's private and family life, the full  force  of  the  open
         justice principle should not readily be denigrated from: Zeromska-
         Smith v United Lincolnshire Hospitals NHS Trust [2019]  EWHC  552
         (QB) ..."

 5. There is, as Mr Bates submitted, no evidence to  support  any  risk  or
    direct adverse consequence to the appellant's child as a result of  his
    deception in obtaining British nationality.  I have not identified  the
    appellant's daughter in this decision or the  family's  whereabouts  in
    the UK.  In my view, neither the interests of  the  child  nor  in  the
    proper administration of justice outweigh the 'open justice'  principle
    which is a fundamental principle of the English legal system.

 6. In those circumstances, I decline to make  an  anonymity  direction  in
    this appeal.

Introduction

 7. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 20  August  1986.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 25  July  1999  together  with  his
    brother, K.  On 20 August 1999, both  the  appellant  and  his  brother
    claimed asylum.  At that time, they gave their nationality  as  Kosovan
    and misrepresented their dates of birth.  The appellant claimed that he
    had been born on 20 August 1987 and his brother  claimed  that  he  was
    born on 22 March 1989 when, in fact, they were each a year  older.   In
    other words,  in  addition  to  misrepresenting  their  nationality  as
    Kosovan they both claimed to be one year  younger  than  they  in  fact
    were.

 8. The appellant was granted four years' leave as a minor on 26 July 2001.
     His brother was also granted leave as a minor.

 9. On 20 August 2004, the appellant became an adult on his 18th  birthday.
    Of course, on the basis of the age that he was (then) claiming to be he
    would not have been 18 until 20 August 2005.

10. On 13 July 2005, both the appellant and his brother  applied  for  ILR.
    They were both granted ILR on 8 November 2005.  At the time, due to the
    misrepresentation of the appellant's date of birth, he was said to be a
    minor at the date of the application on 13 July 2005 although  he  was,
    in fact, an adult as, on his true date of birth, he had become 18 years
    old on 20 August 2004.  His  brother,  whether  on  the  basis  of  his
    falsely claimed date of birth as 22 March 1989 or on the basis  of  his
    true date of birth of 22 March 1988, was a minor both at  the  date  on
    which his ILR application was made on 13 July 2005 and on the date that
    it was granted on 8 November 2005.

11. On 12  June  2016,  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  British
    citizenship with his brother (who at the time  was  claiming  to  be  a
    minor) as a dependant.  Both the appellant and his brother gave a false
    nationality  (Kosovan)  and  their  false  dates  of   birth   in   the
    application.  Both were granted  British  citizenship  on  20  December
    2006.

12. Subsequently,  the  Secretary  of  State  discovered  as  a  result  of
    verification checks carried out by the Status Review Unit that both the
    appellant and his brother had  falsely  stated  their  nationality  and
    place of birth, together with their dates of birth.

13. The Secretary of State, relying upon the appellant's  false  statements
    as to his nationality, place of birth and date of  birth  both  at  the
    time of his application for ILR and also in his application for British
    citizenship, decided to deprive him of his  British  nationality  under
    s.40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981 (the "BNA 1981").

14. As I understand it, from what I was told by the representatives  before
    me, the Secretary of State  decided  not  to  deprive  the  appellant's
    brother of his British  citizenship  on  the  basis  that,  unlike  the
    appellant, at the time he applied for ILR he was a minor.

15. On 11 March 2020,  the  appellant  appealed  against  the  respondent's
    decision to deprive him of his British citizenship under s.40(3) of the
    BNA 1981.  The appellant accepted that he had obtained his  nationality
    by fraud but argued that discretion  under  s.40(3)  should  have  been
    exercised in his favour, not least because his  brother  had  not  been
    deprived of his citizenship.  In addition, the  appellant  relied  upon
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

16. In a decision sent on 17 February 2021, Judge K R Moore  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  Accepting, as the appellant had conceded, that the
    appellant had obtained his British citizenship by deception, the  judge
    found that there were no "compelling mitigating  factors"  which  would
    render deprivation of his citizenship unfair and unreasonable and  that
    discretion should be exercised differently so as to not deprive him  of
    that citizenship.  In addition, the judge found that  the  decision  to
    deprive him of citizenship did not breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. The appellant appealed to the Upper  Tribunal.   He  did  so  on  three
    grounds.

18. First, the judge erred in law by failing to give adequate  reasons  why
    there were not compelling mitigating factors which rendered deprivation
    of his citizenship unfair and unreasonable such that discretion  should
    be exercised in his favour.

19. Secondly,  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  apply  the
    respondent's policy set out in chapter 55 "Deprivation and  Nullity  of
    British Citizenship" at para 55.7.5.

20. Thirdly, the judge failed properly  to  assess  the  appellant's  claim
    under Art 8 and the exercise of discretion under s.40(3) independently.



21. On 16 March 2021, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Parkes)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis that it  was  difficult  to
    see what distinction there was to draw between the  appellant  and  his
    brother both of whom  had  entered  as  minors  and  both  applied  for
    citizenship as adults knowingly using false details.

22. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing  on  22  July  2021  at  the
    Cardiff Civil Justice Centre.  I was based in court and  Ms  Foot,  who
    represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Bates,   who   represented   the
    respondent, joined the hearing remotely by Microsoft Teams as  did  the
    appellant.

The Law

23. Section 40(3) of the BNA 1981 provides as follows:

         "40.(3)  The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of  a
         citizenship  status  which  results  from   his   registration   or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -

              (a) fraud,

              (b) false representation, or

              (c) concealment of a material fact."

24. An appeal against a decision under  s.40(3)  lies  principally  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under s.40A(1) of the  BNA  1981.   Section  40A(1)
    provides as follows:

         "A person who is given notice under section 40(5) of a decision  to
         make an order in respect of him under section 40 may appeal against
         the decision to the First-tier Tribunal".

25. In relation to  appeals,  s.40A(3)  sets  out  the  provisions  in  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIA Act 2002") which
    apply to an appeal under s.40A(1) as they apply to an appeal under s.82
    of the NIA Act 2002.  Those provisions  are  limited  to  "section  106
    (Rules"), "section 107 (Practice Directions)" and "section 108  (Forged
    document: proceedings in  private)".   Significantly,  the  grounds  of
    appeal set out in s.84 of the NIA Act 2002, and which apply in  appeals
    to the FtT under s.82 of the NIA Act 2002,  do  not  apply  in  appeals
    against deprivation of citizenship decisions made under s.40(3) of  the
    BNA 1981.   There  are,  therefore,  no  statutory  grounds  of  appeal
    although, of course, the FtT must consider an individual's human rights
    because s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 applies  to  the  respondent's
    decision-making and to the FtT.

The SSHD's Policy/Guidance

26. In reaching decisions in relation to deprivation  of  citizenship,  the
    Secretary of State has a policy set out in Chapter 55, "Deprivation and
    Nullity of British Citizenship".

27. Paragraphs 55.7.1-55.7.3 set outs out the general  position  concerning
    depravation under s.40(3):

         "55.7.1  If the relevant facts, had they been known at the time the
         application for citizenship was considered, would have affected the
         decision to grant citizenship via  naturalisation  or  registration
         the caseworker should consider deprivation.

         55.7.2   This will include but is not limited to:

              .   Undisclosed convictions or other information which  would
              have affected a person's ability to meet the  good  character
              requirement

              .   A marriage/civil partnership which is found to be invalid
              or void, and so would have affected  a  person's  ability  to
              meet the requirements for section 6(2)

              .   False details given in  relation  to  an  immigration  or
              asylum application, which led to that status being given to a
              person who would not otherwise have qualified, and  so  would
              have affected a person's ability to meet the residence and/or
              good   character   requirements   for    naturalisation    or
              registration

         55.7.3   If the  fraud,  false  representation  or  concealment  of
         material fact did not  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  grant  of
         citizenship, it will  not  be  appropriate  to  pursue  deprivation
         action."

28. Paragraph 55.7.5 provides for circumstances in which the  Secretary  of
    State will not "in general" deprive a person of British citizenship:

         "55.7.5  In general the Secretary of  State  will  not  deprive  of
         British citizenship in the following circumstances:

              .    Where  fraud  postdates  the  application  for   British
              citizenship it will not be appropriate to pursue  deprivation
              action.

              .   If a person was a minor on the date at which they applied
              for citizenship we will not deprive of citizenship

              .   If a person was  a  minor  on  the  date  at  which  they
              acquired  indefinite  leave   to   remain   and   the   false
              representation, concealment of material fact or  fraud  arose
              at that stage and the leave to remain led to  the  subsequent
              acquisition of citizenship we will not deprive of citizenship



         However, where it is in the public interest to deprive despite  the
         presence of these factors they will not prevent deprivation."

29. Paragraph 55.7.7 indicates that in depriving a  person  of  citizenship
    there should be "an intention to deceive" and that "an  innocent  error
    or genuine omission should not lead to deprivation".

30. At para 55.7.8, the guidance deals with "complicity" as follows:

         "55.7.8  Complicit

             55.7.8.1 If the person was a child  at  the  time  the  fraud,
             false representation  or  concealment  of  material  fact  was
             perpetrated, the caseworker should assume that they  were  not
             complicit in any deception by their parent or guardian.

             55.7.8.2  This   includes   individuals   who   were   granted
             discretionary leave until their 18th birthday  having  entered
             the UK as a sole minor who can not be returned  because  of  a
             lack of reception arrangements. Such a minor  may  be  granted
             ILR after they reach the age of 18  without  need  to  succeed
             under the Refugee Convention or make a further application but
             the fraud was perpetrated when the individual was a minor.

             55.7.8.3 However, where a minor on reaching the age of 18 does
             not acquire ILR or other leave automatically  and  submits  an
             application for asylum or other form of leave which  maintains
             a fraud, false representation or concealment of material  fact
             which they adopted whilst a minor, they should be  treated  as
             complicit.

             55.7.8.4 In the case of an adult, the fact that an  individual
             was advised by a relative or agent to give  false  information
             does  not  indicate  that  they  were  not  complicit  in  the
             deception.

             55.7.8.5 All adults should be  held  legally  responsible  for
             their own citizenship applications, even where this is part of
             a family application. Complicity should therefore  be  assumed
             unless sufficient evidence in mitigation is  provided  by  the
             individual in question as part of the investigations process."

31. Para 55.7.10  requires  that  the  decision  should  be  "balanced  and
    reasonable"  "taking  into  account  the  seriousness  of  the   fraud,
    misrepresentation or concealment":

         "55.7.10 Reasonable/Balanced

             55.7.10.1 The caseworker should consider  whether  deprivation
             would be seen to be a balanced and reasonable  step  to  take,
             taking  into   account   the   seriousness   of   the   fraud,
             misrepresentation or concealment, the level  of  evidence  for
             this, and what information was available to UKBA at  the  time
             of consideration.

             55.7.10.2 Evidence that was before the Secretary of  State  at
             the time of application  but  was  disregarded  or  mishandled
             should not in general be used at a later stage to  deprive  of
             nationality. However, where it is in the  public  interest  to
             deprive despite the presence  of  this  factor,  it  will  not
             prevent the deprivation."

32. Then at para 55.7.11 mitigating factors are considered.   At  55.7.11.1
    caseworkers are instructed to "consider any mitigating  circumstances",
    examples of which are then given in para 55.7.11.3-55.7.11.5.

33. Paragraph 55.7.11.2 deals with applications made on behalf of an  adult
    and indicates examples  of  what  will  not  amount  to  mitigation  as
    follows:

         "55.7.11.2 All adults are expected to take responsibility  for  the
         information they provided on acquisition of ILR and/or  citizenship
         and the following will not be examples of mitigation:

             .    Where the applicant claims that a family member acted  on
             their behalf

             .    Where the  applicant  claims  that  a  representative  or
             interpreter advised them to provide false details

             .    Where an applicant claims that he or she was coerced into
             providing false information or  concealing  a  fact,  but  has
             since had the opportunity to advise the  Home  Office  of  the
             correct position but failed to do so"

R(Begum) v SIAC

34. At the outset of the hearing I raised  with  both  representatives  the
    recent decision of the Supreme Court in R (Begum) v Special Immigration
    Appeals Commission [2021] UKSC 7.

35. In that case, the Supreme Court considered the scope of  an  appeal  to
    the  SIAC  against  a  decision  to  deprive  an  individual  of  their
    citizenship under s.40(2) of the BNA 1981 on  the  basis  that  it  was
    "conducive to the public good".  In Begum, the Supreme  Court  did  not
    follow, and disapproved, the earlier approach in the Upper Tribunal  in
    Deliallisi (British citizenship: deportation appeal: scope) [2013] UKUT
    439 (IAC).   The Supreme Court  concluded  that  the  scope  of  SIAC's
    jurisdiction was limited  to  public  law  principles  or  whether  the
    decision breached s.6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  in  particular
    breached Art 8 of the ECHR.   The  Supreme  Court  concluded  that  the
    appeal to SIAC was not a merits based appeal apart from the requirement
    to determine whether  the  decision  breached  the  individual's  human
    rights.  Consequently, it was not for SIAC  to  determine  whether  the
    condition precedent for deprivation was satisfied under s.40(2), namely
    whether it was conducive to the public good and it was not for SIAC  to
    exercise for itself the statutory discretion to deprive the  individual
    of citizenship.

36. Ms Foot, in her oral submissions, accepted that the approach  in  Begum
    applied not only to appeals under s.40(2) to SIAC but also  in  appeals
    to the First-tier Tribunal where the  deprivation  of  citizenship  was
    effected under s.40(2) on the basis that the  individual  had  obtained
    citizenship by means of "fraud", "false representation" or "concealment
    of a material fact".   Mr  Bates  reserved  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position on this issue.

37. Both representatives indicated that given the grounds  of  appeal,  the
    issue of whether the UT's cases such as Deliallisi (and BA (Deprivation
    of Citizenship: Appeals) Ghana [2018] UKUT 85  (IAC))  were  no  longer
    good law in an appeal against a decision under s.40(3), was  immaterial
    as the substance of the grounds were either a public law  challenge  to
    the exercise  of  the  discretion  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  his
    citizenship or the challenge was to the judge's decision in respect  of
    Art 8.  It was, therefore, not material whether the judge, not  at  all
    surprisingly as his decision preceded that  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Begum, had applied the approach in the UT's cases such as Deliallisi.

38. The approach of both representatives is, no doubt, a pragmatic  one  in
    the context of this appeal. A similar approach was adopted  before  the
    Court of Appeal in Laci v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 769  at  [40].    It  is
    accepted that the  appellant  satisfied  the  condition  precedent  for
    depriving him of his citizenship, namely  that  he  had  obtained  that
    citizenship by means of "fraud" or a "false representation".   Further,
    the appellant's challenge to the judge's approach to his appeal  itself
    rested upon public law principles.  Those were that the judge had erred
    in law by failing properly to apply the Secretary of State's policy  in
    relation to deprivation  of  citizenship  in  reaching  a  decision  to
    deprive the appellant of his citizenship whilst reaching  the  opposite
    decision in relation to the appellant's brother.  That is a public  law
    challenge (see Lumba (Congo) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 12).  Also, the grounds
    contend that the judge failed to consider at all, or at least properly,
    the exercise of discretion under s.40(3).  To that  extent,  therefore,
    the issues are essentially public law issues in any event.

39. Finally, in large part, the judge's decision concerned  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR which, even after Begum, required the judge to form his own  view,
    based upon the evidence, as to the merits of the appellant's claim that
    the deprivation of his citizenship breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

40. That said, therefore, it is strictly unnecessary to  determine  whether
    the approach in Begum applies in an appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against a  decision  made  under  s.40(3).   As  I  indicated  to  both
    representatives at the  hearing,  in  an  earlier  unreported  decision
    (DC/00094/2019), I directly addressed this issue and concluded that the
    approach in Begum did, indeed, apply in an  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision under s.40(3).  Given the position taken by
    the representatives in this appeal, it is only necessary to set out  my
    reasoning relatively briefly.

41. In Begum, Lord Reed (delivering the judgment of the Supreme Court)  set
    out at [63]-[70] his reasons for concluding that the  approach  adopted
    in the earlier UT decisions such as Deliallisi  did  not  apply  in  an
    appeal to SIAC against a decision  to  deprive  an  individual  of  her
    citizenship under s.40(2) on the grounds that it was "conducive to  the
    public good".

42. At [61]-[65] of my decision in DC/00094/2019, I set out my reasons why,
    in my view, Lord Reed's reasoning applied equally  to  appeals  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  against  decisions  taken  under  s.40(3).   Those
    reasons (with typographical corrections) were as follows:

         "61. First, whilst the Supreme Court was concerned with  an  appeal
         to SIAC and an appeal  against  the  decision  under  s.40(3),  its
         reasoning cannot be limited to such appeals and not  be  applicable
         to appeals to the First-tier Tribunal against decisions taken under
         s.40(3).

         62.  The Supreme Court referred extensively to the Upper Tribunal's
         decisions in Deliallisi and BA which were concerned with appeals to
         the First-tier Tribunal against decisions taken under s.40(3).  The
         Supreme Court was highly critical of those  decisions.   Lord  Reed
         plainly saw it as  a  necessary  stepping  stone  to  his  ultimate
         conclusion as to the scope of an appeal to SIAC against a  decision
         under s.40(3) that the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  was  wrong.
         It would be very surprising if the Supreme Court, whilst expressing
         this trenchant criticism,  intended  to  leave  standing  the  UT's
         decisions in appeals  to  the  FtT  against  decisions  made  under
         s.40(3).  The very same criticism undermines the Court of  Appeal's
         "endorsement" of the UT's decisions  in  KV.   Whilst  KV  was  not
         apparently cited to the  Supreme  Court,  and  was  definitely  not
         referred to by  Lord  Reed,  it  cannot  any  longer  be  taken  to
         represent he law.

         63.  Secondly, Lord Reed's reasoning applies equally to appeals  to
         the First-tier Tribunal against decisions taken under s.40(3).  The
         legislative scheme that was important in determining the  scope  of
         the appeal in Begum applies to appeals to the  First-tier  Tribunal
         against decisions whether taken under s.40(3) or s.40(2).

             (1)  There are no stated grounds of appeal whether the  appeal
             is to SIAC or the FtT. There is no statutory ground explicitly
             allowing a consideration of factual matters or allowing either
             tribunal to exercise discretion for itself.

             (2)   Both  s.40(2)  and  s.40(3)  are  phrased   as   vesting
             determination of the triggering criterion in  both  provisions
             in the Secretary of State  ("...if the Secretary of  State  is
             satisfied...") and not the tribunal.

             (3)  Both s.40(2) and s.40(3)  place  the  discretion  on  the
             Secretary of State ("may") to deprive an individual  of  their
             citizenship on the stated grounds and not the tribunal.

             (4)  The stated grounds under both s.40(2)  and  s.40(3)  fall
             within the purview of the Secretary of State.  Where issues of
             national security etc. arise,  a  tribunal  is  likely  to  be
             cautious in taking a different  view  from  the  Secretary  of
             State.  That, however, does not alter the jurisdiction of  the
             relevant tribunal but rather points to the need for  deference
             or, in some cases, recognition of the  non-justiciable  nature
             of the subject matter.  Of course, that is much more likely to
             occur in an appeal to SIAC.  It is also more likely  to  occur
             in an appeal against a decision under s.40(2).  But there  can
             be no assumption that appeals against decisions under  s.40(2)
             will be to SIAC and appeals against s.40(3) decisions  to  the
             FtT.  Some decisions taken under s.40(2) may not be  certified
             on national security grounds and the appeal will  be  properly
             brought in the FtT.   Likewise,  some  decisions  taken  under
             s.40(3) may be certified on  national  security  grounds  such
             that an appeal could only be brought to SIAC.

             It is, therefore, neither the  judicial  forum  (necessarily),
             nor whether the decision is taken under  s.40(2)  or  s.40(3),
             that informs the scope and nature of an appeal.  Rather, it is
             the nature of the statutory  provisions  which  vest  decision
             making in the Secretary of State including deciding whether to
              exercise discretion if satisfied that the relevant  condition
             whether found  in  s.40(2)  or  s.40(3)  is  met  and  limits,
             therefore, the scope of any appeal to  public  law  principles
             and not permitting of a 'full-blown' merits appeal."

         64.  It is, perhaps, noteworthy that the Upper Tribunal in  Pirzada
         expressed the view that the First-tier Tribunal's jurisdiction  was
         limited, in effect,  to  public  law  grounds  in  appeals  against
         decisions made both under s.40(2) and s.40(3).  That was a decision
         which, not only did Lord Reed not seek expressly to disapprove, but
         in the context of his consideration of the decisions in  the  Upper
         Tribunal appeared to find favour with him  over  the  decisions  in
         Deliallisi and BA.

         65.  In my judgment, the Supreme Court in Begum set out the  proper
         scope of an appeal, under s.40A of the 1981 Act whether the  appeal
         is brought to SIAC or  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  whether  the
         appeal is against a decision taken under s.40(2) or  s.40(3).   The
         scope of such appeals is as set out [by]  Lord  Reed  in  [71]  and
         [119]."

43. In consequence, the scope of an appeal to the FtT  against  a  decision
    under s.40(3), reflects the scope of an appeal to SIAC under s.40(2) as
    set out in Lord Reed's judgment at [68], [71] and [119].   The  summary
    at [119] is as follows:

         "119.    The scope of SIAC's jurisdiction in an  appeal  against  a
         decision taken under section 40(2) was summarised in para 71 above:
         first, to determine whether the Secretary of State has acted  in  a
         way in which no reasonable Secretary of State could have acted,  or
         has taken into account some irrelevant matter, or  has  disregarded
         something to which he should have given weight, or has been  guilty
         of some procedural impropriety; secondly, to determine  whether  he
         has erred in law, for example by making findings of fact which  are
         unsupported by any evidence  or  are  based  upon  a  view  of  the
         evidence which could not reasonably be held; thirdly, to  determine
         whether he has  complied  with  section  40(4);  and  fourthly,  to
         determine whether he  has  acted  in  breach  of  any  other  legal
         principles applicable to  his  decision,  such  as  the  obligation
         arising in appropriate cases under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
         Act."

44. However, as I  have already noted, and it is common ground between  the
    parties, the substance of  the  appellant's  challenge  is  based  upon
    public law principles and a challenge to the judge's decision under Art
    8 which had, necessarily, to be a decision made by  the  judge  on  the
    evidence.

45. With that in mind, I turn to the grounds.

Discussion

46. Grounds  1  and  2  both  relate  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's claim when contrasted with that of  his  brother  whom  the
    Secretary of State had decided not to deprive of his citizenship.   The
    essence of the appellant's case is that the judge was wrong to  draw  a
    distinction between  the  respondent's  decision  in  relation  to  the
    appellant and that of his brother when he concluded at para 26  of  his
    decision that:

         "I do not accept that there are compelling  mitigating  factors  in
         this case which would render deprivation  unfair  and  unreasonable
         taking into account the appellant's history and that he was only 12
         years of age when he came to  the  United  Kingdom,  and  that  his
         brother who entered with him was also a minor, but was  not  facing
         deprivation, and that bearing all this  in  mind  a  discretion  to
         deprive  should  be  exercised  differently  in  relation  to  this
         appellant".

47. In the grounds and Ms Foot's oral submissions, it is contended that the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for that finding,  in  particular
    at para 27 wrongly concluding that

         "the only reason for [the differential treatment of  the  appellant
         and his brother] was due to the age of the younger brother  at  the
         time of the initial application and subsequently".

48. Tying that up to ground 2, and the respondent's policy as  set  out  in
    chapter 55.7.5, Ms Foot submitted that the judge had wrongly taken into
    account that the appellant's brother was "younger" (implicitly a minor)
    subsequent  to  his  "initial  application".   In  fact,  although  the
    respondent had been deceived by the appellant and  his  brother  as  to
    their ages, whilst the appellant was an  adult  both  at  the  time  of
    applying for ILR (and its grant) and when applying for citizenship (and
    its grant), the appellant's brother had only been a minor at  the  time
    of the ILR application and grant.   By  the  time  of  the  citizenship
    application, the appellant's brother was, on his true date of birth, an
    adult.

49. Relying on para 55.7.5 of the respondent's policy,  Ms  Foot  submitted
    that the judge's decision was not within  the  spirit  of  the  policy,
    although she recognised  that  the  policy  differentiated  between  an
    individual who, although an  adult  at  the  time  of  the  citizenship
    application and decision,  was  a  minor  at  the  time  they  acquired
    indefinite leave to remain.

50. Finally, Ms Foot submitted, relying upon ground 3, that the  judge  had
    simply failed to deal with the issue  of  the  exercise  of  discretion
    under s.40(3) separate from whether the decision breached Art 8 of  the
    ECHR.

51. Ms Foot's reliance upon the underlying  "spirit"  of  the  respondent's
    policy is difficult to pin down, certainly in any  application  to  the
    appellant on the basis of  a  comparison  with  the  decision  made  in
    relation  to  the  appellant's  brother  not  to  deprive  him  of  his
    citizenship.

52. Both the Secretary of State and the judge, had to apply  the  terms  of
    the respondent's policy set out in chapter 55 and, in particular,  para
    55.7.5 (see Lumba at [26] per Lord Dyson).  Of course, a decision maker
    must follow a published policy unless there are good  reasons  for  not
    doing so.  It is not suggested in this appeal that there was  any  good
    reason to depart from the respondent's policy.  As will shortly  become
    clear, the respondent properly applied her policy both to the appellant
    and to his brother, at  least  so  far  as  what  is  known  about  his
    brother's citizenship application and its precursors.

53. Ms Foot accepted in her oral  submissions  that  by  any  reference  to
    "substantive unfairness" in the appellant's grounds of appeal, that had
    to be understood as  a  public  law  challenge  based  upon  Wednesbury
    reasonableness or irrationality as there  is  no  separate  public  law
    principle of substantive unfairness.  I agree.  It suffices to refer to
    two passages from  the  judgments  in  the  Supreme  Court  case  of  R
    (Gallaher Group Ltd) v Competition Marketing Authority [2018]  UKSC  25
    which make that plain.

54. At [41] Lord Carnwath (with  whom  Lords  Mance,  Sumption,  Hodge  and
    Briggs agreed) said this:

         "In summary, procedural unfairness is  well-established  and  well-
         understood. Substantive unfairness on the other hand - or, in  Lord
         Dyson's words at para 53, "whether there has been unfairness on the
         part of the authority having regard to all the circumstances" -  is
         not a distinct legal criterion. Nor is it made so by  the  addition
         of terms such as "conspicuous" or "abuse of power".  Such  language
         adds nothing to the ordinary principles of judicial review, notably
         in the present context irrationality and legitimate expectation. It
         is by reference to those principles that cases such as the  present
         must be judged."

55. At [50] Lord Sumption added:

         "...to say that the result of the decision  must  be  substantively
         fair, or at least not "conspicuously" unfair, begs the question  by
         what legal standard the fairness of the decision is to be assessed.
         Absent a legitimate expectation of a different result arising  from
         the decision-maker's statements or conduct,  a  decision  which  is
         rationally based on relevant considerations is most unlikely to  be
         unfair in any legally cognisable sense."

56. It will be helpful first to consider the respondent's policy set out in
    chapter 55.  In particular the  paragraph  at  55.7  "Material  to  the
    Acquisition of Citizenship" is relevant.  At 55.7.1, the decision-maker
    is reminded that "if the relevant facts". had they been  known  at  the
    time of the application for  citizenship  was  considered,  would  have
    affected the decision to grant citizenship  then  deprivation  of  that
    citizenship should be considered.   At  55.7.2,  having  set  out  non-
    disclosures that may be relevant at  55.7.3,  it  is  stated  that  the
    "fraud, false representation or concealment of  material  fact"  should
    have a "direct bearing on the grant of citizenship" if  deprivation  is
    to follow.  Jumping ahead slightly to 55.7.7,  it  is  noted  that  the
    individual must have an "intention to deceive" and that it not  be  "an
    innocent error or genuine omission" before deprivation should follow.

57. At 55.7.8 under the heading "Complicit", it is noted at  55.7.8.1  that
    if the person under consideration was  a  child  at  the  time  of  the
    "fraud, false representation  or  concealment  of  material  fact",  it
    should be assumed that they were not complicit in any  deception  by  a
    parent or guardian.

58. Again, at 55.7.8.2, the policy refers to a minor  who  is  granted  ILR
    after they have reached the age of 18 but  the  fraud  was  perpetrated
    when the individual was a minor.  That would also be a case where  they
    should also not be assumed to be complicit in any earlier deception.

59. However, at 55.7.8.3, if having reached the age of 18  and  having  not
    acquired ILR,  an  individual  makes  an  application  for  asylum  and
    maintains a "fraud, false representation  or  concealment  of  material
    fact" which they adopted whilst a minor, in those  circumstances,  they
    should be treated as complicit.

60. Finally, in relation to adults the fact that an individual  is  advised
    by a relative or agent to give false information, is not a  case  where
    they are to be treated as not complicit in the deception (55.7.8.4) and
    all adults are responsible for  their  "own  citizenship  applications,
    even where this is part of a family application" and complicity  should
    be assumed unless there  is  sufficient  evidence  in  mitigation  (see
    55.7.8.5).

61. It follows, as a generality, that the policy recognises that  in  order
    to establish the condition precedent there  must  be  an  intention  to
    deceive  (and  not  an  innocent  error);  by  and  large  adults   are
    responsible for what is done by them or on their behalf; but minors are
    not responsible for what is done on their behalf unless, possibly, that
    fraud or false representation is repeated in an asylum claim once  they
    reach adulthood. But, that later caveat is specifically  limited  to  a
    case where the minor (now adult) has not acquired ILR.

62. Paragraphs 55.7.11.2 and 55.7.5  are  particularly  important  in  this
    appeal. I have set them out above but, the relevant parts, need  to  be
    repeated here.  They are relevant, respectively, to the decisions  made
    in respect of the appellant and his brother respectively.

63. Paragraph 55.7.11.2 recognises the responsibility of an adult:

         "All adults are expected to take responsibility for the information
         they provided on acquisition of ILR and/or citizenship..."

64.  Paragraph 55.7.5 provides, so far as relevant:

         "55.7.5  In general the Secretary of  State  will  not  deprive  of
              British citizenship in the following circumstances:

              ...

               . If a person was a minor on the date at which  they  applied
                 for   citizenship we will not deprive of citizenship.

               . If a person was a minor on the date at which they  acquired
                 indefinite leave to remain and  the  false  representation,
                 concealment of material fact or fraud arose at  that  stage
                 and the leave to remain led to the  subsequent  acquisition
                 of citizenship we will not deprive of citizenship.

              However, where it  is  in  the  public  interest  to  deprive
              despite the presence of these factors they will  not  prevent
              deprivation".

65. It seems to me that the italicised bullet-point was precisely  the  one
    correctly applied by the Secretary of State to the appellant's brother.



66. By contrast, the appellant was an adult both at the  time  of  the  ILR
    application and decision and at the time of his citizenship application
    and decision.  It is accepted that, throughout, he has practised  fraud
    or made a false representation in order to obtain ILR and  subsequently
    citizenship.   On  the  basis  of  the  policy  (see  55.7.11.2),   his
    deliberate representations were such as to  make  him  complicit.   The
    italicised  bullet-point  did  not  apply  to  him.   Subject  to   the
    reasonable and rational exercise of discretion, the Secretary of  State
    and, indeed, the judge correctly applied the policy to him.

67. The appellant's brother was simply in a different  position  under  the
    policy.  He was a minor at the time of the ILR  application  and  grant
    but he was an adult at the time  of  the  citizenship  application  and
    decision.  Whilst the policy recognises that  following  adulthood,  an
    individual  may  become  complicit  in  a  repeated  fraud   or   false
    representation made previously when he was a minor, 55.7.5, makes plain
    that "in general" a person who was a minor at the date he acquired  ILR
    (and at which stage the fraud or  false  representation  was  initially
    made) but who subsequently acquires citizenship will not be deprived of
    citizenship.

68. Mr Bates tentatively suggested this was because,  had  the  person  not
    applied for citizenship, the Secretary  of  State  would  not  seek  to
    revoke his ILR based upon fraud for which he was not  complicit  as  he
    was a minor when he acquired the ILR.  A person should be in  no  worse
    position if he subsequently acquired citizenship as an  adult  and  who
    would, by virtue of that grant, no longer  have  ILR  which  would,  of
    course, not be revived by the  loss  of  citizenship.   That  may  well
    explain the exception  in  55.7.5  which  applied  to  the  appellant's
    brother (but not the appellant).  I am not in a  position  to  reach  a
    concluded view upon it.  Of course, Ms  Foot  does  not  challenge  the
    rationality of the policy but merely its application - differentially -
    to the appellant when compared to his brother.  I  see  no  basis,  put
    forward before me, that would make the  policy  (and  the  differential
    outcome it creates in a case such as the present) irrational.

69. In summary, Ms Foot might regard  the  differential  treatment  of  the
    appellant and his brother as "substantively  unfair",  that  cannot  be
    based upon a misapplication of the respondent's policy,  in  particular
    55.7.5.  Both the decision in relation to the appellant and his brother
    was in accordance with that policy as written.

70. It is impossible, therefore, to conclude that in some way the  decision
    made in relation to  the  appellant  is  not  in  accordance  with  the
    "spirit" of the policy.  That argument cannot have any purchase if  the
    terms of the policy apply so as to create a  differential  approach  to
    decisions to deprive the appellant, on the one hand, and  his  brother,
    on the other hand, of their citizenship.  Likewise, it  is  simply  not
    possible to establish that, in applying the policy, in accordance  with
    its own terms that there is any argument that the decision in  relation
    to the appellant (on that basis alone) was Wednesbury  unreasonable  or
    irrational.

71. It is far from clear to me that in para 27, as Ms Foot contended to  be
    the  case,  the  judge  misunderstood  the   difference   between   the
    appellant's situation and that of his brother.   When  the  judge  said
    that the "only reason" for the differential outcome was the age of  the
    younger  brother  "at  the  time  of  the   initial   application   and
    subsequently", the judge does not make  clear  what  he  means  by  the
    "initial application".  It is difficult  to  construe  those  words  as
    applying to the deprivation of citizenship application.  That was  not,
    on any view, an "initial application" but, in fact, the  concluding  or
    final  application.   Perhaps,  or  naturally,  the  reference  to  the
    "initial application" is to the  ILR  application  which,  as  everyone
    accepts in this  appeal,  was  a  necessary  precursor  to  making  the
    citizenship application subsequently.  In my view, that is  the  proper
    interpretation of what the judge was saying in para  27,  namely  that,
    unlike the appellant, the appellant's brother was a minor initially  at
    the time of the ILR application and, indeed, subsequently  for  a  time
    although not by the time of the citizenship application.  The judge was
    well aware of the respective histories of the appellant and his brother
    and I see no reason to read what he said in para 27 as  misrepresenting
    those respective histories.  It is perhaps worth noting  that  at  para
    11, when relating the appellant's applications history, the judge noted
    that:

         "...unlike the appellant [the]  younger  brother  had  not  made  a
         subsequent application as an adult and even though there  was  only
         an 18 month difference  between  this  appellant  and  his  younger
         brother, the Respondent  will  be  taking  no  action  against  the
         younger brother whilst depriving the appellant of his  nationality,
         since that citizenship had been obtained by fraud". (my emphasis)

72. The reference to the "subsequent  application"  is,  clearly,  there  a
    reference to the citizenship application and not  the  ILR  application
    which, sensibly read, the judge referred to in para 27 as the  "initial
    application".

73. For these reasons, therefore, I reject both grounds  1  and  2  to  the
    extent that it is contended that the judge failed properly to apply the
    respondent's policy to the appellant  and,  in  effect,  in  doing  so,
    reached a Wednesbury unreasonable or irrational decision in  the  light
    of the respondent's decision not to deprive the appellant's brother  of
    his citizenship.

74. Under ground 3, Ms Foot relied on  a  couple  of  points  in  her  oral
    submissions.  Ground 3, taken at face value, contends  that  the  judge
    wrongly simply  focused  on  Art  8  rather  than  determining  whether
    discretion should be exercised differently.

75. The ground simply fails to recognise what the judge said in para 26  of
    his decision in which he did not accept that there were any "compelling
    mitigating factors" which led him to conclude that  discretion  "should
    be exercised differently in relation  to  this  appellant".   That,  in
    itself, is a separate decision, independent of Art  8,  concerning  the
    exercise of discretion.  Reading the judge's decision as  a  whole,  it
    take  into  account  those  factors   relating   to   the   appellant's
    circumstances, including that a different decision was made in relation
    to his brother, in concluding that a breach  of  Art  8  had  not  been
    established.

76. Of course, following Begum applied to an appeal under  s.40(3)  to  the
    FtT, the true scope of the judge's enquiry should have been whether  or
    not the Secretary of State reached her conclusion in  relation  to  the
    exercise of discretion contrary to public law principles.   Of  course,
    if the judge applying  a  merits  approach,  albeit  wrongly  following
    Begum, did conclude that discretion should  be  exercised  against  the
    appellant, it would be difficult to reject an argument  that  he  would
    have reached any conclusion other than that the Secretary of State,  on
    the same evidence,  reached  a  rational  and  reasonable  decision  in
    examining discretion against the appellant.

77. Finally, it is not entirely clear whether Ms Foot sought  to  challenge
    the judge's decision under Art 8 other than by reference to  a  failure
    to properly apply either the  letter  or  spirit  of  the  respondent's
    policy: a contention which I have, earlier, rejected.

78. The judge correctly identified the "heavy weight" which must be  placed
    upon the public interest when an  individual  has  by  fraud  or  false
    representation  obtained  British  citizenship.   At  para  22  of  his
    decision, the judge  set  out  a  passage  from  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in Hysaj where the UT said (at [31]) that:

         "... where the requirements of section  40(3)  are  satisfied,  the
         Tribunal is required to place significant weight on the  fact  that
         Parliament has decided, in the public interest, that a  person  who
         has employed deception to  obtain  British  citizenship  should  be
         deprived of that status".

79. Mr Bates placed reliance upon what was said by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Laci v SSHD.  At [37], Underhill LJ (with  whom  Newey  and  Baker  LJJ
    agreed) said this:

         "As to point (4) in BA, the broad thrust of what the  UT  says  is
         that only exceptionally will it be  right  for  a  person  who  has
         obtained British citizenship by (in short) deception to be  allowed
         to retain it. In my view that is entirely correct:  the  reason  is
         self-evident. It is in line with what Leggatt LJ says in the  first
         half of para. 19 of his judgment in KV [(Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2018]
         EWCA Civ 2483]. I note that he uses the term "unusual" rather  than
         "exceptional". That may be because the Courts  have  been  wary  of
         treating "exceptionality" as a test as such, but  I  do  not  think
         that there is a problem here: the reason why such an  outcome  will
         be exceptional is that it will be unusual for a migrant to be  able
         to mount a sufficiently compelling case to justify their  retaining
         an advantage that they should never  have  obtained  in  the  first
         place. The UT was  also  right  to  recognise  that  the  necessary
         assessment arises both as a matter of common law and  (potentially)
         in relation to Convention rights."

80. At [38], Underhill LJ noted that Aziz v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  1884  the
    Court of Appeal concluded that the First-tier Tribunal:

         "... ought not, at least  normally,  to  undertake  any  'proleptic
         assessment'  of  the  likelihood  of  removal.   Loss  of   British
         citizenship and loss of  leave  to  remain  are  different  things,
         appealable by different processes.  However,  it  should  be  noted
         that  Sales  LJ's  reasoning  does  not  apply  to  other   adverse
         consequences of a deprivation decision.  One  example  of  such  an
         adverse consequence was statelessness, which was the issue  in  KV.
         Another may be a 'limbo period'.  ...  Such  consequences  will  in
         principle be relevant to the exercise of the common law  discretion
         under section 40(3), and to the  extent  that  they  constitute  an
         interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights they  will  need
         to go into the proportionality balance: see para 17 of Leggatt LJ's
         judgment in KV".

81. The court in Aziz noted there that the issues arising under Art  8  are
    directed to the impact of the deprivation of  citizenship  rather  than
    the individual's removal - a decision yet to be made.  At [73] in Laci,
    Underhill LJ stated:

         "In all ordinary cases deprivation of citizenship  will  indeed  be
         the inevitable outcome of a finding that it was obtained by deceit:
         see para 37 above.  The appellant can muster a number of points  in
         his favour, but most of them could not, whether  by  themselves  or
         cumulatively,  outweigh  the  obvious  strong  public  interest  in
         depriving him of a status of fundamental importance to which he was
         not entitled".

82. In this appeal, the  judge  did  consider  all  the  circumstances  put
    forward on the appellant's behalf including the  differential  decision
    made in relation to his brother.  However, the  judge  also  took  into
    account that the appellant was an adult when he applied for ILR as well
    as when he applied for citizenship and was, as a result,  complicit  in
    the "ongoing  deception  which  continued  throughout  the  appellant's
    application for citizenship" (see para 20).  There was, undoubtedly,  a
    very  strong  public  interest  based  upon  the  sustained   deception
    practised by the appellant over a  period  of  time  and  a  number  of
    applications.

83. At para 27, the judge said this:

         "This is a difficult case, not least of all because the appellant's
         younger brother by 18 months has not been deprived  of  citizenship
         but it would be reasonable to presume that the only reason for such
         was due to the age of the  younger  brother  at  the  time  of  the
         initial application and subsequently.  I  am  also  satisfied  that
         this appellant has been  in  a  long  term  relationship  with  his
         current partner for a number of years and that there is  one  child
         of the family  aged  approximately  2  years  and  the  partner  is
         currently pregnant with a child expected in or around August  2021.
         I am also satisfied that during the years that this  appellant  has
         been in the United Kingdom he has conducted  himself  with  credit,
         obtaining a number of academic qualifications and seeking a variety
         of different jobs in order to financially support himself.  I weigh
         all these factors in  mind  before  reaching  a  decision  in  this
         matter".

84. At para 28, the judge concluded as follows:

         "It is of course significant that this appellant was an adult  when
         he  persisted  with  his  deception  in  order  to   gain   British
         citizenship.   This  was  clearly  an  attempt  to  undermine   the
         immigration system in this country and notwithstanding the  valiant
         submissions made by [Counsel] on behalf  of  the  appellant,  I  am
         satisfied  that  deprivation  is  a  proportionate   and   balanced
         response.

         Taking into account the duty under Section 55 of the 2009 Act I  am
         satisfied that the best interests of the appellant's young daughter
         are not infringed by the decision of  the  respondent.   I  am  not
         satisfied that the child  would  suffer  by  the  appellant  losing
         British citizenship, whilst accepting that for a period of time the
         appellant would lose the rights and benefits of a  British  citizen
         which for a period of time would include  loss  of  employment  and
         entitlement to a driving licence and other state benefits which  he
         might be entitled to flowing from citizenship.  While in the United
         Kingdom the appellant has been able to benefit from  the  education
         system despite his deception.

         The appellant is a national of Albania who has parents  and  family
         continuing to live  in  that  country.   I  remind  myself  of  the
         decision in the aforementioned case of Hysaj [2020], and that there
         is a 'heavy weight  to  be  placed  upon  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining integrity of the system by which foreign nationals  are
         naturalised  and  permitted  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of   British
         citizenship, any effect on day-to-day life that may result  from  a
         person being deprived of British citizenship is  a  consequence  of
         that person's fraud or deception and, without more, cannot tip  the
         proportionality balance so as to compel the Respondent to  grant  a
         period of leave, whether short or otherwise'.

         Having considered all the evidence before me  I  am  not  satisfied
         that the proportionality balance has been tipped in favour  of  the
         appellant compelling the Respondent to grant a period of  leave  to
         this appellant.  I would only wish to reiterate that case  law  and
         statutory provisions are of significance  importance  in  decisions
         such as these, and whilst I am satisfied the  appellant  has  acted
         with credit and resourcefulness while in this country subsequent to
         his deception, I find that the  evidence  before  me  supports  the
         public interest in deprivation of citizenship and that this  appeal
         must fail".

85. I see nothing that could conceivably give rise to an error  of  law  in
    the judge's reasoning under Art 8 which, of course, must be read across
    to  his  finding  that  discretion  should  be  exercised  against  the
    appellant.

86. Having properly assessed the application of the respondent's policy  to
    the appellant and, by contrast,  his  brother,  the  judge  could  only
    conclude that the decision was in accordance with that policy  and,  on
    any basis of differential  treatment,  could  not  be  shown  to  be  a
    disproportionate decision.  I do not accept Ms Foot's  submission  that
    it is not possible to  discern  why  there  were  not  any  "mitigating
    factors" which  rendered  deprivation  unfair  and  unreasonable.   The
    judge's assessment is detailed, considering all the  evidence,  and  he
    carried out the balancing exercise required for proportionality  having
    regard to the strong public interest as a  result  of  the  appellant's
    fraud  or  false  representation  in  obtaining   British   citizenship
    including maintaining that deception as an adult from the earlier  time
    when he successfully applied for ILR which was a necessary step in  his
    obtaining British citizenship.  The disadvantages which  the  appellant
    would suffer in the UK as a result of his loss of citizenship were,  of
    course, benefits which he was only entitled to because he had  obtained
    that citizenship by fraud.

87. For these reasons, I reject each of the  grounds  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.   The  judge  reached  a  lawful  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal and uphold the respondent's decision to deprive  the
    appellant of  his British citizenship under s.40(3) of  the  BNA  1981.



Decision

88. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.  That
    decision, therefore, stands.

89. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               9 August 2021
