
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00030/2018
                                                               DC/00031/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 19 February 2019          |On 26 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE WAKSMAN
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 HAROON [V]
                                  ANISA [V]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Metzer QC, Counsel
                    instructed by Addison & Khan solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS







    Background

      1. The Appellants appeal under section  40A  British  Nationality  Act
         1981  against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge   Sweet
         promulgated on 28 November 2018 ("the Decision")  dismissing  their
         appeals against the Secretary of State's  decision  dated  15  June
         2018 giving them notice of  intention  to  deprive  them  of  their
         British citizenship on the basis that they used  a  false  identity
         when applying for citizenship.

      2. The Appellants are originally nationals of India.  We do  not  need
         to set out the details of the way in which British citizenship  was
         obtained.  The Appellants accept that they obtained it using  false
         identities.  It is also not disputed that the Appellants have  four
         minor children aged between seventeen and eight years, all of  whom
         are British citizens.  The Respondent has not taken  any  steps  to
         deprive them of citizenship.  They  therefore  remain  entitled  to
         stay in the UK as British nationals.

      3. As is clear from the findings at [25] to [28] of the Decision,  the
         focus of the Appellants'  appeals  is  the  reasonably  foreseeable
         consequences of  deprivation.    In  those  paragraphs,  the  Judge
         considered whether those foreseeable consequences would  involve  a
         breach of the Appellants' human rights  and/or  whether  there  was
         some exceptional feature of the case which  means  that  discretion
         ought to have been exercised differently.  He concluded that  there
         was not and therefore dismissed the appeals.

      4. The Appellants appeal on three grounds.  First, they say  that  the
         reasonably foreseeable consequences  involve  them  being  left  in
         "limbo" which would be a breach of their Article 8 rights and, more
         importantly, those of their four minor children.  Second, they  say
         that the Judge erred in his conclusion that  the  consequences  did
         not impact on the best interests of the children.  Third, they  say
         that it was unfair and unreasonable for the Respondent to  exercise
         discretion to deprive them of citizenship because of his own  delay
         which they say was in the order of three years  and  that,  in  any
         event, that delay fell to be weighed in the balance when  assessing
         the balance against the interference with their Article 8 rights.

      5. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  SPJ
         Buchanan in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "...

             [3] The Grounds of Appeal [GOA] contend that the FTTJ arguably
             erred on three Grounds.

             [4] GOA1: "limbo and reasonably foreseeable consequences".  It
             is contended that the FTTJ did not consider the true impact on
             the  appellant  and  his  children  of  the   deprivation   of
             citizenship.  It is contended  at  (7)  that  in  the  interim
             period the appellant would be  left  without  any  immigration
             status and would have "no leave at all".  It is contended that
             as a person without leave the appellant  would  be  unable  to
             work and unable to rent and that it would be contrary  to  the
             children's best interests for  such  a  state  of  affairs  to
             prevail.

             [5] At [26] of the Decision, the FTTJ states that he does  not
             consider the deprivation  of  citizenship  would  violate  the
             obligations of the UK government under the  Human  Rights  Act
             1998  for  the  reasons  given  in  paragraphs  [27]  +  [28].
             However, the reasons given at [27] and [28] do not discuss the
             issue of financial resources and the  impact  on  the  British
             Citizen children if the appellants are unable to  provide  for
             them financially at some stage in the process.

             [6] No authority is given for the proposition that pending any
             appeal, immigration status would be lost; however,  Article  8
             appears to have been considered by the FTTJ at [27]  and  [28]
             only in relation to matters of separation and/or removal.  The
             reasons read more as conclusions than as reasoned argument.

             [7] For these reasons, it is  arguably  by  reference  to  the
             Grounds of Appeal that there may have been a material error of
             law in the Decision.  I grant permission to appeal."

      6. The appeals come before us to determine whether there is a material
         error of law in the Decision  and  if  so  either  to  re-make  the
         decision or remit the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal  for  that
         purpose.

    Discussion and Conclusions

      7. Before turning to the submissions made and our conclusions,  it  is
         convenient to set out  in  full  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
         Decision where the Judge reaches his findings on the issues:

             "[25]     The burden of proof is  on  the  appellant  and  the
             civil standard of the balance of probabilities  applies.   The
             appellants' history is set out in paragraphs 6-11  above.  The
             appellants have  accepted  their  fraud  in  their  respective
             applications, in particular  their  applications  for  British
             citizenship.  The question for consideration at this appeal is
             whether it is  appropriate  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
             deprive them of their citizenship status.  They  accept  their
             fraud, false representation and concealment of a material fact
             under Section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981.   The
             Secretary of  State  accepts  that  the  four  children,  born
             respectively on 23 June 2001, 5 January 2004, 26 May 2008  and
             15 October 2009 retain their British citizenship,  but  it  is
             the  effect  of  the  appellants'  deception  on   their   own
             citizenship.  The status of their oldest daughter ([N]) is not
             relevant to these appeals as she is now aged 24 and  does  not
             live in the UK.

             [26]      I am satisfied that there was the  necessary  causal
             link between the appellants'  deception  and  their  grant  of
             British citizenship.  Pursuant to BA [2018] the fact that  the
             Secretary  of  State  has  decided  in  the  exercise  of  his
             discretion to deprive the appellants  of  British  citizenship
             will  in  practice  mean  that  the  Tribunal  can  allow  the
             appellants'  appeal   only   if   satisfied   the   reasonably
             foreseeable  consequence  of  deprivation  would  violate  the
             obligations of the UK government under the  Human  Rights  Act
             1998 and/or that there is some exceptional feature of the case
             which means  that  discretion  in  the  sub-section  concerned
             should be exercised differently.   I  consider  that  no  such
             circumstances apply in this case for these reasons.

             [27]      It is accepted that the  appellants'  four  children
             retain their British citizenship and there is  no  attempt  to
             remove their citizenship.  They are  all  at  UK  schools  and
             continuing their current  education.   If  these  appeals  are
             dismissed, the next step will be for the Secretary of State to
             consider removal  and/or  deportation  (as  confirmed  in  the
             refusal letters) and the appellants will  retain  a  right  of
             appeal against any subsequent decision.  There  can  therefore
             be no breach of their Article 8 ECHR rights in  the  meantime,
             because they are not being separated from their children,  nor
             are they being required to return to India.  Nor is there  any
             failure of the Secretary of State in respect of the welfare of
             the children under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009.  I do not consider that  the  three-year
             delay (2015-2018) in the respondent's decision is excessive  -
             and therefore any delay is not material to my decision.

             [28]      In respect of the alleged statelessness due  to  the
             loss of their Indian nationality under Section  40(4)  of  the
             Act, no evidence was provided by the appellants.  In any event
             it was reasonable and  proportionate  for  the  respondent  to
             reach its decision as to deprivation  of  citizenship  in  the
             light of the seriousness of the fraud, the need to protect and
             maintain confidence in  the  UK  immigration  system  and  the
             public  interest  in  preserving  the  legitimacy  of  British
             nationality.  Nor was there any evidence that  the  appellants
             could not reinstate their  Indian  citizenship  if  they  lost
             their British nationality."

      8. Before we turn to the substance of the submissions,  we  record  Mr
         Metzer's complaint that  he  was  provided  with  the  Respondent's
         written submissions only on the morning of the  hearing.   This  is
         contrary to the directions given on 16 January 2019  requiring  the
         Respondent to provide a Rule 24 response by 30 January  2019  which
         was to be sufficiently particularised to stand as the  Respondent's
         skeleton argument.  We also record  Mr  Lindsay's  acceptance  that
         this was not done and his  apology  for  that  oversight.   He  had
         however been able to provide  written  submissions  which  were  of
         assistance to us, coming as they did after Mr Metzer's very helpful
         skeleton argument and in response to it.  Whilst  it  goes  without
         saying that directions are made for the purpose  of  assisting  the
         parties' focus and to assist the Tribunal with its task, we do  not
         consider that the Respondent's non-compliance has on this  occasion
         prejudiced our consideration of the issues nor,  more  importantly,
         the Appellants' ability to prepare their case.

      9. We also wish to clarify one  further  matter  which  arose  in  the
         course of Mr Metzer's submissions  and  that  is  the  position  as
         regards the Appellants' evidence.  As we were obliged to point  out
         to Mr Metzer and as we note below, the Appellants'  evidence  which
         was before the First-tier Tribunal is, in relation  to  the  issues
         which arise from the grounds, virtually  non-existent.   Mr  Metzer
         pointed out that he was not counsel before the First-tier  Tribunal
         nor was he the barrister who drafted the grounds.  However, we were
         not assisted by the lack of any application made to adduce the sort
         of evidence which Mr Metzer indicated might be  forthcoming  if  we
         were to find an error of law.

     10. Mr Metzer said that his solicitors had not presented such  evidence
         at this stage as it would not be admissible.  He is of course right
         to say that such evidence could not be  considered  by  us  at  the
         error  of  law  stage.   However,  it   might   be   pertinent   to
         consideration whether any error would make  a  difference.   It  is
         also inaccurate to say that such evidence is inadmissible  at  this
         stage.  As the original directions sent with the  permission  grant
         make clear, the Tribunal may, if it finds an error of law and  sets
         aside a First-tier Tribunal decision move directly to the re-making
         of the decision.  Indeed, those directions envisage that  this  may
         be the usual course.  As such, those directions  also  provide  for
         the parties to be able to apply under Rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 for further  evidence  to  be
         adduced in the event of re-making.  The further directions given on
         16 January 2019 in this case indicated that  any  such  application
         should be made by no later than 13 February  2019.   That  was  not
         done.

    Ground Three

     11. We begin our consideration of the substance  of  the  grounds  with
         ground three as Mr Metzer accepted that this was not his  strongest
         ground, at least  taken  alone.  We  can  therefore  deal  with  it
         shortly.  Mr Metzer submitted that the Judge failed to explain  why
         a three-year period of delay was not excessive.   He  directed  our
         attention to the case of EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 and the  ways  in  which  delay  can
         impact on the proportionality assessment (see in particular [14] to
         [16] in the speech of Lord Bingham of Cornhill).  We accept that as
         a proposition; it is clearly binding on  us.   However,  the  issue
         here is whether the delay which the Judge says is of  a  three-year
         length from 2015 to 2018 is such  as  to  give  rise  to  a  factor
         relevant to the exercise  of  discretion  and/or  as  part  of  the
         balancing exercise when considering Article 8 ECHR.

     12. As Mr Lindsay pointed out, it is difficult to  categorise  this  as
         delay at all taken in context given that  the  Appellants  admitted
         their fraud only in response to a letter  from  the  Status  Review
         Unit on 19 June 2015 and after they had continued to use the  false
         identities for  all  purposes  for  about  nine  years.   Following
         further enquiries, the decision to deprive them of citizenship  was
         made on 15 June 2018.   The enquiries are set out in more detail at
         [20] to [25] of the Respondent's decision letter although we accept
         that the Judge does not make reference to this as  the  reason  for
         the delay.  However, the question whether the delay  was  excessive
         and therefore a relevant factor to take into account either  as  an
         exceptional factor or as part of the proportionality balance was  a
         matter for the Judge  to  weigh.   We  consider  that  Mr  Metzer's
         submission amounts to requiring the Judge to give reasons  for  his
         reasons.  He did not include delay as a relevant factor because  he
         did not consider the delay to be excessive.  He did not need to  go
         further.




    Grounds One and Two

     13. It is convenient to take grounds one and two together as  there  is
         some overlap between the two.  Before we look at the  substance  of
         these grounds, however, we record our exchange with Mr Metzer about
         whether the "limbo" point was put to Judge Sweet at all.  Mr Metzer
         very frankly accepted that he had been unable to establish  whether
         that had been the Appellants' submission to the Judge.

     14. We have seen a copy of the written submissions made to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge.   Those  do  not  include  a  submission  that
         Article 8 would be  breached  in  the  interim  period  whilst  the
         Respondent  considers  what  further  action  to   take   following
         deprivation.  We note the reference to the First Appellant  working
         and owning his own property as part of the Appellants'  submissions
         recorded at [15] of the Decision.  However, we are quite unable  to
         read that paragraph and the following  paragraph  as  a  submission
         that there would be a period  of  "limbo"  which  would  involve  a
         breach of the Appellants' human  rights  or  would  impact  on  the
         children's well-being.

     15. Mr Metzer submitted however that it was an obvious point  that  the
         Judge should have taken for himself.   He submitted that it is part
         of the responsibility of an immigration judge to identify  what  he
         says is  a  potentially  significant  matter  for  himself  and  if
         necessary to ask  for  further  evidence  to  be  provided  or  for
         submissions to be made.

     16. We pointed out that this would depend on the nature and  extent  of
         the evidence before the Judge.  As we have  already  indicated,  in
         particular  the  witness  evidence  of  the  Appellants   was   not
         extensive.  The statements appear  at  [AB/65-69]  and  [AB/76-80].
         They are mainly concerned with their immigration history and  their
         right to acquire Indian nationality.  There is an  indication  that
         the First Appellant works but what is said about the situation they
         would face if deprived of citizenship is focussed on  the  position
         if they were returned to India.

     17. As we pointed out, therefore, we do not know for  example,  whether
         the children attend state schools or private schools, if  fees  are
         payable for their education and if so the extent of their fees.  We
         do not know whether the  Appellants  face  costs  of  accommodation
         although we do note from the submission made  on  their  behalf  at
         [15] of the Decision that the First Appellant owns  his  own  home.
         Nothing is said there about any mortgage  over  that  property  and
         what amount is payable in that regard (although  we  do  note  that
         there is a mortgage statement in  the  Appellants'  bundle).    The
         Appellants' bundle includes some bank  statements.   Those  of  the
         First Appellant show a balance which  fluctuates  between  a  debit
         balance of several hundred pounds to a credit  balance  of  several
         thousand pounds. He has an overdraft limit of �2,600.  There is  no
         witness evidence from either of the Appellants as  to  their  means
         and ability to support the family during any period when  they  are
         unable to work.  There is no information about what other means  of
         support might be available to the Appellants in the short to medium
         term.  We note for  example  that  the  Appellants  have  an  adult
         daughter who no longer lives in the UK.  We do not know whether she
         may be able to provide some support.  There  may  be  other  family
         members whether in the UK or India who can assist.

     18. As Mr Lindsay pointed out in his oral submissions the effect of  Mr
         Metzer's submission is that we are still being invited to speculate
         on what evidence there may be which could be put forward in support
         of the legal submission.

     19. Further, the lack of such evidence does not point in the  direction
         of the "limbo" point being an obvious point which the Judge  should
         have taken for himself,  particularly  since  the  Appellants  were
         legally  represented  before  the  Judge  and  could  therefore  be
         expected to take the point themselves  if  it  had  any  evidential
         foundation.  Although it may be said that a First-tier Tribunal has
         a  partially  inquisitorial  function,  particularly   as   regards
         protection claims, the system  remains  an  adversarial  one.   The
         burden of proof in these appeals is on the Appellants  to  evidence
         the existence of  and  extent  of  interference  with  their  human
         rights.   It is also convenient for us to record at this  juncture,
         Mr Lindsay's submission by reference to  (i)  of  the  headnote  in
         Ahmed and Others (deprivation of citizenship) [2017] UKUT 118 (IAC)
         that "the onus of making  representations  and  providing  relevant
         evidence  relating  to  a  child's  best  interests  rests  of  the
         appropriate parental figure".

     20. Notwithstanding the above, we allowed  Mr  Metzer  to  develop  his
         submissions  on  this  point  on  the  assumption  that  it  was  a
         submission made or that the Judge should  have  considered  it  for
         himself.

     21. We have set out the  relevant  passage  from  the  Decision  above.
         Although Mr Metzer suggests in his skeleton argument that the Judge
         has misunderstood the test which he had to apply (because  he  says
         that the Judge did not understand the  tests  of  breach  of  human
         rights or other exceptional factors to be in  the  alternative)  we
         did not understand him to make  that  point  in  oral  submissions.
         Indeed, he accepted that the test was correctly set out at [26]  of
         the Decision.  The Judge clearly understood  by  reference  to  the
         words "and/or" that he had to consider either or both  of  the  two
         relevant heads  of  challenge.   The  test  as  there  set  out  is
         precisely the same as  set  out  at  [4]  of  the  headnote  in  BA
         (deprivation of citizenship: appeals) [2018] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

     22. Mr Metzer's submissions were focussed rather on what he said was  a
         failure properly to apply the test, a failure to  provide  adequate
         reasons for the conclusion that the two heads of challenge were not
         met and a failure to take into account whether  there  would  be  a
         breach of human rights or impact on the children's  best  interests
         in the interim period.  In essence, he  says  that  the  Judge  has
         failed to engage with the point that the Appellants will be  unable
         to work and provide for their children whilst they have no leave.

     23. As Mr Metzer points out, there is  authority  for  the  proposition
         that  the  Appellants  will  be  without  leave  once  deprived  of
         citizenship.  That is to be found at (3)  of  the  headnote  to  AB
         (British citizenship: deprivation; Deliallisi  considered)  Nigeria
         [2016] UKUT 00451 (IAC) which applies by analogy the  case  law  in
         relation  to  deportation  appeals  following  the  Supreme   Court
         judgment in R (George) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2014] UKSC  28.   Whilst  we  are  unaware  of  any  higher  court
         authority in support of that proposition in deprivation  cases,  we
         are content to assume that AB is correctly decided and, unless  and
         until overturned, we should  follow  it  as  a  reported  case.  We
         therefore assume that the Appellants will be without  leave  during
         the period whilst the  Respondent  considers  what  further  action
         should be taken.

     24. However, that point has no direct relevance to the  correctness  of
         the  Decision  as  the  point  is  raised  only  in  the  grant  of
         permission.   As  Mr  Lindsay  also  points  out  in  his   written
         submissions, the assumption said to have been made at [5]  and  [9]
         of the Appellants' grounds by reference to [23] of the Decision  is
         misconceived as the Judge  was  there  recording  the  Respondent's
         submission and not his view of the position.   We do not read  what
         is said at [27] of the Decision as involving  any  assumption  that
         the  Appellants  would  have  leave  during  that  interim  period.
         Indeed, quite the opposite.  We infer from what is there said  that
         the Judge was well aware that this would be the position.

     25. The Respondent in his decision letter sets out the  next  steps  in
         the event that the Appellants'  appeals  are  unsuccessful  in  the
         following terms:

             "[44]     Once deprived of citizenship you become  subject  to
             immigration control and so may  be  removed  from  the  UK  or
             prevented from returning  to  the  UK  if  deprivation  action
             occurs whilst you are abroad.  Consideration may also be given
             on whether a limited form of leave may be given.   A  decision
             on this matter will follow once the deprivation order is made.

             [45]      In order to provide  clarify  regarding  the  period
             between loss of citizenship via service of a deprivation order
             and the further decision to remove, deport or grant leave, the
             Secretary of State notes this period will be relatively short:

                    . A deprivation order will be made within four weeks of
                      your appeal rights being  exhausted,  or  receipt  of
                      written confirmation from you or your  representative
                      that you will not appeal this decision, whichever  is
                      the sooner.

                    . Within eight weeks from the deprivation  order  being
                      made, subject to any representations you may make,  a
                      further decision will be made either  to  remove  you
                      from the United Kingdom, commence deportation  action
                      (only if you have less than 18 months of a  custodial
                      sentence to serve or have already been released  from
                      prison), or issue leave."

     26. As we read [27] of the Decision, the Judge did have regard to  what
         would happen following deprivation and in  consequence  of  it  and
         specifically to the prospect that  removal  or  deportation  action
         would be considered alongside the possibility of a grant  of  leave
         to remain within a very short time.  It was that  period  which  he
         was considering when he said that there would not be any breach  of
         the Appellants' rights in that period because  they  would  not  be
         separated from their children and would remain in the UK.

     27. Similarly, it is in relation to that short period  that  the  Judge
         was required to consider the best interests of  the  children.   We
         have  already  referred  to  the  paucity  of  evidence  about  the
         circumstances of the family in the short interim period.  There  is
         even less said about the children other than that they are  British
         citizens.  Judge Sweet  records  at  [16]  the  submission  of  the
         Appellants' representative that  "[t]here  will  be  a  detrimental
         impact on the children if  the  appellants'  citizenship  is  taken
         away" but there is no development of that submission  by  reference
         to the possible impacts.   The  Judge  records  also  at  [15]  the
         submission that the children are "well established in the  UK"  and
         reference is there made to  school  reports.   However,  the  Judge
         deals with that at [27] of the Decision where he  points  out  that
         the children will continue their education in the UK and  that  the
         Respondent has no intention  of  removing  their  citizenship.   In
         light of the lack of evidence as to consequences for  the  children
         in the short, interim period, there is  no  error  in  the  Judge's
         conclusion at [27] that the children's welfare will be safeguarded.



     28. Nor do we understand, contrary to what is suggested at [25]  of  Mr
         Metzer's  skeleton  argument,  that  the  Judge   relied   on   the
         Appellants' poor  conduct  when  considering  the  children's  best
         interests.  The Judge's conclusion is simply that, on the evidence,
         there would be no impact and that those  best  interests  would  be
         safeguarded.

     29. Mr Metzer also raises a further  issue  at  [27]  of  his  skeleton
         argument concerning the different position of the Second  Appellant
         from that of the First Appellant as to  the  extent  of  the  fraud
         perpetrated.  However, this is not a point raised  in  the  grounds
         nor, so far as we can see, in submissions before Judge  Sweet.   It
         is not a point which the Appellants have permission to argue.

     30. For the above reasons, we are satisfied that the Decision does  not
         contain an error of law.  It follows that we  uphold  the  Decision
         with the consequence that the Appellants' appeals remain dismissed.



    DECISION

    We are satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material error of
    law.  We  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet
    promulgated  on  28  November  2018  with  the  consequence  that   the
    Appellants' appeals stand dismissed


    Signed [pic] Dated: 22 February 2019
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


    Signed [pic]
    Mr Justice Waksman
