
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00043/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Business                             |                                      |
|On 6 October 2020                    |On 16 October 2020                    |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                ARBEN BURGAJ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S Kerr, Counsel, Karis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant  is  a  national  of  Albania.  His  appeal  against  the
    respondent's  decision  to  deprive  him  of  British  citizenship  was
    initially allowed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Callow) by means of a decision sent to the parties on  24  May
    2019. The respondent was granted permission to appeal to this  Tribunal
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 10 July  2019.  Following  a  hearing
    held at Field House, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt set aside  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal by a  decision  dated  30  August  2019  and
    decided that the decision would be remade by this Tribunal.

 2. Consequent to an application by the appellant, UTJ Pitt stayed  further
    consideration of this appeal pending consideration of related issues by
    a  Presidential  panel.  The  decision   in   Hysaj   (Deprivation   of
    Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 00128 (IAC) was promulgated on 19 March
    2020.

 3. I issued directions on 3 June 2020 indicating my preliminary view  that
    this was a suitable matter to be conducted by remote  hearing.  Neither
    party objected to such approach.

 4. The resumed hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference
    hearing held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in  a  hearing
    room at Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the
    public. The hearing and its start time were listed in the daily list. I
    was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as  if  we
    were  together  in  the  hearing  room.  I  am  satisfied:  that   this
    constituted a hearing in open court; that the  open  justice  principle
    has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that,  insofar
    as there has been any  restriction  on  a  right  or  interest,  it  is
    justified as necessary and proportionate.

 5. The  parties  agreed  that  all  relevant  documents  were  before  the
    Tribunal.  The  video  and  audio  link  were  connected  between   the
    representatives and the Tribunal throughout the hearing, save  for  the
    initial connection to Mr. Kerr being initially subject to a few seconds
    of interruption. Upon Mr. Kerr removing his  earphones  the  connection
    improved and all involved were able to see and hear each other. At  the
    conclusion of the hearing both parties confirmed that the  hearing  had
    been completed fairly.

 6. The appellant attended the hearing remotely. No member  of  the  public
    attended the hearing, either remotely or in person at Field House.

Anonymity

 7. No anonymity direction was issued by the First-tier Tribunal or by  UTJ
    Pitt and no application for such direction was made before me.

Background

 8. The appellant was born in Skhoder, Albania and is presently aged 45. He
    initially entered the United Kingdom on 10  October  1997  and  claimed
    asylum. He falsely asserted that he  was  a  national  of  the  Federal
    Republic of Yugoslavia, hailing from Gjakova, Kosovo,  and  provided  a
    date of birth that was 6 days prior to his  true  date  of  birth.  The
    United  Kingdom  recognised  the  appellant  as   a   refugee   fleeing
    persecution at the hands of the  Serbian  majority  in  Yugoslavia  and
    granted him indefinite leave to remain in  this  country  on  11  April
    2000. The appellant was subsequently naturalised as a  British  citizen
    on 28 January 2003.

 9. The appellant married his wife, an Albanian national, in Albania on  17
    November  2011.  Their  marriage  certificate  correctly  details   the
    appellant's true date and place  of  birth.  The  appellant  wished  to
    support his wife's lawful entry into this country and so instructed his
    legal representatives to write to the respondent and request  that  his
    naturalisation certificate be amended to record his true date and place
    of birth. A letter detailing the same was sent to the respondent on  22
    March 2012. In making such request, by which  he  identified  his  true
    nationality and the untruth as to his purported history of persecution,
    the appellant asserted that he did not  fall  for  deprivation  of  his
    British citizenship consequent to Chapter 55.7.2.5 of the then existing
    Nationality Instructions,  to  be  read  in  conjunction  with  Chapter
    55.7.2.6.

10. The respondent issued a decision on  22  February  2013  declaring  the
    appellant's naturalisation to be a nullity  because  he  had  falsified
    elements of his identity when he applied for British  citizenship.  The
    appellant challenged  this  decision  by  judicial  review  proceedings
    initiated on 14 May 2013.

11. By its judgment in R  (Hysaj)  v.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 82,  [2018]  1  W.L.R.  221  the  Supreme  Court
    confirmed that the gradual developments of the law as  to  the  nullity
    approach to grants of citizenship following R. v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department Ex p. Mahmood (Sultan) [1981] Q.B. 58 were  wrongly
    decided and that where a person was considered  for  naturalisation  by
    the respondent in their false identity and granted citizenship in  that
    identity, such grant was valid albeit that the person  might  later  be
    deprived of it under s.40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981  ('the
    1981 Act').

12. Consequent to the Supreme Court judgment the  respondent  reviewed  her
    nullity decision in relation to the appellant and notified  him  on  26
    February 2018 that the decision was withdrawn. The  respondent  decided
    by means of a decision dated 28 August 2018 to deprive the appellant of
    his British citizenship.

Application for a stay of proceedings

13. I observe the headnote to the Tribunal decision in Hysaj:

          1) The starting point in  any  consideration  undertaken  by  the
             Secretary of State ("the respondent") as to whether to deprive
             a person of British citizenship must be made by  reference  to
             the rules and policy in force at  the  time  the  decision  is
             made. Rule of law  values  indicate  that  the  respondent  is
             entitled to take advice and act in light of the state  of  law
             and the circumstances known to her. The benefit of  hindsight,
             post the Supreme Court judgment in R (Hysaj) v.  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 82, does not  lessen
             the significant public interest in the deprivation of  British
             citizenship acquired through fraud or deception.

          2) No legitimate expectation  arises  that  consideration  as  to
             whether or not to deprive citizenship is to be  undertaken  by
             the application of a historic policy that was in  place  prior
             to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hysaj.

          3) No historic injustice is capable of arising  in  circumstances
             where the respondent erroneously declared British  citizenship
             to be a nullity, rather than seek  to  deprive  under  section
             40(3) of the British Nationality Act  1981,  as  no  prejudice
             arises because it is not possible to establish that a decision
             to deprive should have been  taken  under  a  specific  policy
             within a specific period of time.

          4) The respondent's  14-year  policy  under  her  deprivation  of
             citizenship policy, which was withdrawn  on  20  August  2014,
             applied a continuous residence requirement that was broken  by
             the imposition of a custodial sentence.

          5) A refugee is to meet the requirement of article 1A(2)  of  the
             1951 UN Refugee Convention and a person  cannot  have  enjoyed
             Convention status if recognition was consequent to an entirely
             false presentation as to a well-founded fear of persecution.

          6) Upon deprivation of British citizenship, there is no automatic
             revival of previously held indefinite leave to remain status.

          7) There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the public  interest
             in maintaining the integrity of the system  by  which  foreign
             nationals are naturalised and permitted to enjoy the  benefits
             of British citizenship. Any effect on day-to-day life that may
             result from a person being deprived of British citizenship  is
             a consequence of the that person's  fraud  or  deception  and,
             without more, cannot tip the proportionality balance, so as to
             compel the respondent to grant  a  period  of  leave,  whether
             short or otherwise.

14. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Kerr applied for a stay of proceedings
    pending consideration of an application for permission to appeal to the
    Court of Appeal by the appellant in Hysaj. He relied  upon  an  undated
    written application for a stay filed with the Tribunal on 23 June  2020
    which had not been considered by the Tribunal to date. The  application
    detailed at para. 8:

         '8.  It has of course been the intention of the Upper  Tribunal  to
             be in a position of legal clarity when considering the  appeal
             of this appellant (and others). It is therefore submitted that
             it would be beneficial for the  Tribunal  to  wait  until  the
             outcome of the application for  permission  to  appeal  before
             proceeding with this appeal.'

15. I was informed that the Tribunal had recently refused the appellant  in
    Hysaj permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal and  he  was  in  the
    process of filing an onward appeal. Though no appeal had been lodged to
    date, Mr. Kerr confirmed that he had been informed by junior counsel to
    Mr. Hysaj that the relevant time limit for filing a  notice  of  appeal
    had not yet expired.

16. I refused the application for a stay of proceedings at the hearing.  As
    observed by the Court of Appeal in R (AB (Sudan)) v. Secretary of State
    for the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  921  the  power  to  stay
    immigration  cases  pending  a  future  appellate  decision  is  to  be
    exercised cautiously and  only  when  necessary  in  the  interests  of
    justice. The fact that the identification of the true position  of  the
    law may possibly change in the near or medium future is not usually  an
    appropriate reason for staying proceedings. I observed at  the  hearing
    that the appeal in Hysaj was considered by a Presidential panel and the
    President subsequently refused permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal. Further, an appeal has not yet been filed  with  the  Court  of
    Appeal and this Tribunal  remains  unaware  as  to  whether  a  general
    challenge will be initiated or one in which the purported error of  law
    arises from facts personal to Mr. Hysaj.

Decision

17. By means of his concise and helpful submissions Mr.  Kerr  accepted  on
    behalf of the appellant that the decision in Hysaj was to  be  followed
    by this Tribunal, though he confirmed that it was not accepted  by  the
    appellant as correctly identifying the law.

18. Mr. Kerr submitted the core of the appellant's case as being  that  the
    respondent had known of his deception since March 2012 and there was  a
    delay in failing to consider his matter prior to 21 August 2014 under a
    previous policy, which the appellant asserts was favourable to him  and
    from which he could have benefitted because he had been present in this
    country for 14 years by October 2011.

19. The appellant posits that the  relevant  Chapter  55  'Deprivation  and
    nullity of British citizenship' policy existing at such time  provided,
    inter alia:

         55.7.2.5.     In general the Secretary of State will not deprive of
                  British citizenship in the following circumstances:

                  ...

                    . If a person has been resident in the  United  Kingdom
                      for more than 14 years we will not  normally  deprive
                      of citizenship

                  ...

20. Consequently, Mr. Kerr submitted that two features  of  satisfying  the
    test for a historic injustice were met; that there has been  a  legally
    flawed prior decision, and that there is a  casual  connection  between
    that decision and the historic injustice. He noted that at the time the
    respondent  was  erroneously  considering  the  appellant's  matter  on
    nullity grounds  she  should  have  been  considering  her  powers  and
    attendant policies under section 40(3) of the 1981 Act. I am  satisfied
    that this submission lacks merit upon consideration of paras. 61 and 63
    of Hysaj:

         '61. We are satisfied that the adoption  of  such  an  approach  to
             limit the application of the public interest  based  on  delay
             alone is unsustainable as it seeks to deny any true engagement
             with  the  facts  that  arise.  The  respondent  was   clearly
             permitted to rely upon legal advice. The starting point in any
             consideration undertaken by the respondent as  to  whether  to
             deprive the appellant of British citizenship must be  made  by
             reference to the rules and policy in force  at  the  time  the
             decision was taken, and such rules and policy will abide  with
             relevant precedent, as understood. The respondent was entitled
             to rely upon the then favourable judgment in Kadria from which
             permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  had   been
             subsequently refused at an oral hearing,  and  indeed  did  so
             rely before both the High  Court  and  the  Court  of  Appeal.
             Though Akhtar and subsequent Court of  Appeal  judgments  that
             relied upon it cannot, with the benefit of hindsight post- the
             Supreme Court judgment in Hysaj, be considered to have finally
             and definitively settled the law the respondent and her  legal
             advisors were entitled  to  observe  the  application  of  the
             doctrine of precedent. The respondent needs to have  means  of
             assessing the legality of her actions at a particular time, in
             order to know what her legal  duty  is.  Rule  of  law  values
             indicate that the respondent should be entitled to take advice
             and act in light of the circumstances known to  her,  and  the
             state of the law, as then known: R. (on the application of MH)
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWHC  2506
             (Admin), per Sales J, at [105]; approved Fardous v.  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 931, at  [42]
             per Lord Thomas CJ. When defending  her  decision  before  the
             Court of Appeal the respondent  was  reasonably  permitted  to
             place reliance upon the principle that the Court of Appeal  is
             obliged  to  follow  one  of  its  previous  decisions  unless
             specific exceptions arise, such  as  the  judgment  being  per
             incuriam: Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd [1946] AC 163.'

         ...

         63.  We are satisfied that whilst the respondent had  knowledge  of
             the fraud in 2007 and a  decision  to  deprive  under  section
             40(3) was only taken in 2018, such delay did  not  arise  from
             illegality on behalf of the respondent nor did it arise from a
             dysfunctional system yielding unpredictable  and  inconsistent
             outcomes. ...'

21. Mr. Kerr asserted at the hearing that the respondent  was  required  to
    make a decision as to deprivation within a 'reasonable period' of  time
    and that such time  should  be  relatively  short.  However,  Mr.  Kerr
    candidly accepted that he could not point to any  authority  supporting
    such position and further acknowledged that the decision of  Collins  J
    in R (FH) v. Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2007]  EWHC
    1571 (Admin) was not supportive of such approach. As  observed  by  the
    Tribunal in Hysaj, at [74], the respondent was  lawfully  permitted  to
    rely upon a favourable High Court judgment as well as previous Court of
    Appeal precedent when considering whether to  declare  the  appellant's
    naturalisation a nullity rather than consider whether to deprive him of
    such citizenship under the 1981 Act and attendant policy.

22. Observing [74] of the Tribunal's decision in  Hysaj  Mr.  Kerr  submits
    that the appellant is not seeking to disapply a current policy.  Rather
    the appellant wants recognition that he could, and  Mr.  Kerr  suggests
    'possibly should', have benefitted from the previous  policy  and  that
    this can amount to an exceptional feature entitling a judge  to  decide
    that discretion should be exercised differently.  This  submission  was
    unsuccessfully argued by the  appellant  in  Hysaj  with  the  Tribunal
    observing at [67}:

         '67. Lord Hoffman confirmed in R (on the application of Bancoult) v
             Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2008]
             UKHL 61; [2009] 1 A.C.  453,  at  [60],  that  a  claim  to  a
             legitimate expectation can be based only upon a promise  which
             is 'clear, unambiguous and devoid of relevant  qualification.'
             We observe the use of the qualifying words  'in  general'  and
             'normally' within Chapter 55.7.2.5 [later  renumbered  Chapter
             55.7.5] and  the  additional  qualification  that  the  public
             interest may still require deprivation even if the  identified
             circumstances militating against deprivation are  established.
             We are satisfied that the provisions in Chapter 55 relied upon
             by the appellant do not  establish  a  clear  and  unambiguous
             promise that by reaching the fourteenth year  of  residence  a
             person will not be deprived of their citizenship because it is
             clear that the respondent qualified the identified  exceptions
             where deprivation will not normally occur so as to permit  her
             to weigh the public interest in proceeding to deprive with the
             individual facts  arising.  The  only  legitimate  expectation
             enjoyed by the appellant is that his case would be treated  in
             accordance with the law and policy in place at  the  time  the
             relevant decision  was  made.  Consequently,  the  appellant's
             submission that he enjoyed  a  legitimate  expectation  to  be
             treated in a particular  way  under  an  earlier  policy  must
             fail.'

23. In such circumstances the  appellant's  appeal  on  historic  injustice
    grounds must fail.

24. The appellant further asserts that the decision to deprive him  of  his
    British citizenship disproportionately interferes with both his and his
    family's protected article 8 rights. Mr. Kerr details by  his  skeleton
    argument, dated 22 June 2020, at paras. 30-31:

         '30. Without leave, [the appellant] would not be entitled  to  work
             and this would have the disproportionate effect of  preventing
             the appellant from providing for his  family  and  maintaining
             the well-being of his children. It is in the gift of the  SSHD
             to make simultaneous decisions  (a  deprivation  order  and  a
             grant/removal decision) as she had in other  cases,  which  in
             turn would  militate  against  the  appellant's  rights  under
             article 8 ECHR being breached. However, the SSHD has not given
             such  an  indication  in  this  case,  thereby  exposing   the
             appellant and his family  to  a  position  where  they  cannot
             support themselves.

         31.  The SSHD cannot provide any good  or  justifiable  reason  for
             allowing  this  period  between  a   deprivation   order   and
             subsequent immigration decision to emerge. The SSHD has  given
             clear representation in other cases that this so-called period
             of 'limbo' can be prevented  by  simultaneous  decisions.  The
             current  procedure  in  this  appeal  therefore  breaches  the
             appellant's rights protected by article 8 ECHR.'

25. The appellant's  family  matrix  shares  many  of  the  characteristics
    enjoyed by Mr. Hysaj with his family. The appellant's  wife  unlawfully
    entered this country in 2014 with their eldest child who  was  born  in
    Albania but is a British citizen by descent. That  child  is  presently
    aged 7. The appellant's wife was granted leave to remain for 30  months
    from 12 June 2018 and so she is lawfully entitled to work. Two  further
    children were born in the United Kingdom and are British citizens. They
    are presently aged 5 and 3.

26. I agree with Mr. Clarke as to the paucity of evidence provided  by  the
    appellant as to his business and present  accommodation.  The  asserted
    impact  of  the  claimed  deprivation  upon  the   family   is   wholly
    unparticularised with no cogent evidence as to  whether  the  appellant
    owns the family home or is renting,  what  savings  the  family  enjoy,
    whether his wife works, the value of the business and whether there are
    staff who can run the business on behalf of the appellant. Further,  as
    the Tribunal held in Hysaj upon  considering  a  very  similar  factual
    scenario, at [108] to [110]

         '108.    The Court of Appeal has confirmed that article 8 does  not
             impose any obligation upon  the  State  to  provide  financial
             support for family life. The ECHR is  not  aimed  at  securing
             social and economic rights,  with  the  rights  defined  being
             predominantly civil  and  political  in  nature:  R.  (on  the
             application of SC) v Secretary of State for Work and  Pensions
             [2019] EWCA Civ 615; [2019] 1 W.L.R. 5687, at  [28]-[38].  The
             State is not required to grant leave to an individual so  that
             they can work and provide their family with material support.

         109. The time period between  deprivation  and  the  issuing  of  a
             decision is identified by the respondent as being between  six
             to eight weeks. During  such  time  the  appellant's  wife  is
             permitted to work. She accepted before us that she could  seek
             employment. She expressed concern as to the impact her limited
             English language skills may have on  securing  employment  but
             confirmed that she  could  secure  unskilled  employment.  She
             confirmed that her husband could remain at home and look after
             their children. The appellant accepted that his wife is  named
             on the joint tenancy and will continue to be able to  lawfully
             rent their home upon his loss of citizenship  and  status.  In
             addition, the children can  access  certain  benefits  through
             their citizenship. Two safety nets exist for  the  family.  If
             there is an immediate and significant downturn in the family's
             finances such as to impact upon the health and development  of
             the children, they can seek support under section  17  of  the
             Children Act 1989. If the family become  destitute,  or  there
             are particularly compelling reasons relating to the welfare of
             the children on account of very low  income,  the  appellant's
             wife may apply for a change to her No Recourse to Public Funds
             (NRPF) condition.

         110. There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the public  interest
             in maintaining the integrity of the system  by  which  foreign
             nationals are naturalised and permitted to enjoy the  benefits
             of British citizenship. That deprivation will cause disruption
             in day-to-day life is a consequence  of  the  appellant's  own
             actions  and  without  more,  such  as  the  loss  of   rights
             previously enjoyed, cannot possibly  tip  the  proportionality
             balance in favour of his retaining the benefits of citizenship
             that he fraudulently secured. That is the essence of what  the
             appellant  seeks  through  securing  limited   leave   pending
             consideration by the respondent as to  whether  he  should  be
             deported. Although the  appellant's  family  members  are  not
             culpable, their interests are not such, either individually or
             cumulatively, as to outweigh the  strong  public  interest  in
             this case.'

27. Whilst Mr. Kerr sought with his usual skill and good humour to  advance
    a meritorious case on article 8 grounds, it simply  cannot  succeed  at
    the present time. This is not only because of  the  decision  in  Hysaj
    upon very similar facts but  also  because  of  the  dearth  of  cogent
    evidence filed in this matter that comes nowhere near establishing  the
    purported concerns advanced as being  likely  to  arise  in  the  short
    period of time the respondent acknowledged in Hysaj, at [102], that  it
    would take for a decision to be  made  upon  a  grant  of  leave  or  a
    decision to remove following deprivation. Such time was identified as 8
    weeks, subject to any representations received.

28. In the circumstances the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to deprive him of his British citizenship is dismissed.



Notice of decision

29. By means of a decision sent to the  parties  on  30  August  2019  this
    Tribunal set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  24  May  2019
    pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal,  Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007.

30. The decision is re-made, and the appellant's appeal against a  decision
    of the respondent to deprive him of British citizenship is dismissed.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 9 October 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appellant did not pay a fee, and the appeal has been dismissed.  No  fee
award is made.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 9 October 2020

