
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00012/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th May 2016                              |On 3rd June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Ameer hamsa mohamed jamaludeen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Jeganathan, instructed by Acculegal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Oakley,
    promulgated on 8 February 2016 after a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on  11
    January 2016.  The circumstances by which this came to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are that the Sri Lankan Appellant was appealing a Decision  of
    the  Secretary  of  State  to  remove  his  British  citizenship.   The
    Secretary of State had  taken  the  decision  on  the  basis  that  she
    believed the grant of Indefinite Leave  to  Remain,  which  formed  the
    basis of his grant of citizenship, was  fraudulent.   She  believed  so
    because a verification stamp on the letter was, it was claimed, not  in
    use after July 2004 yet the date on the letter was  March  2005.  After
    the decision, the  Appellant,  who  denied  any  fraud,  contacted  the
    Secretary of State asking for Ms Curtis's signature, which appeared  on
    the letter, to be verified.  The Secretary of State did  nothing  about
    that.

 2. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal, all  the  evidence
    the Secretary of State adduced  was  a  witness  statement  from  a  Mr
    Richard John Anthony Jeal. It was his evidence that the  stamp  was  no
    longer in use at the date of the letter granting  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain.  However, as the Judge pointed out, that witness did not attend
    and was not available to be questioned.  On the other  hand  there  was
    evidence from CID, the Secretary of State's computer system, indicating
    a grant of Exceptional Leave to Remain  to  the  Appellant,  which  the
    Secretary of State said was a mistake.  There was evidence,  also  from
    CID, that the Appellant had no restrictions on his leave,  which  would
    indicate a grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain.  The Secretary of State
    was relying therefore upon a statement from a caseworker  who  was  not
    present in court and on the absence of any documentation in  her  files
    indicating a grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain.

 3. The Judge  in  his  Decision  noted  those  matters  and  quite  simply
    preferred the evidence adduced and argued on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    over that on behalf of the Secretary of State. I can find no  error  of
    law in that.  Certainly it was not a perverse finding; it was  open  to
    the Judge on the evidence in front of him.  In such cases the burden of
    proof rests with the Secretary of State and in this case  there  was  a
    very serious allegation of fraud which if  proven  could  have  led  to
    criminal proceedings and the incarceration of the Appellant  concerned.
    That is not to say that the criminal standard of proof applied in  this
    case; it was the balance of probabilities but nevertheless  the  burden
    of establishing even on that basis rests with the  Secretary  of  State
    and she had signally failed to adduce satisfactory  evidence  to  cross
    that threshold. The Appellant had quite clearly set out  his  story  in
    terms  of  the  basis  upon  which  he  was  defending  the  case.   He
    specifically asked for verification of the signature. The Secretary  of
    State chose to ignore that completely whereas  it  would  have  been  a
    simple matter for Ms Curtis to have made a statement with regard to the
    signature. If the Secretary of State wishes  to  win  appeals  of  this
    nature then she needs to put the evidence forward in order to do so.

Notice of Decision

 4. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1st June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
