
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00145/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 September 2021                           |On 28 September 2021          |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          YASSIN MOHAMMED HUSSEINI

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant/Secretary of State for the Home Department: Mr D. Clarke,
                    Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Hamilton Rees
Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the Respondent as the Appellant as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


 2. The Appellant's appeal against the decision of the SSHD  on  9  October
    2019 to make an order depriving him of British citizenship pursuant  to
    Section 40 of British Nationality Act 1981 was allowed by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal A P Higgins in a determination that was promulgated
    on 21 April 2021.  The SSHD was granted permission to appeal by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 14 May 2021.  The matter came  before  me
    on 8 September 2021 to determine whether the judge made an error of law
    when allowing the Appellant's appeal.


 3. The Appellant first entered the UK on 28 September  2006  when  he  was
    aged 16.  He made an asylum claim. He said he was a  citizen  of  Iran.
    The application was refused. He was granted discretionary leave (DL) on
    account of him being an unaccompanied  minor.   On  27  March  2008  he
    applied for an extension of DL.  He was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain (ILR) on 18 August 2010 based on the length of time in the  UK.
    He made an application for naturalisation as a British  citizen  on  13
    September 2011.  His application was approved and he became  a  British
    citizen on 29 November 2011.


 4. The SSHD's case is that the Appellant submitted  documents  in  support
    his son's passport application to Her Majesty's Postal Office (HMPO) in
    2014 which indicated that he, the Appellant was born  in  Erbil,  Iraq,
    while he had maintained in his previous dealings with the SSHD that  he
    had been born in Iran and British citizenship had been granted on  that
    basis.  HMPO referred  the  case  to  the  SSHD.  In  response  to  the
    correspondence (an investigation letter of 25 September 2019) from  the
    SSHD following the application to HMPO, the Appellant submitted further
    evidence which the SSHD considered to be fraudulent.


 5. The Appellant at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  relied  on
    the evidence in his witness statement which is in a  nutshell  that  he
    had paid for a false Iraqi residence card which he submitted  to  HMPO.
    He had applied for this because he did not want to disclose his Iranian
    nationality to his Iraqi father-in-law.  However he maintains  that  he
    is a citizen of Iran.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 6. The judge recorded that the Appellant's barrister,  Mr  Iqbal  conceded
    that the SSHD had discharged the evidential  burden  on  her  and  that
    there is a case for the Appellant  to  answer.   The  judge  took  into
    account that the Appellant had not produced any documentary evidence in
    support of his claim to have been born in Iran.  He found that  it  was
    "difficult to understand" why the Appellant would not have explored the
    possibility of approaching the Iranian authorities or the Red Cross  in
    relation to contacting his family.  The judge also  took  into  account
    the manner in which the Appellant chose to respond to the Secretary  of
    State's letter informing him that she was  considering  deprivation  of
    citizenship.  He found that the Appellant instead chose to "obfuscate".
     However the judge went on to make the following findings:-


         "35.     That said, there  is  considerable  force  in  Mr  Iqbal's
             response to the Respondent's suggestion in her  decision  that
             documents he had submitted may not have  been  authentic.   If
             the Appellant had lied  about  his  place  of  birth  and  his
             nationality from 2006 until 2011, and in the application for a
             passport he subsequently made  on  his  son's  behalf,  he  is
             unlikely to have submitted false documents in  support  of  it
             which  undermined  his  claims.   Secondly,  the  Respondent's
             suggestion that he might have tampered with the  extract  from
             the civil record he enclosed with his letter  of  11  November
             2019 by removing it.  References to him and  his  wife  is,  I
             agree with Mr Iqbal, unfounded.  The extract  from  the  civil
             record the Appellant enclosed with his letter of  11  November
             2019 predated the extract he had already submitted in  support
             of his son's passport application,  and  the  extract  he  had
             submitted in support of the passport application  included  an
             endorsement (at paragraph 10 above) explaining that the  civil
             record had been rectified  to  include  details  of  Ishmael's
             parents which had previously been lacking


         "36.     The terms of the rectification of the civil  record  noted
             in  the  second  extract  issued  on  30  June  2016   affords
             considerable support to the Appellant's  claims  not  to  have
             been born in Iraq and to have procured his registration as  an
             Iraqi  citizen  corruptly  in  2014.    Whereas   his   wife's
             registration had been affected on 12 April 1984 on  the  basis
             of a birth certificate issued within weeks of her birth on  20
             March 1984, his registration was not affected  until  15  June
             2014, and the basis  of  his  registration  was  not  a  birth
             certificate issued to him, but the birth certificate issued to
             his wife in 1984.


         37.  Also consistent with the Appellant's claim not  to  have  been
             born in Iraq is the reference to his nationality being Iranian
             in the record of Ishmael's birt (sic) signed  by  a  physician
             and dated 14 October 2015 to which  I  referred  at  paragraph
             9(c), and the reference in Ishmael's birth certificate  issued
             the same day, to which I referred at paragraph  9(d),  to  the
             Appellant's nationality being British rather than Iraqi.


         38.  His claims are lent further support by the fact that he  chose
             in  2018,  before  learning  in  2019   the   Respondent   was
             considering depriving him of his British citizenship,  to  pay
             for a residence card rather than  simply  rely  on  the  Iraqi
             identity card  issued  to  him  four  years  previously.   His
             explanation that he chose to spend a substantial sum of  money
             on a residence card because he was conscious the identity card
             had been obtained by bribery, and to have relied on hit  (sic)
             might have led its lack of legitimacy to come to light, is  at
             least plausible.


         39.  He was a credible witness.  He has provided an explanation for
             why he chose to procure an Iraqi identity card in  2014  which
             incorrectly stated his place of  birth.   His  explanation  is
             coherent.  More importantly, it is supported by  documentation
             with which he provided the Respondent in the respects  I  have
             identified.   I  accept  his  obfuscation  in  the  letter  of
             11 November 2019 reflected his panic at the prospect of being
             deprived of British citizenship to which he and his  son  were
             entitled, as well as a reluctance  to  admit  that  his  Iraqi
             identity card had been dishonestly procured.  The misgivings I
             identified  paragraphs  33   and   34   notwithstanding,   the
             Respondent has failed to satisfy me that the Appellant was not
             born in Iran as he is consistently claimed (sic); and since  I
             am not satisfied his British citizenship was, more likely than
             not, obtained by fraud, I allow his appeal".


The Grounds of Appeal


 7. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal contain one ground asserting
    mistake of fact/inadequate reasons and perversity.


 8. The grounds specifically challenge the first part of [35]. It is stated
    in the grounds that the SSHD has never  suggested  that  the  documents
    submitted  to  HMPO  were  not  authentic.    On   the   contrary   the
    investigation letter  sent  to  the  Appellant  on  25  September  2019
    confirms that the Appellant had supplied documents which showed that he
    was born in Erbil, Iraq.


 9. It was the documents that the Appellant sent in response to that letter
    which were said to be false and the representation  that  he  was  from
    Iran.   The  error   undermines   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
    understanding of  the  evidence  and  the  assessment  of  credibility,
    particularly  when  considered  in  the  light  of  the  other  adverse
    findings.


10. The grounds also challenge the finding of the  judge  relating  to  the
    extract from the civil record. Mr Clarke did not pursue  this  in  oral
    submissions.


11. In oral submissions Mr Clarke drew my attention the to  documents  that
    the Appellant submitted in his application to HMPO which indicated that
    he was born in Erbil. It is these documents  that  disclosed  that  the
    Appellant had committed a fraud when claiming  to  be  from  Iran.  The
    Appellant committed a second fraud when submitting  further  documents,
    but Mr Clarke did not pursue the grounds in so  far  as  the  reasoning
    relating to these documents is concerned.


The Appellant's submissions


12. The Appellant asserts that the grounds are  misconceived  because  they
    are based on a misreading of the relevant documents.






13. Mr Iqbal made extensive oral submissions. He helpfully took me  through
    the documents that had been submitted with the application to HMPO  and
    those in response to the letter from the Home Office  of  25  September
    2019. He said that there were two limbs to the SSHD's case.  The  first
    limb concerns two of the documents that the Appellant submitted to HMPO
    indicating that he was born in Erbil. He said that the  judge  accepted
    the Appellant's evidence about this, having found  that  him  credible;
    namely that he had paid a bribe to obtain a fraudulent document and the
    reasons the Appellant gave for this. The SSHD accepted  that  they  are
    authentic.  This is accepted in the grounds of appeal.  Therefore,  the
    first reason for revocation of British  citizenship  falls  away.   Any
    challenge to the findings of the judge in  respect  of  what  Mr  Iqbal
    categorised as the first limb of the SSHD's case must fail.  He  cannot
    have committed a deception  or  fraud  because  the  SSHD  accepts  the
    documents as authentic. Moreover, there is no challenge to the findings
    in respect of the first aspect of the SSHD's case  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  Mr Iqbal drew my attention to  documents  that  the  Appellant
    submitted to HMPO which indicated that his nationality was  Iranian  or
    British. Only two of the documents said that he was born in  Erbil  and
    the Appellant explained the evidence about why this came  about,  which
    was accepted by the judge.




14. According to Mr Iqbal, the second limb of the SSHD's case concerns  the
    documents that the Appellant submitted to the SSHD in response  to  the
    letter of 25 September. The judge found in favour of the  Appellant  in
    this respect (see the second part of paragraph 35 which is not set  out
    in the grounds). Bearing in mind the SSHD does not  now  challenge  the
    judge's findings on the second limb and that according to Mr Iqbal this
    is the sole ground  of  appeal  in  the  written  grounds,  the  SSHD's
    application must fail.




15. Mr Clarke disagreed with Mr Iqbal's interpretation of  his  grounds  of
    appeal. He said expressly what is challenged is the judge's finding  in
    the first part of [35] which does not make sense. This  undermines  the
    assessment of credibility generally.


Error of law


16. Mr Iqbal's categorisation of  the  case  into  two  separate  limbs  is
    misleading and wrong. The fraud alleged  is  that  the  Appellant  lied
    about his citizenship in 2006 and in subsequent dealings with the  SSHD
    because the documents he submitted to HMPO indicated he was  Iraqi  and
    not from Iran. The argument that because the SSHD's case  is  that  the
    documents submitted to HMPO representing the Appellant's place of birth
    as Erbil are authentic (although the Appellant's own evidence  is  that
    they are fraudulent),  the first limb of the SSHD's case cannot succeed
    is wholly untenable.  The  argument  ignores  that  the  case  concerns
    deprivation of citizenship and whether the  Appellant  lied  about  his
    nationality in 2006.






17. The grounds challenge the assessment of credibility focusing  on  [35].
    The first task for the judge was to assess whether  the  Appellant  had
    lied about his nationality in his dealings with SSHD.  The  judge  took
    into account that he had obfuscated by purporting to submit  copies  of
    the documents he sent to HMPO to the SSHD. He  then  blamed  the  Iraqi
    authorities for having made a mistake. He then changed his  account  in
    his witness statement on 4 April (the hearing was  on  15  April).  His
    evidence in that statement and at the hearing was that he had  obtained
    the false documents which he submitted to HMPO indicating that  he  was
    born in Iraq by way of a bribe. He did  this  as  a  result  of  family
    pressure.  There was no evidence to support his  account.  He  did  not
    produce evidence from Iran despite having indicated  to  the  SSHD  had
    such evidence existed.   However, the judge  accepted  the  Appellant's
    account. This was a decision open to the  judge;  subject  to  adequate
    reasons. Moreover, the parties must be able to understand the decision.








18. The judge gave a  number  of  reasons  for  accepting  the  Appellant's
    account. The first of which is  at  [35]  as  set  out  in  the  SSHD's
    grounds. He found that there was "considerable  force"  in  Mr  Iqbal's
    suggestion. He  does  not  identify  the  suggestion,  but  it  can  be
    reasonably inferred to relate to the second sentence of [35],  "If  the
    Appellant had lied about his place of birth and  his  nationality  from
    2006 until 2011, and in the application for a passport he  subsequently
    made on his son's behalf,  he  is  unlikely  to  have  submitted  false
    documents in support  of  which  undermined  his  claims."  The  second
    sentence is baffling. Neither representative was able to explain to  me
    what it means or what was intended by the judge.  If what is  meant  is
    that the Appellant is unlikely to have submitted false documents, if he
    had lied about his nationality in 2006 and in the passport  application
    because this would undermine his claim to be from Iran,  the  reasoning
    is  perverse.  On  the  Appellant's  own  account  he  submitted  false
    documents albeit he claims the false documents were submitted  to  HMPO
    and not the Home Office.  The Appellant's own evidence is that  in  the
    application  for  a  passport  he  submitted  documents  that  did  not
    represent the truth, and which  therefore  potentially  undermined  his
    claim to be a citizen of Iran.  The judge's finding does not make sense
    in the context of the Respondent's case and the  Appellant's  evidence.
    The finding is perverse.






19. I note that the sentence almost echoes what is at [5] of the grounds of
    appeal before the judge and in which it is questioned why the Appellant
    would submit false documents that undermined his claim to be from Iran.
    However, the grounds were drafted on the basis that the documents  were
    erroneously issued by the Iraqi authorities.  However, the  Appellant's
    evidence had changed at the hearing and the case was argued differently
    before the First-tier Tribunal.






20. While the judge found that the civil record had not been tampered  with
    (and there is no discrete challenge  to  this  finding  pursued  by  Mr
    Clarke) and I take into account Mr Iqbal's  submission  that  the  some
    documents   submitted   to   HMPO   supported   the   Appellant   being
    British/Iranian, the reasons given  for  the  judge  having  found  the
    Appellant credible are undermined by the  error  identified  above.   I
    have taken into account that  the  judge  made  a  number  of  positive
    findings that are not challenged to support his overall conclusion that
    the Appellant is credible; however, I find the error material.






21.  I  am  mindful  that  an  appellate  court  should  be  cautious  when
    interfering with credibility findings of a lower court.  I  have  taken
    into account what the  Court  of  Appeal  recently  stated  in  Lowe  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ 62. However,
    I am unable to state with certainty  that  had  the  judge  not  "found
    considerable force" in an argument which cannot  be  understood  and/or
    discloses  perverse  reasoning,  he  would  have   reached   the   same
    conclusion.




22. I set aside the decision of the judge. The matter will need to be heard
    afresh applying Begum [2021] UKSC 7. I agreed with the parties that the
    appeal should be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 13 September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



