
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: dc/00094/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 07 June 2021                      |
|Remotely by Skype                    |                                     |
|On 11 February and 13 May 2021       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                AMIR RAMAZAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
     (13 May 2021)
     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
     (11 February 2021)

For the Respondent:    Mr R O'Ryan instructed by Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: Amir Ramazan (the appellant) and the Secretary of State  (the
    respondent).

Introduction

 2. The appellant was born on 9 January 1975 and is a citizen  of  Iraq  by
    birth.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002.  On 14 February  2002
    he claimed asylum.  His claim was refused  on  29  May  2002.  He  was,
    however, granted exceptional leave to remain for 4 years. Subsequently,
    on 1 May 2007 the appellant was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain.

 3. On 4 April 2002, the appellant was cautioned by the Northumbria  Police
    for two offences - indecent assault on a female 16 or over contrary  to
    s.14 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956 and using threatening, abusive  or
    insulting words likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress  contrary
    to s.5(1) of the Public Order Act 1986.  As  a  result  of  the  sexual
    offence, the appellant was placed on the Sexual Offenders Register  for
    2 years.

 4. On 15 April 2008, the appellant applied to become a British citizen  by
    naturalisation.  In his application  form  dated  11  April  2008,  the
    appellant did not disclose either of his cautions or that he  had  been
    placed on the Sex Offenders Register between 2002 and 2004.

 5. In response to the application,  the  appellant  became  a  naturalised
    British citizen on 29 September 2008.

 6. Following an investigation  by  the  Home  Office,  the  appellant  was
    notified of the Secretary of State's intention to deprive  him  of  his
    British citizenship on 14 March  2019  under  s.40(3)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 (the "1981 Act") on the  basis  that  his  British
    citizenship  had  been  obtained  by  fraud,  false  representation  of
    concealment of material facts..  The Secretary of State  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had mispresented certain person  details,  including
    his name and his date and place of birth in Iraq having given different
    details in his dealings with the Home Office in his asylum  application
    and passport applications made on  behalf  of  his  children  in  Iraq.
    Further, the appellant had failed in  his  nationality  application  to
    disclose his two cautions or  that  he  had  been  placed  on  the  Sex
    Offenders Register.

 7. On 27 June 2019, the Secretary of State made a decision to deprive  the
    appellant of his British citizenship under s.40(3) of the 1981 Act.

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 11 November 2019, Judge Andrew Davies allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision to the
    Upper Tribunal.  On  28  January  2020,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ
    Woodcraft) granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

10. The appellant filed a rule 24 response seeking to  uphold  the  judge's
    decision.

11. The hearing was initially listed on 11 February  2021  at  the  Cardiff
    Civil Justice Centre sitting remotely.  I heard oral  submissions  from
    Mr O'Ryan who represented  the  appellant  and  Mr  Howells,  who  then
    represented the Secretary of State.  In addition,  Mr  O'Ryan  filed  a
    skeleton argument dated 11 February 2021.

12. Following the conclusion of  that  hearing,  I  issued  directions  re-
    listing the appeal for a continuation of the error of  law  hearing  in
    order to deal with a number  of  legal  issues  upon  which  I  invited
    further submissions.

13. That hearing took place on 13 May 2021 when  the  appellant  was  again
    represented by Mr O'Ryan who submitted an additional skeleton argument.
     At this hearing, the respondent  was  represented  by  Mr  Clarke  but
    further written submissions were also made in advance of the hearing by
    Mr Howells who had represented the Secretary of State  at  the  initial
    error of law hearing.

The Judge's Decision

14. Judge Davies set out the background to the appeal at paras 4-12 of  his
    determination as follows:

         "4.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2002.  He  claimed
             asylum.  His asylum claim was  rejected  but  he  was  granted
             exceptional leave to remain for 4 years.   The  appellant  had
             claimed to originate from Mosul in Government Controlled  Iraq
             (GCI).   The  exceptional  leave  policy  applied  to   asylum
             applicants  from  such  areas  as  against  the  then  Kurdish
             Autonomous Zone (KAZ).  After completing the 4  years  of  his
             exceptional leave to remain the appellant applied successfully
             for indefinite  leave  to  remain.   He  then  naturalised  in
             September 2008.

         5.   On 27 June 2019 the respondent gave notice to the appellant of
             a decision to deprive him of British citizenship under Section
             40 British Nationality Act 1981.  The basis  of  the  decision
             was that citizenship  was  obtained  fraudulently.   When  the
             appellant arrived in the UK in February 2002 he claimed to  be
             from Mosul in GCI.   His  asylum  claim  was  refused  but  he
             benefited from the policy of  granting  exceptional  leave  to
             remain  for  applicants  from  GCI.    Evidence   subsequently
             provided by the appellant in support of passport  applications
             for  children  in  Iraq  indicates  that  he  had  made  false
             representations as he  originated  from  Ranya,  Sulaymaniyah.
             Had those facts been made known to caseworkers at the time  of
             the asylum claim and subsequent applications, the applications
             would have been refused and he  would  have  been  subject  to
             removal.

         6.   A variety of representations  were  made  by  the  appellant's
             solicitors on 2  April  2019  which  were  summarised  in  the
             decision letter.  He claimed that there was an  error  in  his
             name due to advice provided by the  Home  Office  interpreter.
             He had been advised by an 'agent'  not  to  provide  his  true
             identity.  He referred to language difficulties in respect  of
             the place of birth,  Iraqi  names  and  dates  of  birth  were
             casually used in Iraq.  He feared repatriation to  Iraq  which
             was wracked with violence.  In short, the respondent  did  not
             accept his explanations for reasons which are set out in  full
             in the decision letter.  The appellant had only  attempted  to
             correct the position after receiving notice of  the  intention
             to deprive him of British citizenship.  The respondent's  case
             is   that   the   appellant   has   admitted   making    false
             representations and omitted material facts  so  as  to  obtain
             leave to which he was not entitled and used  his  fraudulently
             obtained status to proceed in an application and naturalise as
             a British citizen.

         7.   The respondent also relies upon police cautions issued to  the
             appellant for indecent assault on a female  under  the  Sexual
             Offences  Act  1956  and  on  the  same  occasion   disorderly
             behaviour or the use  of  threatening/abusive/insulting  words
             likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress under the Public
             Order Act 1986.  The appellant did not disclose the name under
             which he was cautioned.  The respondent  considered  that  the
             appellant failed to disclose  his  cautions  and  deliberately
             abbreviated his name in order to avoid a  refusal  of  British
             citizenship under the good character provisions  of  the  1981
             Act.

         8.   The appellant also contended that the deception  employed  was
             not directly  material  to  the  grant  of  citizenship.   The
             respondent's view is that it was the claimed  place  of  birth
             that was material  to  the  grant  of  leave.   Had  the  true
             position been known the application for leave to remain  would
             have  been  refused  with  the  consequent   effect   on   any
             application for indefinite leave and naturalisation.

         9.   The  appellant's  case  is  that,  although  he  was  born  in
             Sulaymaniyah, he was travelling back and forward to Mosul  and
             he also resided in Mosul  immediately  before  he  left  Iraq.
             Under the Iraq Rashid policy it was the stated policy  of  the
             Secretary of State to grant exceptional leave  to  remain  for
             those asylum applicants from Iraq refused asylum between April
             1991 and 20 March 1993 and who originated from  GCI.   It  was
             the policy of the Secretary of State at the time not to  argue
             internal  relocation.   For  all  intents  and  purposes   the
             appellant's home area was Mosul.

         10.   The  respondent  referred  to  the   application   form   for
             naturalisation and the failure of the appellant  to  show  his
             true name, date and place of birth and provide any information
             about offending.  Deprivation of citizenship is in the  public
             interest and will be  appropriate  and  proportionate  in  the
             public  interest  in  preserving  the  integrity  of   British
             citizenship and to maintain immigration control.  While it was
             acknowledged that the decision to deprive on grounds of  fraud
             is discretionary, taking all  the  factors  into  account  the
             respondent  felt   the   decision   to   be   reasonable   and
             proportionate.

         11.  The respondent also stated in the  decision  letter  that  the
             removal of citizenship did not  preclude  an  individual  from
             remaining in the UK.  It was not necessary to take account  of
             the impact of removal on himself and any family  members  such
             as under Article 8.  Nor  was  it  accepted  that  Section  55
             Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  applied  in
             respect  of  the  appellant's  children   in   Iraq   although
             notwithstanding that statement the respondent  also  indicated
             that the 2009 Act had been taken into account.

         12.  The respondent carried out no  detailed  analysis  of  whether
             deprivation  would  leave  the   appellant   stateless.    The
             statutory requirement to do so was only applicable  where  the
             deprivation was deemed conducive  to  the  public  good  under
             Section 40(2) and (4) 1981 Act".

15. At paras 13-24, Judge Davies then set out the  law  including  ss.40(2)
    and (3) and the relevant (at the time) case  law  including  Deliallisi
    (British citizen: deportation appeal: Scope)  [2013]  UKUT  439  (IAC),
    Pirzada (Deprivation of citizenship: general  principles)  [2017]  UKUT
    196 (IAC), BA (deprivation of citizenship: appeals) [2018]  UKUT  00085
    (IAC), Sleiman (Deprivation of citizenship; conduct) [2017] UKUT  00367
    (IAC) and R(KV) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 2483.

16. Importantly, in the light of subsequent  developments  in  the  Supreme
    Court, the judge concluded that his task in the appeal was to  consider
    whether the  Secretary  of  State's  "discretion  should  be  exercised
    differently" under s.40(3) (see para 22) and that he must "form a  view
    not just whether it was  rational  to  make  [an  order  depriving  the
    appellant of his citizenship] but whether it was right to do so"  (para
    24).

17. At paras 28-39, the judge set out the relevant circumstances  including
    the respondent's claim that the appellant  had  dishonestly  failed  to
    disclose his police cautions and that he had been on the Sex  Offenders
    Register for two years and had misrepresented his name, date  of  birth
    and place of birth in order to assist in his citizenship application.

18. At para 41, the judge was not satisfied  that  the  latter  allegations
    were established:

         "41. I am not satisfied  that  the  respondent  has  made  out  the
             allegation that the appellant had varied his name in order  to
             mislead either about the cautions or otherwise.  Nor  are  the
             variations in the date of birth  of  any  great  significance.
             The dates are little more than a week or so apart".

19. However, as regards the failure to refer to  the  cautions,  the  judge
    said this at para 42:

         "However, I do accept that the appellant made a conscious  decision
         not to refer to the cautions for the reasons set out above".

20. The "reasons set out above"  were  in  order  to  avoid  being  refused
    British citizenship under the good character  provisions  of  the  1981
    Act.

21. As regards the non-disclosure of the  cautions,  the  judge  concluded,
    applying the approach of the UT in Sleiman, that  those  cautions  were
    "directly material" to the decision to grant him citizenship.  At paras
    47-48, the judge said this:

         "47. I am, however, satisfied that the appellant's police  cautions
             are directly material and that includes his failure to declare
             them.  On his application form  for  naturalisation  in  April
             2008 the appellant completed section 3 of the form which deals
             with the matter of good character.  There  were  a  number  of
             questions.  Question 3.7 asked whether the appellant's details
             had been recorded by the police in respect of  certain  sexual
             offences.  The appellant answered in the negative.   I  accept
             that the question  was  specific  and  clear.   Question  3.12
             dealing with other activities which might be relevant to  good
             character is of a more general nature and I put no  weight  on
             the appellant's answers which were also 'no'.  So the question
             of  good  character   is   part   of   the   process   towards
             naturalisation and is directly material.

         48.  I am also satisfied the appellant would have been aware of the
             purpose of the form and would have understood the  meaning  of
             the relevant  section  about  whether  his  details  had  been
             recorded by the police in respect of a  sexual  offence.   The
             events leading to  a  caution  and  registration  on  the  Sex
             Offenders list had taken place just six years previously.  The
             appellant had the assistance of a  friend  in  completing  the
             form.  I  find  therefore  that  the  failure  to  report  the
             cautions, the  deception,  did  motivate  the  acquisition  of
             citizenship".

22. At paras 49-51,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  deprivation  of  the
    appellant's citizenship did not breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

23. At para 52 the judge went on to consider, in accordance with  the  then
    case law, whether discretion  should  be  exercised  differently  under
    s.40(3).  The judge said this:

         "However, notwithstanding my conclusions  above,  I  must  consider
         whether the Secretary of State should have exercised his discretion
         differently and I must carry out the balancing exercise referred to
         in KV.  I remind myself that it is not just  a  matter  of  whether
         discretion was rational, it must also be right".

24. At paras  53-59,  the  judge  considered  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision to deprive the appellant of his citizenship  including  having
    regard to the relevant Nationality Instructions.  The judge said this:

         "53. Although,  as  I  indicate  below,  I  find  the  respondent's
             position unsatisfactory in the failure to  implement  his  own
             guidance as to dealing  with  proportionality,  nonetheless  I
             must give significant weight to the decision because there was
             dishonesty and in part I am satisfied that the  appellant  was
             motivated by his  application  for  citizenship  to  omit  the
             details of his cautions  and  also  that  the  matter  of  the
             cautions was material to the decision.

         54.  The published Nationality Instructions do deal with the matter
             of  whether  deprivation  is  proportionate.   At   paragraphs
             following 55.7.10 under the heading 'Reasonable/Balanced'  the
             caseworker is advised  to  consider  whether  the  deprivation
             would be seen to be a balanced and reasonable  step  to  take,
             taking  into   account   the   seriousness   of   the   fraud,
             misrepresentation or concealment.

         55.  Caseworkers are also advised (paragraph  55.7.11  onwards)  to
             take  account  of  mitigating  circumstances.   The   examples
             considered there do not assist the  appellant.   The  guidance
             emphasises that where  advice  to  provide  false  details  is
             relied upon or the person claims that someone such as a family
             member acted on their behalf  (thereby  exonerating  him  from
             responsibility) that is not to  be  regarded  as  constituting
             mitigation.  On the other hand, the caseworker is exhorted  to
             take account of Article 8  rights  and  to  consider  granting
             leave in accordance with the guidance on  family  and  private
             life.  This does not take account of the fact that the  person
             deprived of citizenship does not revert to  the  stage  before
             citizenship (indefinite leave) but effectively returns to  the
             starting point.

         56.  I have taken account of the fact in assessing  proportionality
             that the respondent has not followed his own  guidelines.   At
             least as far as I can judge from the decision letter.   Indeed
             I find the decision letter  at  paragraph  50  unsatisfactory.
             While indicating that  deprivation  of  citizenship  might  in
             certain circumstances result in the loss of right to abode and
             with it the loss of the ability to enter and remain in the  UK
             without any restriction or time  or  purpose,  the  respondent
             also indicates that the decision did not in itself preclude an
             individual from remaining in the UK.  Then  it  was  indicated
             that, although deprivation might culminate in  a  decision  to
             remove him, it is not necessary to take account of the  impact
             of removal on the appellant and his family.

         57.  The respondent did  not  deal  with  whether  the  deprivation
             decision would represent a reasonable and  balanced  approach.
             At paragraph 55.7.9 of  the  Nationality  Instructions  it  is
             stated that the caseworker must consider that issue.  Only  at
             paragraph 47 does the respondent refer to proportionality  and
             there appears simply a bald statement that the action proposed
             'would  be  appropriate  and  proportionate  in   the   public
             interest' as part of preserving the integrity  of  citizenship
             and maintaining immigration control.  There is no evidence  in
             the decision letter of a full evaluation carried out.

         58.  I have considered whether the deprivation decision  is  right.
             I give considerable weight to the respondent's decision in the
             light  of  my  findings  about  dishonesty  and   materiality.
             Moreover, I am not satisfied that ultimately the  end  product
             of the decision will be the removal of the appellant from  the
             UK.  Statelessness is not an issue.   However,  on  the  other
             side of the balance sheet, are some very  significant  factors
             in the appellant's favour.  He has lived in  the  UK  for  the
             best part of eighteen years  and  aside  from  an  unfortunate
             episode in 2002, which has not  been  repeated,  the  evidence
             suggests that he has been a hardworking, law-abiding  citizen.
             Nearly seventeen years have elapsed since his police cautions.



         59.  There are  practical  legal  consequences  of  deprivation  of
             citizenship  including  the  loss  of  voting   rights.    The
             appellant would be forced to start his applications  all  over
             again.  No indication is given that the  appellant  is  to  be
             granted leave to remain.  Inevitably there will be uncertainty
             and worry.  There may be an impact on the appellant's position
             in the labour market.  I also take account of  the  fact  that
             public policy is traditionally aimed at allowing  citizens  to
             rehabilitate themselves from criminal convictions through  the
             provisions of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act."

25. Having set those  matters  out,  at  para  60  the  judge  reached  the
    following conclusion:

         "60.     For these reasons, to use the words  of  the  respondent's
             own guidelines, deprivation would not be seen  as  a  balanced
             and  reasonable  step  to  take  taking   into   account   the
             misrepresentation involved and  what  the  representation  was
             attempting to hide".

26. As a result, the judge allowed the appeal.

The Issues

27. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, upon which  permission  had
    been granted, challenged  the  judge's  exercise  of  discretion  under
    s.40(3) in the appellants favour on the basis that he had been wrong to
    conclude this was a "rare case" or  one  where  there  was  "some  very
    compelling feature" where the public interest  was  outweighed  and  an
    appeal should be allowed applying what was said in BA  (at  [44]).   It
    was perverse of the judge to take into account that the  appellant  had
    not committed any further crimes since 2002 and the  Rehabilitation  of
    Offenders Act 1974.It was upon this basis that the appeal was argued by
    the Secretary of State at the initial hearing on 11 February 2021.

28. The appellant also contended that there  had  not  been  any  fraud  or
    misrepresentation as the matters  relied  on  were  "spent"  under  the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 and, in any event, the  judge  had
    not found that any failure to disclose was material  to  the  grant  of
    citizenship.  Mr O'Ryan accepted that establishing the latter point was
    not without some difficulty as the judge had treated it as material  by
    determining the appeal on the basis of how the discretion under s.40(3)
    should be exercised. I would add that it also does not  fit  with  what
    the judge said at paras 47 and 53 about the 'materiality' of  the  non-
    disclosure.

29. Following that hearing, I directed that  the  appeal  be  re-listed  in
    order for there to be further submissions on  the  application  of  the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 and the respondent's  guidance  to
    the non-disclosure of the cautions and  that  the  appellant  had  been
    placed on the Sex Offenders Register.

30. At the resumed hearing, the issues  between  the  parties  became  more
    focused.  A central issue was whether  the  Supreme  Court's  decision,
    reached since the initial hearing in February,  in  R  (Begum)  v  SIAC
    [2021] UKSC 7 limiting the scope of an appeal  against  a  decision  to
    deprive an individual of citizenship under s.40(2) in an appeal to  the
    Special Immigration Appeals Commission ("SIAC") to public law  grounds,
    applied to an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision  to
    deprive an individual of citizenship under s.40(3) of the 1981 Act.

31. Further, Mr  Clarke  no  longer  sought  to  sustain  the  respondent's
    decision on a number of bases which had been rejected by  Judge  Davies
    including  that  the  appellant  could  be  properly  deprived  of  his
    citizenship on the basis of any misrepresentation relating to his name,
    date of birth or place of birth.  Mr Clarke eschewed all reliance  upon
    that basis for the respondent's decision.

32. Mr Clarke focussed upon the appellant's two cautions which he  received
    in 2002 for a sexual offence of indecency and a public  order  offence.
    In addition, reliance was placed upon the fact that the  appellant  had
    been placed upon the Sex Offenders Register for a period of  two  years
    between 2002 and 2004 as a result of  accepting  the  caution  for  the
    sexual offence.

33. Mr Clarke accepted on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    appellant's convictions, by accepting the cautions, in relation to both
    offences were "spent" under the Rehabilitation of  Offenders  Act  1974
    and the appellant was  not  required  to  disclose  those  offences  in
    response to  questions  in  the  application  form,  in  particular  at
    question 3.6 and 3.7.  Mr Clarke also accepted that the  appellant  was
    not required to disclose that he had been on the Sex Offenders Register
    between 2002 and 2004 in answering question 3.7 which related  to  only
    whether the appellant's details were, at the date of the application in
    2008, recorded on the Sex Offenders Register.   He  accepted  that  the
    appellant had no obligation to disclose that he had  been  on  the  Sex
    Offenders Register in the past in answer to question 3.7.  Instead,  Mr
    Clarke  submitted  that  the  appellant's  failure  to   disclose   the
    underlying facts that had given rise to both the cautions and his being
    placed on the Sex Offenders Register in answer to question 3.12 in  the
    application   form   for   citizenship   amounted   to   fraud,   false
    representation or concealment of a material fact.

34. Mr O'Ryan, on behalf of the appellant,  whilst  accepting  Mr  Clarke's
    concessions, submitted that the appellant was under  no  obligation  to
    disclose the underlying facts that had given rise to  the  convictions,
    cautions and being placed on the Sex Offenders Register in response  to
    question 3.12 on the form.

35. The effect of the parties' positions in relation  to  the  appeal  was,
    therefore, accepted to be as follows.  The issue of whether  the  judge
    had erred in law in his approach to the appeal under s.40A of the  1981
    Act against a decision to deprive  the  appellant  of  his  citizenship
    under s.40(3) of that Act determined whether the  judge  had  erred  in
    law.  The judge had adopted a merits assessment in the appeal which, in
    the context of the circumstances in Begum, had  been  rejected  by  the
    Supreme Court as the proper  approach  on  appeal  to  SIAC  against  a
    decision under s.40(2).  If that approach also applied to  the  present
    appeal, then the judge had erred in law in  considering,  for  himself,
    whether  s.40(3)  applied  rather  than  in  determining  whether   the
    Secretary of State  reached  her  decision  in  breach  of  public  law
    principles.

36. Secondly, if that approach was, indeed, an error  of  law  because  the
    approach in Begum applied, Mr O'Ryan  submitted  that  that  error  was
    immaterial as the judge was bound to have allowed the appeal  since  it
    could  not  be  established  that  the  appellant  had   obtained   his
    citizenship by fraud because he had not failed  to  disclose  something
    which he was required to do, in particular in response to question 3.12
    of the application form.

37. If that was the case, the representatives invited me either  to  uphold
    the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  or,   if
    necessary, to find that there was an error of law and to  substitute  a
    decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that   the   requisite
    misrepresentation or fraud required by  s.40(3)  was  not  established.
    Otherwise, if an error of law  was  established  but  no  more,  I  was
    invited to re-list the appeal for a resumed hearing in order to re-make
    the decision.

The Relevant Legal Provisions

38. Sections 40(2)-(4A) of the 1981 Act set out the provisions by which the
    Secretary of State  may  make  an  order  depriving  an  individual  of
    citizenship either on the basis that that deprivation is "conducive  to
    the public good" or  because  the  citizenship  has  been  obtained  by
    "fraud", "false representation" or "concealment of  a  material  fact".
    The provisions are as follows:

         "40. (2) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
                  citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied
                  that deprivation is conducive to the public good.

             (3)  The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
                  citizenship status which results from his registration or
                  naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
                  the registration or naturalisation was obtained by means
                  of -

                  (a)  fraud,

                  (b)  false representation, or

                  (c)  concealment of a material fact.

             (4)  The Secretary of State may not make an order under
                  subsection (2) if he is satisfied that the order would
                  make a person stateless.

             (4A) But that does not prevent the Secretary of State from
                  making an order under subsection (2) to deprive a person
                  of a citizenship status if -

                  (a)  the citizenship status results from the person's
                      naturalisation,

                  (b)  the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
                      deprivation is conducive to the public good because
                      the person, while having that citizenship status, has
                      conducted him or herself in a manner which is
                      seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the
                      United Kingdom, any of the Islands, or any British
                      overseas territory, and

                  (c)  the Secretary of State has reasonable grounds for
                      believing that the person is liable, under the law of
                      a country or territory outside the United Kingdom, to
                      become a national of such a country or territory.

             ...."

39. An appeal against a decision  under  either  s.40(2)  or  s.40(3)  lies
    principally to the First-tier Tribunal under s.40A(1) of the 1981  Act.
    Section 40A(1) provides as follows:

         "A person who is given notice under section 40(5) of a decision to
         make an order in respect of him under section 40 may appeal against
         the decision to the First-tier Tribunal".

40. However, in a case where the Secretary of  State  has  certified  under
    s.40A(2) that the decision was taken wholly or partly in the  interests
    of national security, state relationships or otherwise  in  the  public
    interest, an appeal lies to SIAC under s.2B of the Special  Immigration
    Appeals Commission Act 1997.

41. In relation to appeals to the FtT, s.40A(3) sets out the provisions  in
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIA  Act  2002")
    which apply to an appeal under s.40A(1) as  they  apply  to  an  appeal
    under s.82 of the 2002 Act.  Those provisions are limited  to  "section
    106 (Rules"), "section 107  (Practice  Directions)"  and  "section  108
    (Forged document: proceedings in private)".  Significantly, the grounds
    of appeal set out in s.84 of the  NIA  Act  2002  and  which  apply  in
    appeals to the FtT under s.82 of the NIA Act  2002,  do  not  apply  in
    appeals  against  deprivation  of  citizenship  decisions  made   under
    ss.40(2) and (3) of the 1981 Act.  There are, therefore,  no  statutory
    grounds of appeal  although,  of  course,  the  FtT  must  consider  an
    individual's human rights because s.6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998
    applies to the respondent's decision-making.

The Pre-Begum Case Law

42. In a series of cases, the Upper Tribunal considered the jurisdiction of
    the First-tier Tribunal in an appeal under s.40A of the 1981 Act.

43. In Deliallisi, the UT was concerned with an appeal against  a  decision
    to deprive an individual of their citizenship under s.40(3), namely  on
    the basis of fraud, etc.  The  Upper  Tribunal,  disagreeing  with  the
    approach of the First-tier Tribunal in that appeal, concluded (at [31])
    that:

         "If the legislature confers a right of appeal against  a  decision,
         then, in the absence of express wording limiting the nature of that
         appeal, it should be treated as requiring  the  appellate  body  to
         exercise afresh any judgment or discretion employed in reaching the
         decision against which the appeal is brought".

44. The UT held, in other words, that the appeal was a merits appeal and it
    was for the judge to determine the underlying  facts  and  whether  the
    discretion to deprive the individual of  their  citizenship  should  be
    exercised against them.

45. Subsequently in Pirzada, a differently  constituted  panel  of  the  UT
    reached a different view.  At [9E], the UT said this:

         "The restrictions on the rights of appeal imposed by  s.84  of  the
         2002  Act  do  not  apply  to  appeals  against  a  s.40  decision:
         therefore,  any  proper  ground  of  appeal  is  available  to   an
         applicant.  The grounds of appeal  are,  however,  limited  by  the
         formulation of s.40 and must be directed to whether  the  Secretary
         of State's decision was in fact empowered by that  section.   There
         is no suggestion that a Tribunal has the power to consider  whether
         it is satisfied of any of the matters set out in sub-ss (2) or (3);
         nor is there any suggestion that the Tribunal can  itself  exercise
         the Secretary of State's discretion".

46. Consequently, for the UT in Pirzada, the scope of any challenge was, in
    effect, limited to public law grounds and the First-tier Tribunal could
    not exercise the discretion under s.40(2) or (3) for itself.

47.  Subsequently,  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  BA  disapproved  Pirzada  and
    reaffirmed the approach in Deliallisi.

48. The approach in Deliallisi and BA was endorsed by the Court  of  Appeal
    in KV v SSHD.  At [6] Leggatt LJ (with whom  Sir  Geoffrey  Vos  C  and
    Haddon-Cave LJ agreed) said this:

         "6. Pursuant to section 40A(1), a person who is given such a notice
         may appeal against the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
         task of the tribunal on such an appeal has been considered  by  the
         Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  in  a  number  of
         cases including Deliallisi (British Citizen:  deprivation  appeal;
         Scope) [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) and, more recently, BA (deprivation of
         citizenship: Appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC). I  would  endorse  the
         following principles which are articulated in those  decisions  and
         which I did not understand to be in dispute on this appeal:

             (1) Like an  appeal  under  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, an appeal under  section  40A
             of the 1981 Act is not a review of the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision but a full reconsideration of the decision whether to
             deprive the appellant of British citizenship.

             (2) It is thus for the tribunal to find the relevant facts  on
             the basis of the evidence adduced to the tribunal, whether  or
             not that evidence was  before  the  Secretary  of  State  when
             deciding to make a deprivation order.

             (3) The tribunal must first  establish  whether  the  relevant
             condition precedent specified in section 40(2) or  (3)  exists
             for the exercise of the  discretion  whether  to  deprive  the
             appellant of British citizenship. In  a  section  40(3)  case,
             this requires the tribunal to  establish  whether  citizenship
             was obtained by one or more of the  means  specified  in  that
             subsection.

             (4) If the condition precedent is  established,  the  tribunal
             has then to ask whether the Secretary of State's discretion to
             deprive  the  appellant  of  British  citizenship  should   be
             exercised differently. For this  purpose,  the  tribunal  must
             first determine the  reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of
             deprivation.

             (5) If the rights of  the  appellant  or  any  other  relevant
             person under article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
             Rights are engaged, the tribunal will have to  decide  whether
             depriving  the  appellant   of   British   citizenship   would
             constitute a disproportionate interference with those  rights.
             But even if article 8 is not engaged, the tribunal must  still
             consider  whether   the   discretion   should   be   exercised
             differently.

             (6) As it is the Secretary of State who has  been  charged  by
             Parliament with responsibility for making decisions concerning
             deprivation of citizenship, insofar as the Secretary of  State
             has considered the relevant facts, the  Secretary  of  State's
             view and any published policy  regarding  how  the  discretion
             should be exercised should normally be  accorded  considerable
             weight (in which regard see Ali v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799)."

49. Each of the cases involved appeals to the First-tier  Tribunal  against
    decisions taken under s.40(3) of the 1981 Act although in  Pirzada  the
    UT's public law approach (subsequently rejected  in  BA)  was  said  to
    apply to appeals against decisions  both  under  s.40(2)  and  s.40(3).
    None of the cases was concerned with appeals to SIAC against  decisions
    taken under s.40(2) on the grounds that deprivation of citizenship  was
    "conducive to the public good".

50. The settled law, therefore, at the time of the FtT's decision  in  this
    appeal was that the FtT had to determine on the  evidence  whether  the
    underlying basis for  deprivation  of  citizenship  under  s.40(3)  was
    established (fraud etc) and, if established, it was for  the  judge  to
    determine how the discretion (whether or not to deprive  an  individual
    of their citizenship) should be exercised.

51. That settled law came under  scrutiny  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  its
    decision in Begun, decided on 26 February 2021 after the initial  error
    of law hearing in this appeal.

The Begum Decision

52. In Begum, the Supreme Court was concerned with an appeal to SIAC  under
    s.2B of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997  against  a
    decision taken to deprive  the  individual  of  her  citizenship  under
    s.40(2) on a not 'conductive to  public  policy'  basis.   In  such  an
    appeal, the Supreme Court  rejected  the  submission  that  SIAC  could
    engage in a merits appeal deciding for itself the underlying facts  and
    exercising  the  discretion  under  s.40(2)  whether  to  deprive   the
    individual of their citizenship.  Arguing for a merits based  approach,
    Counsel for Ms Begum relied upon the UT's decisions in  Deliallisi  and
    BA.

53. Giving the only judgment, Lord Reed (with whom Lord Hodge, Lady  Black,
    Lord Lloyd-Jones and Lord  Sales  agreed)  was  critical  of  the  UT's
    reasoning in those cases.  At [40]-[45], Lord Reed said this:

         "40. There does  not  appear  ever  to  have  been  any  statutory
         provision relating to the grounds on which an appeal under  section
         2B may be brought, the matters to be considered, or how the  appeal
         is to be determined (as mentioned in para 34 above,  section  4  of
         the 1997 Act was repealed on the same date as section 2B came  into
         force; and sections 84-86 of the  2002  Act  were  not  applied  to
         appeals under section 2B). The same appears to be true of an appeal
         to the Tribunal under section 40A of the 1981 Act.

         41. In relation to the scope of the jurisdiction created by section
         2B, counsel for Ms Begum and for Liberty referred to some decisions
         of the Upper Tribunal in which the jurisdiction of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal in an appeal  under  section  40A  of  the  1981  Act  was
         considered. The earliest of them is Deliallisi v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) (unreported) given 30
         August 2013, which was concerned with  deprivation  of  citizenship
         under section 40(3) of the 1981 Act. That provision  applies  where
         the citizenship results from  registration  or  naturalisation  and
         "the Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that  the  registration  or
         naturalisation was obtained by means of  -  (a)  fraud,  (b)  false
         representation, or (c) concealment of a material fact".

         42. In that case, the First-tier Tribunal concluded that it had no
         power to exercise the Secretary of State's discretion  differently,
         since such a power could only be  conferred  by  express  statutory
         provision. Subject to compliance with the  Human  Rights  Act,  the
         scope of an appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act, in  the  view
         of the First-tier Tribunal, was to examine the facts on  which  the
         Secretary of State made the  decision,  examine  the  evidence  and
         determine whether the basis upon which the decision  was  made  was
         made out.

         43. The Upper Tribunal, chaired  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane,
         adopted the opposite approach, holding (para  31)  that  "[i]f  the
         legislature confers a right of appeal against a decision, then,  in
         the absence of express wording limiting the nature of that  appeal,
         it should be treated as requiring the appellate  body  to  exercise
         afresh  any  judgement  or  discretion  employed  in  reaching  the
         decision against which the appeal  is  brought".  The  judge  found
         support for that position in the  earlier  judgment  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal in Arusha and Demushi (Deprivation of Citizenship) [2012]
         UKUT 80 (IAC); [2012] Imm AR 645, another  case  concerned  with  a
         decision made under section 40(3). However,  the  judge mistakenly
         understood the judgment in that case to have "approved"  (para  28)
         remarks made by the First-tier Tribunal, which the  Upper  Tribunal
         had in reality  merely  recorded  (see  paras  11  and  14  of  its
         judgment). The judge also  found  support  in  remarks  made  by  a
         minister in the course of a debate during the passage of  the  2002
         Act through Parliament, which he mistakenly treated  (para  34)  as
         revealing Parliament's intention, applying Pepper v Hart [1993] AC
         593 in a manner which was disapproved in Wilson  v  First  County
         Trust Ltd (No 2) [2004] 1 AC 816, paras 58-60. The judge also cited
         textbook authority that a fresh exercise of judgment  was  excluded
         if the decision involved a consideration of matters which were non-
         justiciable, and stated that that could not possibly be said  of  a
         decision under section 40: a questionable  proposition  so  far  as
         some decisions under section 40(2) are concerned, but one which can
         be accepted in relation to section  40(3).  However,  the  apparent
         reasoning, that (1)  an  appellate  body's  ability  to  re-take  a
         discretionary decision is excluded if the  subject-matter  is  non-
         justiciable, and (2) the subject-matter of this decision is not non-
         justiciable, therefore (3) this decision can  be  re-taken  by  the
         appellate body, is fallacious. It depends on the  unstated  premise
         that an appellate body can always re-take a discretionary  decision
         unless the subject-matter is non-justiciable: a premise  which,  as
         explained  below,   is   incorrect.   The   judge   also   referred
         in Deliallisi to a  number  of  potentially  helpful  authorities
         concerned with the scope of appellate  jurisdiction,  but  did  not
         discuss them. It will be necessary  to  return  to  some  of  those
         authorities.

         44. A different approach was adopted by the Upper Tribunal, chaired
         by Mr C M G  Ockelton,  in Pirzada  (Deprivation  of  Citizenship:
         General Principles) [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC); [2017] Imm AR 1257.  He
         stated at para 9 of his judgment that section 84 of  the  2002  Act
         did not apply to appeals under section 40A of  the  1981  Act,  but
         added that the grounds of appeal, in appeals under section  40A  of
         the 1981 Act, must be directed to whether the Secretary of  State's
         decision was empowered by section  40,  and  that  "[t]here  is  no
         suggestion that a Tribunal has the power to consider whether it  is
         satisfied of any of the matters set out in sub-sections (2) or (3);
         nor is there any suggestion that the Tribunal can  itself  exercise
         the Secretary of State's discretion."

         45. In BA (Deprivation of Citizenship: Appeals) [2018]  UKUT  85
         (IAC); [2018] Imm AR 807 the Upper Tribunal, chaired by  Lane  J,
         repeated what had been said  in Deliallisi and  stated  that  the
         passage  just  cited  from Pirzada was  accordingly  not  to  be
         followed. In support of his view of the proper ambit of an  appeal
         under section 40A, Lane J cited the decision of this court in Ali v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1
         WLR 4799. However, that decision was not concerned with  an  appeal
         under section 40A, but with an immigration appeal  subject  to  the
         pre-2014 version of section 84 of the 2002 Act (para 36 above), and
         was therefore not in point."

54. At [46]-[50], Lord Reed dealt with two cases concerned with  the  scope
    of appeals and which were referred to in Deliallisi:  John  Dee  Ltd  v
    Comrs of Customs and Excise [1995] STC 941 and Banbury Visionplus Ltd v
    Revenue and Customs Comrs [2006] EWHC 1024 (Ch); [2006] STC 1568.  At
    [46], Lord Reed observed:

         "It is apparent from them that the principles to be applied  by  an
         appellate body, and the powers available to it,  are  by  no  means
         uniform. At one extreme, some authorities, concerned with licensing
         appeals to courts of summary  jurisdiction,  have  held  that  such
         appeals should proceed as re-hearings, reflecting the terms of  the
         relevant legislation and the procedures followed  by  such  courts.
         Other authorities, concerned with appeals to the  Court  of  Appeal
         against discretionary decisions by lower courts, have held that the
         scope of the appellate jurisdiction was much more  limited.  Modern
         authorities  concerned  with  the  scope  of  the  jurisdiction  of
         tribunals  hearing  appeals  against  discretionary  decisions   by
         administrative decision-makers  have  adopted  varying  approaches,
         reflecting the nature of the  decision  appealed  against  and  the
         relevant statutory provisions."

55. At [51]-[62], Lord Reed considered the decision of the House  of  Lords
    in SSHD v Rehman [2001] UKHL 47 concerned with an appeal to SIAC  under
    s.2 of the 1997 Act against a deportation decision made  on  the  basis
    that the Secretary of State deemed the individual's deportation  to  be
    "conducive to the  public  good".   Lord  Reed  pointed  out  that  the
    Secretary of State had relied on interests of national security in that
    case.

56. At [63]-[70], Lord  Reed  set  out  his  reasoning  which  led  to  his
    conclusion that the scope of any appeal  to  SIAC  against  a  decision
    under s.40(2) was limited to public law (or human rights)  grounds  and
    SIAC was not entitled to determine the underlying  statutory  criterion
    ('conductive to the public good') or exercise the statutory  discretion
    for itself.  Lord Reed said this:

         "63.  Considering, against  that  background,  the  functions  and
         powers of SIAC in an appeal  under  section  2B  of  the  1997  Act
         against a decision to deprive a person of their  citizenship  under
         section 40(2) of the 1981 Act, it is clearly necessary  to  examine
         the nature of the decision and any statutory provisions which throw
         light on the matter, bearing  in  mind  that  the  jurisdiction  is
         entirely statutory.

         64.  It is also necessary to  bear  in  mind  that  the  appellate
         process must enable the procedural requirements of the ECHR  to  be
         satisfied, since many appeals will raise  issues  under  the  Human
         Rights Act. Those requirements will vary, depending on the  context
         of the case in question. In the  context  of  immigration  control,
         including the exclusion of aliens, the case  law  of  the  European
         Court of Human Rights establishes that they generally  include,  in
         particular, that the  appellant  must  be  able  to  challenge  the
         legality of the measure taken against him, its  compatibility  with
         absolute rights such as those arising under articles 2 and 3 of the
         ECHR, and the proportionality of any  interference  with  qualified
         rights such as those arising under article 8.  SIAC  must  also  be
         able to allow an appeal in cases where  the  Secretary  of  State's
         assessment  of  the  requirements  of  national  security  has   no
         reasonable basis in the  facts  or  reveals  an  interpretation  of
         "national  security"  that  is  unlawful  or  arbitrary:  see,  for
         example, IR v United Kingdom (2014) 58 EHRR SE14, paras 57-58 and
         63-65 (concerning an appeal under section 2 of the 1997 Act,  prior
         to the amendments made by the 2014 Act). A  more  limited  approach
         has  been  adopted  in  cases   concerned   with   deprivation   of
         citizenship. The European Court of Human Rights has  accepted  that
         an arbitrary denial or deprivation of citizenship may,  in  certain
         circumstances, raise an  issue  under  article  8.  In  determining
         whether there is a breach of that article, the Court has  addressed
         whether  the  revocation  was  arbitrary  (not   whether   it   was
         proportionate), and what the consequences of  revocation  were  for
         the applicant. In determining arbitrariness,  the  Court  considers
         whether the deprivation was in accordance with the law, whether the
         authorities acted diligently and swiftly, and  whether  the  person
         deprived of citizenship  was  afforded  the  procedural  safeguards
         required by article 8: see, for example, K2 v United Kingdom (2017)
         64 EHRR SE18, paras 49-50 and 54-61.

         65. Section 2B of the 1997 Act  confers  a  right  of  appeal,  in
         distinction to sections 2C to 2E, which provide for  "review".  The
         latter provisions require SIAC to apply the principles which  would
         be applied in judicial review proceedings, and enable  it  to  give
         such relief as may be available in such  proceedings:  see  section
         2C(3) and (4), and the equivalent provisions in sections 2D and 2E.
         No such limitations are  imposed  upon  SIAC  when  determining  an
         appeal under section 2B.  It  is  also  relevant  to  note  section
         5(1)(b), which enables the Lord Chancellor to make rules regulating
         "the mode and burden  of  proof  and  admissibility  of  evidence".
         Clearly, appeals involving questions of fact as well as  points  of
         law are contemplated. That is also  reflected  in  the  rules  made
         under section 5.

         66. In relation to the nature of the decision under appeal, section
         40(2) provides:

             "(2)     The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person
             of a citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied
             that deprivation is conducive to the public good."

         The opening words ("The Secretary of State may ...") indicate  that
         decisions under section 40(2) are made by the Secretary of State in
         the exercise  of  his  discretion.  The  discretion  is  one  which
         Parliament has confided to the Secretary of State. In  the  absence
         of any provision to the contrary, it must therefore be exercised by
         the Secretary of State and by no one else. There is  no  indication
         in either the 1981 Act or the 1997 Act, in its present  form,  that
         Parliament intended the discretion to be exercised  by  or  at  the
         direction of SIAC. SIAC  can,  however,  review  the  Secretary  of
         State's exercise of his discretion and set it aside in cases  where
         an appeal is allowed, as explained below.

         67. The statutory condition which must  be  satisfied  before  the
         discretion can be exercised is that  "the  Secretary  of  State  is
         satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the  public  good".  The
         condition is not  that  "SIAC  is  satisfied  that  deprivation  is
         conducive to the public good". The existence of a right  of  appeal
         against the Secretary of State's decision  enables  his  conclusion
         that he was satisfied to  be  challenged.  It  does  not,  however,
         convert the statutory requirement that the Secretary of State  must
         be satisfied into a requirement that SIAC must be  satisfied.  That
         is a  further  reason  why  SIAC  cannot  exercise  the  discretion
         conferred upon the Secretary of State.

         68.  As explained at paras 46-50, 54 and  66-67  above,  appellate
         courts and  tribunals  cannot  generally  decide  how  a  statutory
         discretion conferred upon the primary decision-maker ought to  have
         been exercised, or  exercise  the  discretion  themselves,  in  the
         absence of any statutory provision authorising them to do so  (such
         as existed, in relation to appeals under section 2 of the 1997 Act,
         under section 4(1) of the 1997 Act as originally enacted, and under
         sections 84-86 of the 2002 Act prior to their  amendment  in  2014:
         see paras 34 and 36 above).  They  are  in  general  restricted  to
         considering whether the decision-maker has acted in a way in  which
         no reasonable decision-maker could have acted, or  whether  he  has
         taken into  account  some  irrelevant  matter  or  has  disregarded
         something to which he should have given weight, or has erred  on  a
         point of law: an  issue  which  encompasses  the  consideration  of
         factual questions, as appears, in the context of statutory appeals,
         from Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) v Bairstow [1956] AC  14.  They
         must  also  determine  for  themselves  the  compatibility  of  the
         decision with the obligations of the decision-maker under the Human
         Rights Act, where such a question arises.

         69.  For the reasons I have explained, that appears to me to be an
         apt description of the role of SIAC in an appeal against a decision
         taken  under  section  40(2).  That  is  not  to  say  that  SIAC's
         jurisdiction is supervisory rather than appellate. Its jurisdiction
         is appellate, and references to a supervisory jurisdiction in  this
         context are capable of being a source of  confusion.  Nevertheless,
         the characterisation  of  a  jurisdiction  as  appellate  does  not
         determine the principles of law which  the  appellate  body  is  to
         apply. As has been explained, they depend upon the  nature  of  the
         decision  under  appeal  and  the  relevant  statutory  provisions.
         Different principles may even apply to the same decision, where  it
         has a number of aspects giving rise to different considerations, or
         where  different  statutory  provisions  are  applicable.  So,  for
         example, in appeals under  section  2B  of  the  1997  Act  against
         decisions made under section 40(2) of the 1981 Act, the  principles
         to be applied  by  SIAC  in  reviewing  the  Secretary  of  State's
         exercise of his discretion are largely the same as those applicable
         in administrative law, as I  have  explained.  But  if  a  question
         arises as to whether the Secretary of State has acted  incompatibly
         with the appellant's Convention rights, contrary to  section  6  of
         the Human Rights Act, SIAC has to determine that matter objectively
         on the basis of its own assessment.

         70. In considering whether the Secretary of State has acted  in  a
         way in which no reasonable Secretary of State could have acted,  or
         has taken into account some irrelevant matter, or  has  disregarded
         something to which he should have  given  weight,  SIAC  must  have
         regard to the nature of the discretionary power  in  question,  and
         the Secretary of  State's  statutory  responsibility  for  deciding
         whether the deprivation of citizenship is conducive to  the  public
         good. The exercise of the power conferred  by  section  40(2)  must
         depend heavily upon a consideration  of  relevant  aspects  of  the
         public interest,  which  may  include  considerations  of  national
         security and public safety, as in the present case. Some aspects of
         the Secretary of State's assessment may not be justiciable, as Lord
         Hoffmann explained in Rehman. Others will depend, in many  if  not
         most cases, on an evaluative judgment of matters, such as the level
         and nature of the risk posed by the appellant, the effectiveness of
         the means  available  to  address  it,  and  the  acceptability  or
         otherwise  of  the  consequent  danger,  which  are  incapable   of
         objectively verifiable assessment, as  Lord  Hoffmann  pointed  out
         in Rehman and Lord Bingham of Cornhill reiterated in A, para 29.
         SIAC has to bear in mind, in relation to matters of this kind, that
         the Secretary of State's assessment should be accorded  appropriate
         respect,   for   reasons    both    of    institutional    capacity
         (notwithstanding the experience of members of SIAC) and  democratic
         accountability, as Lord  Hoffmann  explained  in Rehman and  Lord
         Bingham reiterated in A, para 29."

57. Then at [71], Lord Reed set out SIAC's function in an appeal against  a
    decision under s.40(2) as follows:

         "71. Nevertheless, SIAC has a  number  of  important  functions  to
         perform on an appeal against a decision under section 40(2). First,
         it can assess whether the Secretary of State has acted in a way  in
         which no reasonable Secretary of State could  have  acted,  or  has
         taken into account  some  irrelevant  matter,  or  has  disregarded
         something to which he should have given weight, or has been  guilty
         of some procedural impropriety. In doing so, SIAC has  to  bear  in
         mind the serious nature of a deprivation of  citizenship,  and  the
         severity of the consequences which can flow from such  a  decision.
         Secondly, it can consider whether the Secretary of State has  erred
         in law, including whether he has made findings of  fact  which  are
         unsupported by any evidence  or  are  based  upon  a  view  of  the
         evidence which could  not  reasonably  be  held.  Thirdly,  it  can
         determine whether the Secretary of State has complied with  section
         40(4), which provides that the Secretary of State may not  make  an
         order under section 40(2) "if he is satisfied that the order  would
         make a person stateless". Fourthly, it  can  consider  whether  the
         Secretary  of  State  has  acted  in  breach  of  any  other  legal
         principles applicable to  his  decision,  such  as  the  obligation
         arising in appropriate cases under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
         Act. In carrying  out  those  functions,  SIAC  may  well  have  to
         consider relevant evidence. It  has  to  bear  in  mind  that  some
         decisions may involve considerations which are not justiciable, and
         that due weight has to be given to the  findings,  evaluations  and
         policies of the Secretary of  State,  as  Lord  Hoffmann  explained
         in Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated in A. In reviewing compliance
         with the Human Rights Act, it  has  to  make  its  own  independent
         assessment."

58. Lord Reed repeated, in slightly different language, the  scope  of  any
    such appeal limited to public law grounds or human rights challenge  at
    [119] as follows:

         "119. The scope of SIAC's  jurisdiction  in  an  appeal  against  a
         decision taken under section 40(2) was summarised in para 71 above:
         first, to determine whether the Secretary of State has acted  in  a
         way in which no reasonable Secretary of State could have acted,  or
         has taken into account some irrelevant matter, or  has  disregarded
         something to which he should have given weight, or has been  guilty
         of some procedural impropriety; secondly, to determine  whether  he
         has erred in law, for example by making findings of fact which  are
         unsupported by any evidence  or  are  based  upon  a  view  of  the
         evidence which could not reasonably be held; thirdly, to  determine
         whether he has  complied  with  section  40(4);  and  fourthly,  to
         determine whether he  has  acted  in  breach  of  any  other  legal
         principles applicable to  his  decision,  such  as  the  obligation
         arising in appropriate cases under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
         Act."

59. As will be plain, in an appeal to SIAC against a decision  taken  under
    s.40(2) of the 1981 Act, the approach in  Deliallisi  does  not  apply.
    The challenge is  limited  to  public  law  or  human  rights  grounds.
    Subject to the need for rationality, the underlying facts are a  matter
    for the Secretary of State and the discretion cannot  be  exercised  by
    SIAC.

Is the Approach in Begum Applicable to this Appeal?

60. Mr O'Ryan submitted that it did not.  He  submitted  that  the  Supreme
    Court had been concerned with an  appeal  under  s.40(2)  and  with  an
    appeal to SIAC  where  national  security  issues  were  in  play.   He
    submitted that approach did not apply to an appeal against  a  decision
    under s.40(2) - as in  this  case  -  or,  indeed,  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in such circumstances.  I do not accept those submissions.

61. First, whilst the Supreme Court was concerned with an  appeal  to  SIAC
    and an appeal against the decision under s.40(2), its reasoning  cannot
    be limited to such appeals and not be  applicable  to  appeals  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against decisions taken under s.40(3).

62.  The  Supreme  Court  referred  extensively  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decisions in Deliallisi and BA which were concerned with appeals to the
    First-tier Tribunal against decisions taken under s.40(3).  The Supreme
    Court was highly critical of those decisions.  Lord Reed plainly saw it
    as a necessary stepping stone to his  ultimate  conclusion  as  to  the
    scope of an appeal to SIAC against a decision under  s.40(3)  that  the
    approach of the Upper Tribunal was wrong.  It would be very  surprising
    if the Supreme  Court,  whilst  expressing  this  trenchant  criticism,
    intended to leave standing the UT's decisions in  appeals  to  the  FtT
    against  decisions  made  under  s.40(3).   The  very  same   criticism
    undermines the Court of Appeal's "endorsement" of the UT's decisions in
    KV.  Whilst KV was not apparently cited to the Supreme Court,  and  was
    definitely not referred to by Lord Reed, it cannot any longer be  taken
    to represent he law.

63. Secondly, Lord Reed's reasoning applies equally to appeals to the First-
    tier Tribunal against decisions taken under s.40(3).   The  legislative
    scheme that was important in determining the scope  of  the  appeal  in
    Begum applies to appeals to the First-tier Tribunal  against  decisions
    whether taken under s.40(3) or s.40(2).

         (1) There are no stated grounds of appeal whether the appeal is  to
         SIAC or the FtT. There is no statutory ground explicitly allowing a
         consideration of factual matters or  allowing  either  tribunal  to
         exercise discretion for itself.

         (2)  Both s.40(2) and s.40(3) are phrased as vesting  determination
         of the triggering criterion in both provisions in the Secretary  of
         State ("...if the Secretary of State is satisfied...") and not  the
         tribunal.

         (3) Both s.40(2) and s.40(3) place the discretion on the  Secretary
         of State ("may") to deprive an individual of their  citizenship  on
         the stated grounds and not the tribunal.

         (4) The stated grounds under both s.40(2) and s.40(3)  fall  within
         the purview of the Secretary of State.  Where  issues  of  national
         security etc. arise, a tribunal is likely to be cautious in  taking
         a different view from the Secretary of State.  That, however,  does
         not alter the jurisdiction of  the  relevant  tribunal  but  rather
         points to the need for deference or, in some cases, recognition  of
         the non-justiciable nature of the subject matter.  Of course,  that
         is much more likely to occur in an appeal to SIAC.  It is also more
         likely to occur in an appeal against a decision under s.40(2).  But
         there can be no assumption that  appeals  against  decisions  under
         s.40(2) will be to SIAC and appeals against  s.40(3)  decisions  to
         the FtT.  Some decisions taken under s.40(2) may not  be  certified
         on national security  grounds  and  the  appeal  will  be  properly
         brought in the FtT.  Likewise, some decisions taken  under  s.40(3)
         may be certified on national security grounds such that  an  appeal
         could only be brought to SIAC.

         It is, therefore, neither the  judicial  forum  (necessarily),  nor
         whether the decision  is  taken  under  s.40(2)  or  s.40(3),  that
         informs the scope and nature of  an  appeal.   Rather,  it  is  the
         nature of the statutory provisions which vest  decision  making  in
         the Secretary of State  including  deciding  whether  to   exercise
         discretion if satisfied that the relevant condition  whether  found
         in s.40(2) or s.40(3) is met and limits, therefore,  the  scope  of
         any appeal to public law principles and not permitting of a  'full-
         blown' merits appeal.

64. It is, perhaps, noteworthy that the Upper Tribunal in Pirzada expressed
    the view that the First-tier Tribunal's jurisdiction  was  limited,  in
    effect, to public law grounds in appeals against  decisions  made  both
    under s.40(2) and s.40(3).  That was a decision  which,  not  only  did
    Lord Reed not seek expressly to disapprove, but in the context  of  his
    consideration of the decisions in the Upper Tribunal appeared  to  find
    favour with him over the decisions in Deliallisi and BA.

65. In my judgment, the Supreme Court in Begum set out the proper scope  of
    an appeal, under s.40A of the 1981 Act whether the appeal is brought to
    SIAC or the First-tier Tribunal and whether the  appeal  is  against  a
    decision taken under s.40(2) or s.40(3).  The scope of such appeals  is
    as set out Lord Reed in [71] and [119].

66. For these reasons, therefore, I reject Mr O'Ryan's  submissions  and  I
    accept those of Mr Clarke.

Begum Applied to this Appeal

67. It is readily apparent, therefore, that Judge Davies erred  in  law  in
    his approach to the scope of the appeal in this  case.   At  [16]-[24],
    Judge Davies plainly applied the approach of the UT in  Deliallisi,  BA
    and of the Court of Appeal in KV and went on  to  find  the  underlying
    facts.  At para [52] he said this:

         "... I must consider whether the Secretary  of  State  should  have
         exercised his discretion differently  and  I  must  carry  out  the
         balancing exercise referred to in KV.  I remind myself that is  not
         just a matter of whether the decision was rational, it must also be
         right".

68. The judge then concluded that the decision was not "right" and  allowed
    the appeal.  In doing so, the judge failed to apply  the  approach  now
    set out in Begum and in doing so erred in law. Given this approach  was
    the  settled  law  at  the  time,  the  judge's  approach  is  entirely
    understandable but, in retrospect, as a result of Begum  that  was  the
    wrong legal approach.

Materiality of the Error of Law?

69. Mr O'Ryan's case at  the  resumed  hearing  was  that  the  appellant's
    answers in response to questions 3.6, 3.7 and 3.12 on  his  nationality
    application form were not false.  He was not required to  disclose  his
    cautions or that he had been on the Sex Offenders Register between 2002
    and 2004 or, as Mr Clarke now argued, the  underlying  facts  of  those
    convictions/cautions.

70. Mr O'Ryan submitted that, if the approach in Begum was applicable,  the
    Upper Tribunal applying public  law  principles  should  conclude  that
    there was no evidence upon which the Secretary of State could, properly
    directing herself, reach the conclusion that the  appellant  had  acted
    fraudulently, had made false representations or had concealed  material
    facts as required by s.40(3).

71. Question 3.6 of the citizenship application form was as follows:

         "Do you have any criminal  convictions  in  the  UK  or  any  other
         country (including traffic offences) or any  civil  judgments  made
         against you?"

    Below that question it is stated:

         "If you have answered Yes to question 1 above please  give  details
         below for each sentence starting with the most recent one.  If  you
         have received more than two sentences you should continue  on  page
         13.  Convictions spent under the Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act
         1974 need not be disclosed  (see  guide  page  18).   If  you  have
         answered No please go to question 3.7".

72. In response to that question the appellant ticked the box "No".

73. Question 3.7 was in the following terms:

         "Are your details recorded by the  police  in  respect  of  certain
         sexual offences, i.e. on the 'Sex Offenders Register', or  are  you
         subject to a  notification  order,  a  sexual  offences  prevention
         order, a foreign travel order, or a risk of sexual harm order?"

74. In response to that question the appellant ticked the box "No".

75. Question 3.12 was in the following terms:

         "Have you engaged in any other activities which might indicate that
         you may not be considered a person of good character?"

76. In response to that question the appellant ticked the box "No".

77. Mr Clarke, as I have already indicated, did not rely on the appellant's
    answers to questions 3.6 or 3.7.  He accepted that the appellant had no
    obligation to disclose his conviction and two  cautions  as  they  were
    "spent".  That, as question 3.6 itself recognises, in  the  form's  own
    rubric, is correct.

78. Further, Mr Clarke did not contend that the appellant was  required  to
    disclose that he had been on the Sex Offenders  Register  between  2002
    and 2004 in answer to question 3.7 as that question was phrased in  the
    present tense "Are your details recorded by the police"  (my  emphasis)
    and, entirely truthfully, the appellant answered 'No' to that  question
    as he had ceased to be on the Sex Offenders Register in 2004, some four
    years before he completed the form.

79.  Mr  Clarke,  however,  submitted  that  the  appellant  was  under  an
    obligation to disclose the underlying circumstances of his offending in
    answer to question 3.12 as those were "any other activities which might
    indicate" that the appellant may not be considered "a  person  of  good
    character".  He submitted that "other activities" meant anything  which
    did not fall within the earlier questions which might  be  relevant  to
    the appellant's good character.

80. Mr O'Ryan submitted that  the  appellant  had  no  such  obligation  in
    response to question 3.12.  He submitted that the  question  could  not
    require the appellant to disclose, in effect, the matters  relating  to
    his convictions which  were  spent.   He  submitted  that  it  was  not
    consistent with the respondent's own guidance on "Naturalisation  as  a
    British Citizen - a guide for applicants" (April 2008) at page  M21  of
    the respondent's bundle.  That referred to disclosure of offences  such
    as terrorism, crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide but also
    that applied,  on  its  own  terms,  only  to  circumstances  where  an
    individual had not been convicted of an offence but his character might
    be in doubt.

81. I do not accept Mr Clarke's submissions and, with one caveat, I  prefer
    those of Mr O'Ryan.

82. I do not accept that question 3.12 requires an individual  to  disclose
    the circumstances which gave rise to a conviction or  convictions  when
    those convictions are themselves spent.  To do so runs counter  to  the
    provisions in the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974,  in  particular
    s.4(2) of that Act which provides as follows:

         "(2) Subject to the provisions of any order made under subsection
             (4) below, where a question seeking information with respect
             to a person's previous convictions, offences, conduct or
             circumstances is put to him or to any other person otherwise
             than in proceedings before a judicial authority -

             (a)  the question shall be treated as not relating to spent
                  convictions or to any circumstances ancillary to spent
                  convictions, and the answer thereto may be framed
                  accordingly; and

             (b)  the person questioned shall not be subjected to any
                  liability or otherwise prejudiced in law by reason of any
                  failure to acknowledge or disclose a spent conviction or
                  any circumstances ancillary to a spent conviction in his
                  answer to the question". (my emphasis)

83. Although the provisions of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, as
    both parties recognise, applies to the appellant the position would  be
    different after 1 October 2012 as a result of s.56A of the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 which disapplies the relevant provisions of the  1974  Act  in
    respect of a "relevant immigration decision" which includes a  decision
    made under the 1981 Act as to a  person's  good  character  (s.56A(2)).
    However, as I have said,  it  was  common  ground  that  s.56A  has  no
    application to the appellant's  application  in  2008  which  was  made
    before s.56A came into force.

84. In my judgment, as the emphasised words in s.4(2) of the Rehabilitation
    of Offenders Act 1974 make plain a person when  asked  about  not  only
    their convictions but also their  "conduct  or  circumstances"  is  not
    required to respond in relation to any spent  convictions  or  "to  any
    circumstances ancillary to spent convictions".   In  my  judgment,  the
    information  which  Mr  Clarke  submitted  the  appellant  should  have
    disclosed in answer to question 3.12 is captured by that provision  and
    the appellant was not required to disclose it.

85.  In  any  event,  in  considering  what  "other  activities"  might  be
    contemplated by section 3.12, it would  be  a  natural  and  reasonable
    interpretation of  that  provision  that  it  related  to  matters  not
    otherwise covered by the earlier questions  including  the  appellant's
    spent convictions, his cautions  and  that  he  had  been  on  the  Sex
    Offenders Register.

86. Further, the respondent's  own  guidance,  to  which  I  was  referred,
    relates the relevant questions to character  issues  not  arising  from
    convictions.  The relevant section at paras 3.7-3.11 begins  which  the
    crossheading:

         "What if you have not been convicted but your character may  be  in
         doubt?" (my emphasis)

87. Clearly, the appellant had been convicted of these  offences,  that  is
    accepted as a result of him agreeing to the cautions.  He did not  fail
    to disclose conduct which might go to court or  which  was  awaiting  a
    hearing in court which is specifically  covered  in  para  3.7  of  the
    guidance.  Whilst the guidance goes on to refer to  such  very  serious
    offences as  terrorism,  genocide,  crimes  against  humanity  and  war
    crimes, I do not accept that  "other  activities"  are  necessarily  so
    restricted.  As the guidance itself states:

         "You must say whether you have  been  involved  in  anything  which
         might indicate that you are not of good character".

    That is altogether broader and, in my judgment, properly reflects  what
    question 3.12 seeks  by  way  of  information  from  an  applicant  for
    citizenship.

88. However,  as  I  have  indicated,  "other  activities"  cannot,  in  my
    judgment, encompass the underlying circumstances that gave rise to  the
    spent convictions and placing of an individual, in the past, on the Sex
    Offenders Register when that information, as Mr Clarke accepted, is not
    required by questions 3.6 and 3.7.

89. It follows, therefore, that if the judge had  approached  his  task  in
    this appeal in the light of what was subsequently determined  in  Begum
    to be the correct approach, there was only one possible  outcome.   The
    judge  could  not  rationally  be  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    committed fraud, misrepresentation or concealed a fact in  relation  to
    information which he was required to disclose  in  answer  to  question
    3.12 (and of course also questions 3.6 and 3.7).

90. Applying the approach summarised by Lord Reed  at  [71]  and  [119]  in
    Begum, the only possible outcome of  the  appeal  was  that  the  judge
    should have allowed it, albeit on a different basis  than  he  actually
    did, because there was no factual basis upon  which  the  Secretary  of
    State could be satisfied, applying  public  law  principles,  that  the
    requirement in s.40(3) was met (see Edwards v Bairstow  cited  by  Lord
    Reed at [68]).  As a result, the Secretary of State unlawfully  decided
    to deprive the appellant of his citizenship under s.40(3).

91. In those circumstances, although I have concluded, as a result  of  the
    law as now understood following the Supreme Court's decision in  Begum,
    that the judge erred in law in his approach to the appeal, the  outcome
    of the appeal was inevitable and the  judge's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal should stand and not be set aside.

Decision

92. For the above reasons, the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law.  However,  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal would, applying the correct law, have inevitably been the  same,
    namely  that  the  appeal  would   have   been   allowed.    In   those
    circumstances, the judge did not materially err in law in allowing  the
    appeal and his decision to allow the appeal stands.  Alternatively,  if
    I were to re-make the decision, for the same  reasons,  the  appeal  is
    allowed.

93. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 25 May 2021

