
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00113/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 May 2021                       |On 28 May 2021                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                ARTAN FRROKU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Foot instructed by Oliver & Hasani Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. By a decision promulgated on 16 November 2020  the  Upper  Tribunal
        found a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  in  a
        manner material to its decision to allow  the  appeal.  The  matter
        comes back before the Upper Tribunal to enable it to  substitute  a
        decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.




Background


     2. There is no factual dispute between the parties. The background set
        out at [6 - 15] of the appellants skeleton  argument,  supplemented
        by the  appellant's  more  recent  witness  statement,  is  in  the
        following terms:


        6.   The Appellant was born in Shkoder, Albania on 5 May  1973.  On
             27 March 1998, aged 24, he entered the UK, claiming asylum the
             following day. On the advice of the agents  who  arranged  his
             journey here, he falsely stated that  he  was  Artan  Berisha,
             born on 5 May 1973 in Prishtina,  Kosovo.  The  Appellant  now
             deeply regrets this course of action and wishes  to  apologise
             for it. Like many young men arriving in the UK  at  the  time,
             the Appellant was escaping violence and upheaval in Albania as
             a result of the civil unrest taking place there  in  the  late
             1990s.


        7.   The Appellant's asylum claim was  never  decided,  and  on  20
             August 1999 he received a letter from the Respondent informing
             him that his case was on hold due to a review of the  security
             situation in Kosovo. On 6 September 1999,  the  Appellant  was
             granted exceptional leave to remain ("ELR") for a year until 6
             October 1999. His asylum case was never determined.


        8.   In parallel to these events, in 1998  the  Appellant  met  and
             formed a relationship with Judith Hynes,  a  British  citizen.
             They  married  on  27  August  2000.  On  26  September  2000,
             independently of his asylum claim, the Appellant  applied  for
             leave to remain as the spouse of a British  citizen,  and  was
             granted it on 19 July 2001, until 18 July  2002.  On  16  July
             2002, he applied in time for ILR, and was granted it, also  on
             the basis of his status as the spouse of a British citizen, on
             30 August 2002.


        9.   On 25 October 2003, the Appellant applied  for  naturalisation
             as a British citizen under s6(2) of  the  1981  Act,  and  was
             issued a certificate under that provision on 27  August  2003.
             The Appellant put forward his  false  nationality  in  all  of
             these applications.


        10.  The Appellant's relationship with his first spouse  eventually
             broke down, and on 19 November  2010  a  decree  absolute  was
             issued.


        11.  The Appellant met a new partner,  Iolanda  Frashnaj,  and  she
             gave birth to a son Daniel on 18 October 2015. The couple were
             married on 19 April 2016 in the UK. Daniel, who  is  now  four
             years old, has been diagnosed with autism, and  the  Appellant
             receives Disability Living Allowance ("DLA")  on  his  behalf.
             Daniel is a British citizen.


        12.  On 22 February 2019, the Respondent wrote to the Appellant  to
             inform  him  that  deprivation  action  was  being  considered
             against him. Appellant assumes this was on the basis that  his
             case was reviewed following the Hysaj judgement in the Supreme
             Court on 21 December 2017 and  the  Respondent's  practice  of
             issuing deprivation decisions following the judgement


        13.  On 24 March 2019, the Appellants representatives wrote to  the
             Respondent disclosing his true identity  and  apologising  for
             his past actions, as well as setting out their case as to  why
             deprivation action should not be initiated.


        14.  On 11 October 2019, the Respondent issued the  decision  under
             appeal here. It was not received by the Appellant at the time,
             owing to a fire in his home which caused the Appellant and his
             wife and child to have to move into  temporary  accommodation.
             The Appellant rescued his child. The circumstances,, which are
             set out in the grounds of appeal, necessitated an  application
             to appeal out of time, which was  eventually  granted  by  the
             Tribunal (FTT).


        15. The Appellant resides with his wife and child. He has worked in
             the UK since being granted  permission  to  do  so,  including
             being employed as an Assistant Steward by P&O Ferries.


     3. In  his  recent  witness  statement  dated  30  November  2020  the
        appellant confirmed he was placed on furlough by the ferry  company
        from March 2020 as a result of the Covid  pandemic.  The  appellant
        states he had  to  leave  such  employment  and  seek  work  during
        September 2020 but was unable  to  find  further  employment  until
        October 2020 when he started working on a part-time basis at a  car
        wash in Dover. His wife has also started  working  on  a  part-time
        basis, assisting with the operation  of  machinery  in  a  cosmetic
        company.



The law


     4. There has also been a fundamental development in  relation  to  the
        legal approach to be taken to appeals  of  this  nature  since  the
        error of law hearing, following the handing down of  the  judgement
        in the case of Begum v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
        [2021] UKSC 7. At [66 - 71] in the lead judgment given by Lord Reed
        it is written:


        66.  In relation to  the  nature  of  the  decision  under  appeal,
             section 40(2) provides:


             "(2) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
             citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
             deprivation is conducive to the public good."


             The opening words ("The Secretary of State may ...")  indicate
             that decisions under section 40(2) are made by  the  Secretary
             of State in the exercise of his discretion. The discretion  is
             one which Parliament has confided to the Secretary  of  State.
             In the absence of any  provision  to  the  contrary,  it  must
             therefore be exercised by the Secretary of State and by no one
             else. There is no indication in either the  1981  Act  or  the
             1997 Act, in its present form, that  Parliament  intended  the
             discretion to be exercised by or at  the  direction  of  SIAC.
             SIAC can, however, review the Secretary  Page  24  of  State's
             exercise of his discretion and set it aside in cases where  an
             appeal is allowed, as explained below.
        67.  The statutory condition which must  be  satisfied  before  the
             discretion can be exercised is that "the Secretary of State is
             satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the  public  good".
             The condition is not that "SIAC is satisfied that  deprivation
             is conducive to the public good". The existence of a right  of
             appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  enables  his
             conclusion that he was satisfied to  be  challenged.  It  does
             not, however,  convert  the  statutory  requirement  that  the
             Secretary of State must be satisfied into a  requirement  that
             SIAC must be satisfied. That is  a  further  reason  why  SIAC
             cannot exercise the discretion conferred upon the Secretary of
             State.
        68.  As explained at paras 46-50, 54  and  66-67  above,  appellate
             courts and tribunals cannot generally decide how  a  statutory
             discretion conferred upon the primary decision-maker ought  to
             have been exercised, or exercise the discretion themselves, in
             the absence of any statutory provision authorising them to  do
             so (such as existed, in relation to appeals under section 2 of
             the 1997 Act, under section 4(1) of the 1997 Act as originally
             enacted, and under sections 84-86 of the  2002  Act  prior  to
             their amendment in 2014: see paras 34 and 36 above). They  are
             in general restricted to  considering  whether  the  decision-
             maker has acted in a way in which no reasonable decision-maker
             could have acted, or whether he has taken  into  account  some
             irrelevant matter or has disregarded  something  to  which  he
             should have given weight, or has erred on a point of  law:  an
             issue  which  encompasses   the   consideration   of   factual
             questions, as appears, in the context  of  statutory  appeals,
             from Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) v  Bairstow  [1956]  AC  14.
             They must also determine for themselves the  compatibility  of
             the decision with the obligations of the  decisionmaker  under
             the Human Rights Act, where such a question arises.
        69.  For the reasons I have explained, that appears to me to be  an
             apt description of the role of SIAC in  an  appeal  against  a
             decision taken under section 40(2). That is not  to  say  that
             SIAC's jurisdiction is supervisory rather than appellate.  Its
             jurisdiction is appellate, and  references  to  a  supervisory
             jurisdiction in this context are capable of being a source  of
             confusion.   Nevertheless,   the   characterisation    of    a
             jurisdiction as appellate does not determine the principles of
             law which  the  appellate  body  is  to  apply.  As  has  been
             explained, they depend upon the nature of the  decision  under
             appeal  and  the  relevant  statutory  provisions.   Different
             principles may even apply to the same decision, where it has a
             number of aspects giving rise to different considerations,  or
             where different statutory provisions are applicable.  So,  for
             example, in appeals under section 2B of the 1997  Act  against
             decisions made under  section  40(2)  of  the  1981  Act,  the
             principles to be applied by SIAC in reviewing the Secretary of
             State's exercise of his discretion are  largely  the  same  as
             those applicable in administrative law, as I  have  explained.
             But if a question arises as to whether the Secretary of  State
             has acted incompatibly with the appellant's Convention rights,
             Page 25 contrary to section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act,  SIAC
             has to determine that matter objectively on the basis  of  its
             own assessment.
        70.  In considering whether the Secretary of State has acted  in  a
             way in which no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State  could  have
             acted, or has taken into account some  irrelevant  matter,  or
             has disregarded  something  to  which  he  should  have  given
             weight,  SIAC  must  have  regard  to  the   nature   of   the
             discretionary power in question, and the Secretary of  State's
             statutory responsibility for deciding whether the  deprivation
             of citizenship is conducive to the public good.  The  exercise
             of the power conferred by section 40(2)  must  depend  heavily
             upon  a  consideration  of  relevant  aspects  of  the  public
             interest,  which  may  include  considerations   of   national
             security and public safety,  as  in  the  present  case.  Some
             aspects of the Secretary of  State's  assessment  may  not  be
             justiciable, as Lord Hoffmann explained in Rehman. Others will
             depend, in many if not most cases, on an  evaluative  judgment
             of matters, such as the level and nature of the risk posed  by
             the appellant, the effectiveness of  the  means  available  to
             address  it,  and  the  acceptability  or  otherwise  of   the
             consequent  danger,  which  are   incapable   of   objectively
             verifiable assessment, as Lord Hoffmann pointed out in  Rehman
             and Lord Bingham of Cornhill reiterated in A,  para  29.  SIAC
             has to bear in mind, in relation to matters of this kind, that
             the  Secretary  of  State's  assessment  should  be   accorded
             appropriate  respect,  for  reasons  both   of   institutional
             capacity (notwithstanding the experience of members  of  SIAC)
             and democratic accountability, as Lord Hoffmann  explained  in
             Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated in A, para 29.
        71.  Nevertheless, SIAC has a  number  of  important  functions  to
             perform on an appeal against a decision under  section  40(2).
             First, it can assess whether the Secretary of State has  acted
             in a way in which no reasonable Secretary of State could  have
             acted, or has taken into account some  irrelevant  matter,  or
             has disregarded  something  to  which  he  should  have  given
             weight, or has been guilty of some procedural impropriety.  In
             doing so, SIAC has to bear in mind the  serious  nature  of  a
             deprivation  of  citizenship,  and   the   severity   of   the
             consequences which can flow from such a decision. Secondly, it
             can consider whether the Secretary of State has erred in  law,
             including whether he has  made  findings  of  fact  which  are
             unsupported by any evidence or are based upon a  view  of  the
             evidence which could not reasonably be held. Thirdly,  it  can
             determine whether the Secretary of  State  has  complied  with
             section 40(4), which provides that the Secretary of State  may
             not make an order under section 40(2) "if he is satisfied that
             the order would make a person  stateless".  Fourthly,  it  can
             consider whether the Secretary of State has acted in breach of
             any other legal principles applicable to his decision, such as
             the obligation arising in appropriate cases under section 6 of
             the Human Rights Act. In carrying out  those  functions,  SIAC
             may well have to consider relevant evidence. It has to bear in
             mind that some decisions may involve considerations which  are
             not justiciable, and that due weight has to be  given  to  the
             findings, evaluations and policies of the Secretary of  State,
             as Lord Hoffmann explained in Rehman and Lord Page 26  Bingham
             reiterated in A. In reviewing compliance with the Human Rights
             Act, it has to make its own independent assessment.
     5. Reliance was also placed by Ms Foot upon the decision of the  Upper
        Tribunal in Sleiman (deprivation of  citizenship;  conduct)  [2017]
        UKUT 00367 (IAC) the headnote of which reads:


        In  an  appeal  against  a  decision  to  deprive  a  person  of  a
        citizenship status, in assessing  whether  the  appellant  obtained
        registration  or  naturalisation  "by  means   of"   fraud,   false
        representation, or concealment of a  material  fact,  the  impugned
        behaviour must be  directly  material  to  the  decision  to  grant
        citizenship.


     6. A further relevant decision of the Upper Tribunal is that of  Hysaj
        (Deprivation of Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 00128 (IAC) decided
        by a Presidential Panel, the headnote of which reads:


         1.   The starting point in  any  consideration  undertaken  by  the
             Secretary of State ("the respondent") as to whether to deprive
             a person of British citizenship must be made by  reference  to
             the rules and policy in force at  the  time  the  decision  is
             made. Rule of law  values  indicate  that  the  respondent  is
             entitled to take advice and act in light of the state  of  law
             and the circumstances known to her. The benefit of  hindsight,
             post the Supreme Court judgment in R (Hysaj) v.  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 82, does not  lessen
             the significant public interest in the deprivation of  British
             citizenship acquired through fraud or deception.
         2.   No legitimate expectation  arises  that  consideration  as  to
             whether or not to deprive citizenship is to be  undertaken  by
             the application of a historic policy that was in  place  prior
             to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hysaj.
         3.   No historic injustice is capable of arising  in  circumstances
             where the respondent erroneously declared British  citizenship
             to be a nullity, rather than seek  to  deprive  under  section
             40(3) of the British Nationality Act  1981,  as  no  prejudice
             arises because it is not possible to establish that a decision
             to deprive should have been  taken  under  a  specific  policy
             within a specific period of time.
         4.   The respondent's  14-year  policy  under  her  deprivation  of
             citizenship policy, which was withdrawn  on  20  August  2014,
             applied a continuous residence requirement that was broken  by
             the imposition of a custodial sentence.
         5.   A refugee is to meet the requirement of article 1A(2)  of  the
             1951 UN Refugee Convention and a person  cannot  have  enjoyed
             Convention status if recognition was consequent to an entirely
             false presentation as to a well-founded fear of persecution.
         6.   Upon deprivation of British citizenship, there is no automatic
             revival of previously held indefinite leave to remain status.
         7.   There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the public  interest
             in maintaining the integrity of the system  by  which  foreign
             nationals are naturalised and permitted to enjoy the  benefits
             of British citizenship. Any effect on day-to-day life that may
             result from a person being deprived of British citizenship  is
             a consequence of the that person's  fraud  or  deception  and,
             without more, cannot tip the proportionality balance, so as to
             compel the respondent to grant  a  period  of  leave,  whether
             short or otherwise.
     7. Whilst it is accepted that a headnote is not the  actual  judgement
        the headnotes set out above accurately reflect the actual  findings
        made by the respective tribunals.

Discussion

     8. As in any case, the starting point is the decision under  challenge
        and the basis on which it is submitted by any challenger that  such
        decision is wrong in law. In her original skeleton  argument  dated
        14 July 2020 Ms Foot set out the three basis on which the  impugned
        decision is challenged in the following terms:

           i. Since his ILR was granted on the basis of his marriage  to  a
              British citizen, and it  was  that  ILR,  which  enabled  the
              Appellant to meet the statutory requirements for citizenship,
              it cannot be said that the citizenship was obtained by  means
              of fraud under section 40(3) of the 1981 Act. In other words,
              the deception was not  directly  material  to  the  grant  of
              citizenship: Sleiman (deprivation  of  citizenship;  conduct)
              [2017] UKUT 367 (IAC). The Appellant obtained his citizenship
              under s6(2) and not 6(1) of the British Nationality Act  1981
              ("the 1981 Act") and his nationality was  irrelevant  to  his
              ability to meet the statutory  criteria  for  naturalisation.
              Had his true nationality been known to the respondent at  the
              material time, it  would  have  made  no  difference  to  the
              Appellant's route to citizenship.
          ii. Even if his citizenship was obtained by means of fraud, it is
              unlawful and  unfair  for  the  Respondent  to  exercise  his
              discretion and deprive the Appellant of his citizenship  now,
              in light of the Appellant's long residence and the time  that
              has  passed  since  he  most  recently  committed  deception.
              Moreover, there are compassionate circumstances in this case.
              The Appellant's son has autism and the impact of  deprivation
              on the family would be highly unsettling.
         iii. Deprivation is  contrary  to  the  Appellant's  rights  under
              Article 8 ECHR and those of his British citizen child,  given
              the impact on him of the Appellant being left without  status
              pending any grant of leave to remain to  him,  taking  proper
              account of his  child's  best  interests  with  reference  to
              section 55 of Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.


     9. Ms Foot accepted in her opening address to the Upper Tribunal  that
        following the decision in Begum she was no longer able to rely upon
        the second of the above arguments but maintained her  challenge  to
        the decision on the first and third grounds, stating that they were
        not materially affected by the decision of the Supreme Court.
    10. The relevant statutory provisions referred to by Ms Foot are:

Section 40(3) British Nationality Act 1981 which reads:

         (3)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status which  results  from  his  registration  or
             naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
             registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

             (a)  fraud,

             (b)  false representation, or

             (c)  concealment of a material fact.



         And sections 6(1) and (2) which read:




         6    Acquisition by naturalisation.

         (1)  If, on an application for naturalisation as a British  citizen
             made by a person of full age and capacity,  the  Secretary  of
             State is satisfied that the applicant fulfils the requirements
             of Schedule 1 for naturalisation as such a citizen under  this
             subsection,  he  may,  if  he  thinks  fit,  grant  to  him  a
             certificate of naturalisation as such a citizen.

         (2)  If, on an application for naturalisation as a British  citizen
             made by a person of full age and capacity who on the  date  of
             the application is married to a British  citizen, or  is  the
             civil partner of a British citizen the Secretary of State  is
             satisfied that  the  applicant  fulfils  the  requirements  of
             Schedule 1 for naturalisation as such  a  citizen  under  this
             subsection,  he  may,  if  he  thinks  fit,  grant  to  him  a
             certificate of naturalisation as such a citizen.




    11. The issue of an individual's conduct is relevant  as  a  result  of
        section 40(2) of the 1981 Act which reads:

"The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a  citizenship
status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that deprivation is  conducive
to the public good."

    12. The requirement for naturalisation under section 6 (2) is not  only
        that a person is of full age and  capacity,  who  at  the  date  of
        application is married to a British citizen or the civil partner of
        a British citizen, but also that such person is able  to  meet  the
        requirements of schedule 1 which  sets  out  the  requirements  for
        naturalisation, the relevant sections of which read:


        Naturalisation as a British citizen under section 6(1)

             1     (1)   Subject  to  paragraph  2,  the  requirements   for
                  naturalisation as a British  citizen  under  section  6(1)
                  are, in the case of any person who applies for it-

                  (a)  the requirements specified in  sub-paragraph  (2)  of
                      this  paragraph,  or  the   alternative   requirement
                      specified in sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph; and

                  (b)  that he is of good character; and

                  (c)  that he has a sufficient knowledge  of  the  English,
                      Welsh or Scottish Gaelic language; and

                  (ca) that he has sufficient knowledge about  life  in  the
United Kingdom; and

                  (d)  that either-

                      (i)  his intentions are such that, in the event of  a
                           certificate  of  naturalisation  as   a   British
                           citizen being granted to him, his home or (if  he
                           has more than one) his principal home will be  in
                           the United Kingdom; or

                      (ii) he intends, in the event of such  a  certificate
                           being granted to him, to enter into, or  continue
                           in, Crown service under  the  government  of  the
                           United Kingdom, or service under an international
                           organisation of which the United Kingdom  or  Her
                           Majesty's government  therein  is  a  member,  or
                           service  in  the  employment  of  a  company   or
                           association established in the United Kingdom.

                  (2)  The requirements referred to in sub-paragraph  (1)(a)
             of this paragraph are-

                      (a)  that the applicant was in the United Kingdom  at
                           the beginning of the period of five years  ending
                           with the date of the application,  and  that  the
                           number of days on which he was  absent  from  the
                           United Kingdom in that  period  does  not  exceed
                           450; and

                      (b)  that the number of days on which he  was  absent
                           from the United Kingdom in the period  of  twelve
                           months so ending does not exceed 90; and

                      (c)  that he was not at any time  in  the  period  of
                           twelve  months  so  ending  subject   under   the
                           immigration laws to any restriction on the period
                           for which he might remain in the United  Kingdom;
                           and

                      (d)  that he was not at any time  in  the  period  of
                           five years so ending in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                           breach of the immigration laws.

                  (3)  The  alternative  requirement  referred  to  in  sub-
                      paragraph (1)(a) of this paragraph  is  that  on  the
                      date of the application he  is  serving  outside  the
                      United Kingdom in Crown service under the  government
                      of the United Kingdom.


         ...

         Subject to paragraph 4, the requirements for  naturalisation  as  a
         British citizen under section 6(2) are, in the case of  any  person
         who applies for it-

             (a)  that he was in the United Kingdom at the beginning of the
                  period  of  three  years  ending  with  the  date  of  the
                  application, and that the number of days on which  he  was
                  absent from the United Kingdom in  that  period  does  not
                  exceed 270; and

             (b)  that the number of days on which he was absent  from  the
                  United Kingdom in the period of twelve  months  so  ending
                  does not exceed 90; and

             (c)  that on the date of the application he  was  not  subject
                  under the immigration  laws  to  any  restriction  on  the
                  period for which he might remain in  the  United  Kingdom;
                  and

             (d)  that he was not at any time in the period of three  years
                  ending with the date of  the  application  in  the  United
                  Kingdom in breach of the immigration laws; and

             (e)  the requirements specified in paragraph 1(1)(b), (c) and
         (ca).


    13. I find the argument that the deception committed by the  appellant,
        which he has admitted to in form and in terms of  his  culpability,
        is immaterial is without merit following an in-depth  consideration
        of the provisions of the requirements for  naturalisation  and  the
        earlier applications for leave.
    14. It is clearly a condition  of  an  application  for  naturalisation
        under section 6(2) that the applicant can satisfy the  requirements
        of paragraph 1(1)(b), the good conduct requirement,  and  that  the
        person must not at any time in the period of three years ending  on
        the date of the application have been  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
        breach of immigration laws, in addition to the primary  requirement
        of being a spouse of a British citizen.
    15. A  person  will  have  previously  breached  the  United  Kingdom's
        immigration laws if, when aged 18 or over, they have:
. overstayed (unless an exception applies)
. breached a condition of their permission
. been, or are, an illegal entrant ('illegal entrant'  includes  those  who
have attempted to enter illegally)
. used deception in an application for entry  clearance  or  permission  to
enter (whether the application was successful or not).
    16. In this regard, it is important to look at the chronology  in  some
        detail. When the appellant entered the United Kingdom on  27  March
        1998, he lied about his true identity by reference to both his true
        name and in claiming to have been Kosovan when he is Albanian.  The
        consequence of  such  deliberate  act  of  deception  is  that  the
        appellant was granted exceptional leave to remain for a  period  of
        one year as a result of the respondent's policy relating to Kosovan
        nationals in existence at that time due to the war in  Kosovo.  But
        for that deception it is highly unlikely the appellant  would  have
        been granted any form of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  As
        Mr McVeety stated in his submissions there was no similar policy in
        force in relation to citizens of Albania, making it likely that the
        appellant  would  have  been  returned  to  Albania  had  his  true
        nationality been known.  The  appellant's  deception  is  therefore
        material not only to his grant of ELR, but also his being permitted
        to remain in the United Kingdom thereafter.
    17. It is accepted the appellant's deception was not  relevant  to  him
        forming a  relationship  with  the  person  he  initially  married,
        although as he appears  from  the  copy  Decree  Absolute  to  have
        married in the name of Artan Berisha, which is not his  true  name,
        that may have given rise to other issues.
    18. What is not disputed is that the appellant  applied  for  leave  to
        remain as a spouse of a British citizen, which was  granted  on  19
        July 2001 until 18 July 2002.
    19. It is important to consider what information was  provided  to  the
        Home Office with  that  application.  An  applicant  completes  the
        required application form in which they are asked to provide  their
        personal details and which contains a declaration at the end of the
        form which is signed by the applicant confirming that those details
        that have been provided are true. In this case, with the  appellant
        still claiming  to  be  Artan  Berisha  both  the  declaration  and
        information as to the appellant's true  name  and  nationality  was
        false.
    20. The deliberate provision of false information for the  purposes  of
        deceiving the Home Office I  find  was  material.  In  addition  to
        considering whether a person met the specific  requirements  of  an
        immigration rule the Secretary of State was  required  to  consider
        whether an individual fell foul of the General Grounds  of  Refusal
        found in paragraph 322 of the Rules. It was not made  out  that  at
        the date the appellant applied for leave that  such  provision  was
        not applicable.
    21. If an applicant failed to disclose a material (relevant)  facts  in
        relation to a  current  application  the  application  was  refused
        pursuant to paragraph 322(1A)  which  was  a  mandatory  ground  of
        refusal.
    22. Also, as submitted by Mr McVeety, when  a  material  fact  was  not
        disclosed in a previous application an application would have  been
        refused under paragraph 322(2) which is a discretionary  ground  of
        refusal.
    23. Any application could also have been refused, had the truth of  the
        appellants identity been know, under paragraph 322(5)  which  reads
        It is undesirable  to  let  an  applicant  stay  because  of  their
        character, behaviour or associations (including  convictions  which
        do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)), or because they are a threat
        to national security. There are no national security issues in this
        appeal, but the deliberate deception by the appellant clearly falls
        within his character of behaviour.
    24. The deception was in relation to both name and nationality. Had the
        Secretary of State discovered who the  appellant  actually  at  the
        time the applications were made it is  likely  that  the  mandatory
        ground of refusal would have been applied, the application refused,
        and the appellant removed from the United  Kingdom.  The  deception
        was therefore material.
    25. When the appellant applied for ILR  on  16  July  2002,  which  was
        granted on 30 August 2002, he maintained the same deception.
    26. To have succeeded in his application  for  ILR  the  appellant  was
        required to show:
         . He was still in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
           partner;
         . He meets the financial requirement;
         . There is no reason to refuse the application under  the  General
           Grounds for Refusal;
         . There is suitable accommodation available to them;
         . They have had leave as a partner (on the 5-year  route)  for  60
           months;
         . They meet the English and Life in UK requirements.


    27. The materiality of the deception is that  had  the  decision  maker
        been aware of the deception at that stage it  was  likely  to  have
        been found that there was good reason  to  refuse  the  application
        under the General Grounds for Refusal, meaning that it was only  as
        a result of the appellant's continued reliance upon the information
        that he knew was not true that he was  able  to  succeed  with  the
        application for ILR.
    28. The appellant then applied for naturalisation as a British  citizen
        under section  6(2)  on  25  October  2003.  As  noted  above,  the
        appellant was in addition to being able to satisfy the requirements
        of being a spouse to satisfy the  specific  points  raised  in  the
        schedule  to  the  Act.  The  appellant  would  have  completed  an
        application  form  for   the   purposes   of   his   naturalisation
        application. A person is not automatically  given  citizenship  but
        must apply and prove on the application that they are so  entitled.
        The application form, Form AN, requires an  applicant  to  set  out
        their personal details including name and nationality. It is  clear
        when he completed the application that in respect of  both  matters
        the appellant continued his deception and  lied.  This  finding  is
        supported by the wording of the Certificate  of  Naturalisation  in
        which the appellant's full name is stated as being 'Berisha  Artan'
        and his place and country of birth as 'Prishtina, Federal  Republic
        of Yugoslavia' information that would  have  been  taken  from  the
        application form.
    29. The appellant was fully aware of the consequences of his  deception
        at the time of his application as there is a clear  endorsement  on
        the application form that the application will be assessed  on  the
        basis of the details provided by an  applicant.  It  is  clear  the
        details that were provided in relation to the key aspects  referred
        to above were wrong. It is clear that not only  did  the  appellant
        deliberately provide false  details,  as  he  had  done  since  his
        arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  that  he  also  lied  when
        completing the declaration at the end of the  form  which  required
        him to certify that the information he had provided was correct.
    30. It is no defence to the appellant to claim there was nowhere on the
        form in which he could  have  revealed  his  correct  identity  and
        provided an explanation as the box requiring  him  to  provide  his
        correct name and nationality would have enabled him to "come clean"
        as to who he really is.  There  is  also  a  section  on  the  form
        enabling an applicant to  provide  'any  other  details'  or  other
        information relevant to the application the Home Office may need to
        consider. The appellant failed to take the opportunity  to  declare
        the truth on every occasion.
    31. The clear thread running through  the  chronology  is  the  act  of
        deception,  the  maintaining  of  the  false  identified   by   the
        appellant, his failure to tell the truth, leading to the grants  of
        leave to remain and citizenship  as  a  result  of  his  deliberate
        actions.
    32. Ms Foot argued that the chain  of  causation  between  the  initial
        deception and the grant of leave  as  a  spouse,  ILR,  leading  to
        citizenship, had been broken, but I do not find this is  the  case.
        Assessing whether the deception was material requires consideration
        of the "but for" test and an assessment of  whether  the  appellant
        was entitled to the leave he sought and would have been granted the
        same if the Secretary of State was aware of who he really was,  and
        of the deliberate deception. I do not find that it  has  been  made
        out that the appellant would have been granted any such leave.
    33. The grant of ELR was on the basis of the claim to be  Kosovan.  Had
        it been know the appellant was Albanian  he  would  not  have  been
        granted such leave.
    34. In relation to leave as the  spouse  of  a  British  citizen,  even
        though the appellant did marry  a  British  citizen  spouse  it  is
        likely any application will have fallen foul of the general grounds
        of refusal in  force  had  the  truth  been  known,  including  the
        mandatory ground.
    35. It is also the case that where  character  and  conduct  come  into
        account the deliberate deceit maintained by the  appellant  over  a
        considerable period of time give strength to an argument  that  any
        application would have been  refused,  which  is  relevant  to  the
        citizenship application.
    36. On the basis of what was known at the relevant times the  decisions
        to grant leave were made. On the basis of what should have been the
        true  situation  declared,  had  the  deception  been  known,   the
        applications for leave would have been refused.
    37. I therefore find there is nothing arguably irrational, unlawful, or
        contrary to the public law principles in relation to the  Secretary
        of State's refusal pursuant to section  40(3)  British  Nationality
        Act 1981 on the basis of the appellant's deception.
    38. Ms Foot's alternative argument is that set out (iii) above,  namely
        that the deprivation is contrary to the appellant's and the  rights
        of his child pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.
    39. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that if he  is  deprived
        of his British citizenship he will not be able to work, not be able
        to rent property and not be able to enjoy the rights  to  which  he
        has been entitled and enjoyed as a British citizen.
    40. Although there was no definitive statement made of what  is  likely
        to occur if the deprivation appeal fails and the Secretary of State
        considers what action to take, it was generally accepted that  with
        a spouse and child in the United Kingdom  it  is  likely  that  the
        appellant will be granted leave to remain, pursuant  to  article  8
        ECHR, although that was no  more  than  a  view  expressed  by  the
        advocates rather than a statement of intent  by  the  Secretary  of
        State.
    41. As noted in Hysaj, any period between the dismissal  of  an  appeal
        and a decision by the respondent as to the next step is  likely  to
        be relatively short. It was not  shown  to  be  otherwise  in  this
        appeal.
    42. Ms Foot submitted the appellant if he loses his rights as a British
        citizen will be unable to work, rent property or enjoy  the  rights
        as a British citizen to which he would  be  entitled,  as  set  put
        above.
    43. It is relevant that the appellants spouse  and  child  are  British
        citizens and that deprivation will have no impact upon  his  wife's
        right as a British citizen to work,  rent  property  or  enjoy  the
        rights she currently does. Although the tenancy of  the  properties
        in the appellant's sole name, the copy  of  the  document  provided
        within the bundle shows it is an Assured  (non  shorthold)  tenancy
        granted between Century Housing Association and the appellant  with
        no evidence being provided to show there had been  any  attempt  to
        contact the Housing Association to ascertain whether they  will  be
        willing to transfer the tenancy into the  appellant's  wife's  sole
        name if he remained unable to be a tenant.
    44. Similarly, it was not made out that the appellant's wife could  not
        continue to work or that if required the  benefits  received  could
        not be adjusted as a result of the loss of  income  to  ensure  the
        minimum needs of this family unit were met.
    45. It was not made out that if the tenancy was  transferred  into  his
        wife's name that the appellant would not be  able  to  continue  to
        live in the property whilst his status was resolved, or that at any
        later date the tenancy could not be  transferred  back  into  joint
        names or his sole name if this was what the family wished to do. It
        has not made out that as a result of the deprivation  decision  any
        member of the family will become homeless.
    46. In relation to the child, who is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  not
        disputed that the child has been diagnosed with autism or that  the
        child  finds  any  alteration  to  his  routine  distressing.   The
        appellant's updated statement  refers  to  his  son  becoming  more
        aggressive during the Covid 19  lockdown  making  it  difficult  to
        control him, which is understandable for a child with  such  needs.
        It was not made out, however, that the relatively short  period  of
        time required between the deprivation decision  taking  effect  and
        any further consideration of leave to  be  granted  will  have  any
        material disruptive effect upon the child's routine.
    47. The child is now back at school and should be back into his  normal
        routine which he has adapted to.  Whilst  the  appellant  expresses
        concern about the impact upon his son's health and  development  he
        fails to explain why the child should be  directly  impacted  by  a
        legal decision. The child is not a party to these  proceedings,  is
        still young, and it is the responsibility of the parents to protect
        the child as far as possible. There is no need  for  the  child  to
        know about the deprivation decision which  is  not  a  decision  to
        remove the appellant from the United Kingdom, but rather a decision
        relating to status that he  obtained  as  a  result  of  deception.
        Whilst it is understandable that uncertainty could lead to  stress,
        it was not made out that could not be managed  within  the  family,
        such as to protect the child. If  the  speculation  regarding  what
        might happen in the future does occur, in  that  the  appellant  is
        granted leave pursuant to article 8 ECHR within a relatively  short
        period of time, life within the family unit can continue as before,
        albeit  without  the  appellant  having  the  benefit  of   British
        citizenship.
    48. I do not find it has been made out that the impact the decision  to
        deprive the appellant of his British citizenship, as opposed to the
        possible impact of any decision  to  remove  him  from  the  United
        Kingdom if the same was to be made, amounts to an interference with
        a protected right, or is contrary to  the  best  interests  of  the
        child on the evidence, sufficient to warrant  a  finding  that  any
        such impact is disproportionate to article 8 ECHR.
    49. If an adverse human right decision was made the appellant will have
        a right of appeal against the same.
    50. In conclusion, I find the appellant has  failed  to  discharge  the
        burden of proof upon him to the required standard to show that  his
        deception was not material to the grants of leave  and  citizenship
        at the various points during which he has maintained his deception,
        or that the decision to deprive him of his British  citizenship  is
        unlawful as being contrary to article 8 ECHR. It is  not  made  out
        there   are   sufficiently   strong   exceptional   or   compelling
        circumstances which would justify the appeal being allowed.
    51. On that basis I dismiss the appeal.

Decision

    52. I dismiss the appeal.

   Anonymity.


    53. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 14 May 2021

