
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: DC/00082/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th September 2019               |On 18th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DT
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Harvey, of Counsel, instructed by Turpin Miller
                    LLP Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

       Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Albania born in 1983. He arrived in  the
       UK in October 1999 and claimed asylum with his true name but with  an
       incorrect date  of  birth  (1983  instead  of  1979).  He  also  said
       untruthfully that he was from Kosovo when in fact he was  from  Kukes
       in northern Albania. He was given four  years  exceptional  leave  to
       remain from March 2000, and then indefinite leave to remain.  He  was
       naturalised as a British citizen in March 2006.

    2. In 2007 the claimant married his wife in Albania, and she applied for
       entry  clearance.  The  British  Embassy  in  Albania  notified   the
       Secretary of State that the claimant had, in their opinion,  obtained
       his naturalisation by means of fraud. In September 2008 the Secretary
       of State wrote to the claimant setting  out  that  consideration  was
       being given to the deprivation of his British citizenship, however on
       28th October 2008 he was informed that no decision had been  made  to
       deprive him of his citizenship. On 11th January 2010  the  respondent
       informed the claimant that steps  were  being  taken  to  remove  his
       citizenship and that he had a right of appeal. He exercised his right
       of appeal. This appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal,  but
       an error of law was found by the Upper Tribunal in the  decision  and
       it was set aside. The deprivation decision of 11th January  2010  was
       withdrawn by the Secretary of State  in  July  2013  due  to  nullity
       proceedings being commenced.

    3. On 22nd March 2013 the Secretary of State issued a decision that  the
       claimant had never been a British citizen and, as a consequence,  his
       certificate of naturalisation was null and void.  A  judicial  review
       challenging this decision was commenced, and  on  3rd  February  2018
       that decision was withdrawn following the  decision  of  the  Supreme
       Court in Hysaj & Ors v SSHD [2017] UKSC 82.

    4. The Secretary of State then made a decision on 7th April 2018 stating
       that he was once again considering  depriving  the  claimant  of  his
       citizenship under s.40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981,  which
       was followed by a decision giving notice of intention to deprive  the
       claimant of his citizenship dated  14th  December  2018.  His  appeal
       against this decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Phull
       in a determination promulgated on the 29th April  2019,  however  for
       the reasons set out in my decision appended at Annex A I  found  that
       the First-tier Tribunal had erred and set aside the decision with  no
       findings preserved.

    5. The matter came before me to remake the appeal.

       Submissions - Remaking

    6. The Secretary of State submits, in short summary  that  the  claimant
       committed fraud in order to obtain his British  citizenship.  He  was
       untruthful about his age and citizenship when he applied for leave to
       remain in the UK and did not disclose that deception when he  applied
       for citizenship; and, it is submitted by the Secretary  of  State  he
       would not have been granted citizenship if  he  had  told  the  truth
       about that deception; and thus the deception was  therefore  material
       in his obtaining citizenship.

    7. As the claimant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
       with his British citizen children in the UK the  Secretary  of  State
       argues that he has a strong claim to remain under Article 8  ECHR  by
       application of s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act 2002, and possibly also by virtue of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  of
       the Immigration Rules as very shortly he will have been in the UK for
       20 years, and so, it is argued, his removal from  the  UK  is  not  a
       foreseeable consequence of deprivation of his citizenship as he could
       make a strong human rights application to remain.  Whilst  Mr  Melvin
       accepted that there would be consequences of the deprivation, such as
       the claimant having no work permission and thus  having  to  give  up
       work, he argues  that  the  impact  on  the  claimant  would  not  be
       sufficiently compelling given the weight that must be  given  to  the
       public interest in depriving those who deceive the Secretary of State
       in the citizenship application process. It  was  not  clear,  in  any
       case, that the claimant would not have savings which could  tidy  him
       over this period. This was not one of the rare and  compelling  cases
       where discretion should have been exercised in the claimant's  favour
       not to deprive him of his citizenship despite the power to do so.  As
       such his appeal under s.40(3) of the  British  Nationality  Act  1981
       should fail as discretion was exercised appropriately and  fairly  to
       deprive him of his citizenship.

    8. Ms Harvey, for the  claimant,  submits  that  the  appeal  should  be
       allowed for the following reasons. She contends that I erred  in  law
       in my error of law decision in finding that the policy generally  not
       to deprive those who had been  in  the  UK  for  14  years  of  their
       citizenship, which  was in force until the 20th August 2014, was  not
       relevant to the legality of the decision to deprive this claimant  of
       his citizenship made on 14th December 2018. She accepts however  that
       this is a point that she will have to argue  in  an  application  for
       leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal if the appeal does not succeed
       on  the  alternative  basis  which  she  puts  forward:  namely  that
       discretion should have been exercised differently and  the  applicant
       should not have been deprived of his  citizenship  because  it  would
       amount to a disproportionate interference with the claimant  and  his
       family's right to respect for family and private life as protected by
       Article 8 ECHR.

    9. The claimant has a British citizen  son,  A,  born  in  May  2008  in
       Albania, who entered the UK clandestinely in 2011  with  his  mother,
       the claimant's wife. His son has now lived in the UK for more than  7
       years. The couple also have a daughter, AA, who was born in the UK on
       1st December 2012, and who is also a British citizen. The  claimant's
       wife is currently on the ten year route to settlement as a wife of  a
       British citizen. She will  complete  the  first  30  months  of  this
       process in October 2019, and thus will have to apply next month for a
       further tranche of Article 8 ECHR leave, which she will be unable  to
       do if her husband is no longer a British citizen. It is argued by  Ms
       Harvey that the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation of
       the claimant's  citizenship  are  disproportionate  as  there  is  no
       assurance in this case that the claimant will not be left without any
       form of status for a period of time, in fact the  submissions  of  Mr
       Melvin made it clear that this would be the case and it would  be  up
       to the claimant to make an application on human  rights  grounds  and
       that he will therefore have a period in "limbo" of many months.

   10. Ms Harvey argues that as someone with no status the claimant will not
       be permitted by law to to rent property; work; claim benefits; drive;
       his bank account can be closed; and he will  not  be  permitted  free
       access to all of the National Health Service. These  provisions  make
       up the "compliant environment" policy of the government  designed  to
       make it hard for those without permission to remain to  stay  in  the
       UK. The claimant is currently in work, and his wife  works  part-time
       as a warehouse operative, and  the  probable  outcome  of  his  being
       unable to continue in his work and being  unable  to  remain  in  his
       rented property once he has no leave to remain  is  that  the  family
       would be forced out of their current accommodation and would have  to
       rely upon Social Services  to  provide  accommodation;  or  that  the
       claimant and his wife would be forced to leave the UK and  return  to
       Albania, which would in turn have a detrimental impact on the welfare
       of their  young  British  citizen  children,  who  would  thereby  be
       deprived of the benefit of their British  citizenship  and  their  EU
       rights. It is also argued that  deprivation  of  citizenship  on  the
       basis of deception under s.40(3) of the 1981 Act should be seen as  a
       less serious basis of deprivation than deprivation under  s.40(3)  of
       the 1981 Act on the basis that the deprivation is  conducive  to  the
       public good, and therefore ultimately on consideration of all of  the
       facts of this case  it  should  be  found  that  deprivation  of  the
       claimant's citizenship is a disproportionate  interference  with  the
       claimant and his family's right to respect  for  family  and  private
       life.

       Conclusions - Remaking

   11. Under s.40(3) of the British Nationality, Act 1981 the  Secretary  of
       State may deprive a person of citizenship if the Secretary  of  State
       is satisfied that the naturalisation was  obtained  by  means  of  a)
       fraud, b) false misrepresentation or c)  concealment  of  a  material
       fact. As set out in  Pirzada  (Deprivation  of  citizenship:  general
       principles) [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC) at paragraph 9C the deception  must
       have motivated and been operative in the grant of citizenship. It  is
       accepted by all that the claimant lied about his age and  nationality
       when he obtained his exceptional leave to remain and indefinite leave
       to remain. I have found, in the error of  law  decision,  that  these
       deceptions were operative in the grant of his leave  to  remain,  and
       the failure to  declare  these  deceptions  on  the  application  for
       naturalisation and the confirmation instead that the claimant was  of
       good character, motivated the acquisition of citizenship.

   12. I must now go on to consider whether the Secretary  of  State  should
       have exercised his discretion differently. As Ms Harvey sets  out  s.
       40(3) of the 1981 Act gives the  Secretary  of  State  the  power  to
       deprive the claimant of his citizenship not a duty to do so.  It will
       not be lawful to  exercise  that  power  if  it  would  amount  to  a
       disproportionate interference with the Article 8 ECHR rights  of  the
       claimant and his family.

   13. This interference with the claimant's Article  8  ECHR  rights  might
       include removal from the UK  if  this  is  a  reasonably  foreseeable
       consequence of deprivation of citizenship, see  paragraph  40  of  BA
       (deprivation of  citizenship:  appeals)  [2018]  UKUT  85  citing  AB
       (British citizenship:  deprivation:  Deliallisi  considered)  Nigeria
       [2016] UKUT 451. There is agreement by the parties that the  claimant
       would have a strong Article  8  ECHR  claim  to  remain  in  the  UK,
       particularly  by  reference  to   s.117B(6)   of   the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  as  he  has  two  British  citizen
       children, one of who has resided in the UK for 7 years. There are  no
       removal directions and no  deportation  order  with  respect  to  the
       claimant.  In these circumstances I do not find removal from  the  UK
       would be a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the  deprivation  of
       citizenship, particularly when consideration is given to what is said
       by the Court of Appeal at paragraphs 28 and 29 of Abdul Aziz & Ors  v
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1884
       regarding it not being necessary to conduct a proleptic  analysis  of
       whether an appellant would be likely to be deported or removed  at  a
       later stage.

   14. I do not find that the  deprivation  of  the  claimant's  citizenship
       would affect the ability  of  the  claimant's  wife  to  make  a  new
       application to extend her leave to remain in October 2019 on  Article
       8 ECHR grounds. She could put forward the same strong Article 8  ECHR
       grounds to be permitted to remain which it is agreed are open to  the
       claimant in an application to extend her leave to remain.  She  would
       continue to have s.3C 1971 Act leave to remain whilst her application
       was considered. She would continue to be lawfully present  and  would
       be able to work part time as a warehouse  operative  as  she  current
       does. She would be able to  rent  a  property,  drive,  have  a  bank
       account and use the national health service. The children are British
       citizens and their entitlements to all forms of  educational,  health
       and social support in the UK would also be  unaltered,  and  likewise
       they would continue to benefit from being EU citizens.

   15. I do find that it is reasonably foreseeable however that the claimant
       will find himself in the UK without leave to remain for a period of a
       number of months. There is no assurance that he will be granted leave
       at the point when he deprived of his citizenship; and  as  Ms  Harvey
       has observed Mr Melvin clearly took the position that it would be  up
       to the claimant to make an application at that stage which would then
       be considered in due course by the Secretary of State.  As  a  result
       during this period of time,  as  set  out  in  Ms  Harvey's  skeleton
       argument, the claimant would not be entitled to work; he would not be
       entitled to benefits; he would not be permitted  to  drive;  and  his
       bank account could be closed down. He would not be entitled  to  free
       NHS  treatment  bar  in  limited  circumstances,  such  as  emergency
       treatment. There is no evidence before me that the claimant  has  any
       current health problems however, and further I have no evidence which
       shows on the balance of probabilities that the family's income  would
       become so low as to impact on the  welfare  of  the  British  citizen
       children as I have no evidence about the earnings of  the  claimant's
       wife or anything in the way of a family budget, and as Mr Melvin  has
       pointed out there is no evidence regarding the current level  of  the
       family's savings.

   16. I find that the most serious of the  consequences  flowing  from  the
       "compliant environment" legislation on the evidence before me is that
       under s.21  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  the  claimant  would  be
       disqualified from occupying  premises  under  a  residential  tenancy
       agreement as he is a person who needs leave to enter  or  remain  and
       does not have it, and I find that the claimant  does  currently  live
       (with his family) in rented accommodation  with  an  assured  tenancy
       agreement. Under further provisions of the 2014 Act his landlord and/
       or any agent might be subject to a penalty notice or be found to have
       committed a criminal offence if he were to remain in the property. As
       a result, I find that a foreseeable consequence of  the  decision  to
       deprive the claimant of his citizenship is that he will not  be  able
       to live in his current home. As I have  indicated  above  I  have  no
       evidence to find on the balance of probabilities that the  claimant's
       wife and his children could not continue to reside in the property as
       I have no evidence indicating that his wife would not be able to  pay
       the rent either from income, savings or help from friends or  family.
       There is also no evidence before me indicating that the claimant,  or
       indeed his entire family might not be able to live  with  friends  or
       neighbours in the UK during this period. It follows I have  no  basis
       to make any negative findings going  to  the  likely  impact  on  his
       family life, and that of his family,  of  his  losing  his  right  to
       occupy premises under a residential tenancy agreement.

   17. I find therefore on the state of the evidence  before  me  concerning
       the impact of a period of this period of "limbo" on the claimant  and
       his family, which I have assessed as  his  being  likely  to  have  a
       number of months without leave to remain whilst  his  application  on
       human rights grounds is considered, dose not suffice to show that  on
       the balance of probabilities that the deprivation of his  citizenship
       would amount to a disproportionate interference with  his  Article  8
       ECHR rights or otherwise would amount to  a  breach  of  his  or  his
       family's human rights. I also do not find that  there  is  any  other
       exceptional feature of this case which means that  discretion  should
       have been exercised differently. I note what was said  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal at paragraph 44 of BA (deprivation of citizenship:  appeals)
       [2018] UKUT 85:  namely  that  the  Tribunal  is  required  to  place
       significant weight on the  fact  that  the  Secretary  of  state  has
       decided, in the public interest,  that  a  person  who  has  employed
       deception to obtain citizenship should be deprived of that status. On
       the totally of the  evidence  before  me  I  am  satisfied  that  the
       Secretary of State acted properly in  exercising  his  discretion  to
       deprive the claimant of his citizenship under  s.40(2)  of  the  1981
       Act.



Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. I dismiss the appeal.




       Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do  so  in  order  to
       protect the anonymity of family members.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 10th September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of Law Decision



DECISION AND REASONS

       Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Albania born in 1983. He arrived in  the
       UK in October 1999 and claimed asylum with his true name but with  an
       incorrect date of birth  (1983  instead  of  1979)  .  He  also  said
       untruthfully that he was from Kosovo when in fact he was  from  Kukes
       in Northern Albania. He was given four  years  exceptional  leave  to
       remain from March 2000, and then indefinite leave to remain.  He  was
       naturalised as a British citizen in March 2006.

    2. In 2007 the claimant married his wife in Albania, and she applied for
       entry  clearance.  The  British  Embassy  in  Albania  notified   the
       Secretary of State that the claimant had, in their opinion,  obtained
       his naturalisation by means of fraud. In September 2008 the Secretary
       of State wrote to the claimant setting  out  that  consideration  was
       being given to the deprivation of his British citizenship, however on
       28th October 2008 he was informed that no decision had been  made  to
       deprive him of his citizenship. On 11th January 2010  the  respondent
       informed the claimant that steps  were  being  taken  to  remove  his
       citizenship and that he had a right of appeal. He exercised his right
       of appeal. This appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal,  but
       an error of law was found by the Upper Tribunal in the  decision  and
       it was set aside. The decision of 11th January 2010 was withdrawn  by
       the Secretary of State in July 2013 due to  the  nullity  proceedings
       set out below.

    3. On 22nd March 2013 the Secretary of State issued a decision that  the
       claimant had never been a British citizen and, as a consequence,  his
       certificate of naturalisation was null and void.  A  judicial  review
       challenging this decision was commenced, and  on  3rd  February  2018
       that decision was withdrawn following the  decision  of  the  Supreme
       Court in Hysaj & Ors v SSHD [2017] UKSC 82.

    4. The Secretary of State then made a decision on 7th April 2018 stating
       that he was once again considering  depriving  the  claimant  of  his
       citizenship under s.40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981,  which
       was followed by a decision giving notice of intention to deprive  the
       claimant of his citizenship dated  14th  December  2018.  His  appeal
       against this decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Phull
       in a determination promulgated on the 29th April 2019.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge SH Smith on 16th May 2019 on the  basis  that  it
       was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in  taking
       account of a former policy which stated that  deprivation  would  not
       normally be pursued  in  cases  of  14  years  residence;  in  giving
       consideration to the  withdrawn  decision  to  treat  the  claimant's
       citizenship as a nullity; and in applying Part 5A of the Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in an Article 8 ECHR assessment  when
       removal is not an issue.

    6. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

    7. At the start of the hearing I raised  with  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  the
       issue of whether she accepted that the  grounds  of  appeal  did  not
       challenge the findings at paragraph 33 of the decision of the  First-
       tier  Tribunal  which  finds  that  there  was   not   an   operative
       misrepresentation by the appellant.  She  argued  that  there  was  a
       general challenge to paragraph 39 but accepted that the  grounds  did
       not include a challenge to this finding specifically. She applied  to
       amend her grounds to include a challenge that there was an  error  of
       law in paragraph 33 of the decision in failing to take  into  account
       material evidence (namely the reasons for refusal letter  dated  14th
       December 2018) and adequately reason this finding.  Mr  Malik  argued
       that I should not permit the amendment as the Secretary of State  was
       applying very late and had been on notice of the issue with paragraph
       33, as it was raised  by  the  claimant's  representatives  in  their
       responses to this appeal. However, he said that  he  would  not  feel
       prejudiced if the Secretary of State  were  permitted  to  amend  the
       grounds and was ready to argue the point as he was confident he could
       succeed in showing there was no error of law in this paragraph.

    8. Whilst the Secretary of State was in a very weak  position  to  apply
       orally to amend the grounds at this point in time I permitted him  to
       do so as I concluded that it  was  ultimately  in  the  interests  of
       justice that the point was considered as it was  possible  that  this
       litigation was more likely to become even further  extended  if  this
       issue was not considered at this point in time, and in the context of
       Mr Malik being certain he was fully prepared to argue the issue.

       Submissions - Error of Law

    9. In his skeleton argument the Secretary of  State  contends  that  the
       claimant committed fraud when applying  for  citizenship  because  he
       said that was a  person  of  good  character  on  his  naturalisation
       application form when he  had  created  a  false  identity  and  lied
       throughout the immigration process to obtain leave to remain  in  the
       UK, and so should have answered no to  the  question  regarding  good
       character. It is argued that he therefore falls to be deprived of his
       citizenship under s.40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981.

   10. Ms Willocks-Briscoe argued her new ground with respect  to  paragraph
       33 of the decision as follows. She argued that it  was  unequivocally
       stated in the refusal letter of 14th December 2018 which led to  this
       appeal that the  claimant  had  been  granted  exceptional  leave  to
       remain, and thus subsequently indefinite leave to remain, because  he
       had said he was a minor from Kosovo, see paragraphs 12 to 15 of  that
       letter. In  accordance  with  the  decision  in  BA  (deprivation  of
       citizenship: appeals) [2018] UKUT 00085 it was necessary  to  see  if
       the deception motivated the grant of citizenship.  The  evidence  was
       clearly there that it did; it had not been apparently considered; and
       the decision not properly reasoned on this point.

   11. It was also argued for the Secretary of State   that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law in  allowing  the  appeal  by  reference  to  a
       previous policy in Chapter 55 of the Nationality Instructions on  the
       basis  that  it  might  have  protected   him   against   deprivation
       proceedings ( as it was operative between June 2010 and  August  2014
       and stated that when  a  person  had  14  years  residence  that  the
       Secretary of State would not normal deprive him of  his  citizenship)
       and would have applied to him as he had 14 years residence  when  the
       nullity proceedings were commenced.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
       that reliance on this policy was unfairly denied  him  because  these
       proceedings were brought after the policy had ceased to  have  affect
       because the respondent had wrongly pursued nullity proceedings, which
       had then to be withdrawn as they were not lawful in  accordance  with
       Hysaj. The Secretary of State argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       have inadequately reasoned the conclusion that  an  inoperative  past
       policy could benefit the claimant at  this  point,  see  particularly
       what is said in MO  (Date  of  Decision:  Applicable  Rules)  Nigeria
       [2007] UKAIT 00057. The Secretary of State had  good  reason  not  to
       pursue these  deprivation proceedings whilst it was thought that  the
       claimant's citizenship was a nullity following decisions of the Court
       of Appeal, and thus properly did not do so again until it  was  clear
       that his citizenship was not a  nullity  following  the  decision  in
       Hysaj in the Supreme Court made in 2018. There is no question of  the
       Secretary of State having delayed improperly in  taking  the  nullity
       proceedings or in bringing these proceedings when the  nullity  issue
       concluded, or his having acted in bad  faith  or  incompetently.  The
       Secretary of State had to apply his policies  which  applied  at  the
       time of decision and there was no basis to think the  claimant  could
       have the benefit of this past policy. It  would  create  considerable
       uncertainty if where the law was found to have been misunderstood  by
       a higher court the Secretary of State had  to  apply  old  policy  to
       applicants. Further in 2010, when the  first  decision  was  made  to
       deprive the  claimant  of  his  citizenship,  the  claimant  had  not
       actually been  present  in  the  UK  for  14  years,  and  there  was
       discretion within the policy for the Secretary of State not to  grant
       to those who had been present for 14 years if that was in the  public
       interest, see paragraph the policy and paragraph 23  of  the  refusal
       letter of 14th December 2018, and the  Secretary  of  State  properly
       decides  issues  of  the  public  interest.   The  issue  of  general
       discretion is further considered  at  paragraph  33  of  the  refusal
       letter where the overall proportionality of the decision  to  deprive
       the claimant of his citizenship is considered.

   12. The Secretary of State also argues that the First-tier Tribunal  also
       erroneously considered it relevant  that  he  had  British  wife  and
       children, and had private life ties with the UK, and that there would
       be an unlawful interference with  his  Article  8  ECHR  rights,  and
       applied s.117B of the 2002  Act  when  that  is  only  applicable  to
       appeals under the Immigration Acts, which does not include an  appeal
       such as this one under the British Nationality Act 1981. Further  the
       claimant  does  not  face  removal  from  the  UK  as  a  foreseeable
       consequence of deprivation of his citizenship as it is found that  he
       has a strong Article 8 ECHR claim to remain and there is  no  removal
       decision, see BA.  There was a general failure  to  look  at  forward
       looking issues in this analysis.

   13. In his skeleton argument and oral submissions Mr  Malik  argues  that
       it is accepted that the  claimant  made  false  representations  with
       respect to his age and nationality to the Secretary of State when  he
       claimed asylum, but there were also  elements  which  have  not  been
       challenged as false including the claimant being injured because of a
       land mine in the Kosovan/Serbian war. The  claimant  got  exceptional
       leave, according to his document granting his  exceptional  leave  to
       remain, due to his "particular circumstances" which could mean  those
       circumstances in the Balkans  at  that  time  and  not  his  age  and
       nationality. There was  no  evidence  that  the  claimant's  age  and
       nationality were operative reasons for the grant of indefinite  leave
       to remain or his naturalisation. This was  the  submission  that  was
       accepted at paragraph 33 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   14. It is argued for the claimant that when coming to the  conclusion  at
       paragraph 33 it is clear that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  consider
       what was said in the reasons for refusal letter,  but  there  was  no
       supporting  or  contemporaneous  evidence  Home  Office  records  and
       further what is said in the letter  of  14th  December  2018  is  not
       compatible with what is written in decision letter. At  paragraph  12
       of the decision letter of 14th December 2018 it says:  "Had  it  been
       known that you were in fact an adult from  Albania,  your  claim  for
       asylum would have been refused and you would not have  qualified  for
       exceptional  leave,  as  you  would  not  have  been   in   need   of
       international protection under the Refugee Convention."  The grant of
       exceptional leave documents dated 18th March  2000  explicitly  state
       however that the  claimant  was  refused  refugee  status  under  the
       Refugee Convention and so clearly he did not get this status  because
       he was a Kosovan minor (as opposed to an Albanian adult) found to  be
       in need of international protection and it was not accepted  that  he
       had a well founded fear of persecution in Kosovo. Instead that  grant
       was due to the "particular circumstances of your case".  As a  result
       the First-tier Tribunal was properly not satisfied that there was  an
       operative deception on the facts  of  this  case,  and  in  turn  was
       properly not satisfied that his naturalisation was acquired by  means
       of false representations under s.40(3) of the British Nationality Act
       1981.

   15. If this argument is correct any issues with the failure  to  exercise
       discretion under s.40(3) due to the policy are  immaterial.  However,
       even  though  previous  policy  in  Chapter  55  of  the  Nationality
       Instructions would not have applied to the claimant at  the  time  of
       the original decision in 2010, it would have  applied  at  the  point
       when a First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the matter  if  the  ill-
       judged nullity decision had not  been  made  in  March  2013,  as  by
       October 2013 the applicant would have had 14 years  presence  in  the
       UK.  It is argued by Mr Malik  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted
       properly in  considering  the  application  of  this  policy  as  the
       Secretary of State had committed an unlawful  act  in  purporting  to
       nullify the claimant's citizenship. He argued that  getting  the  law
       wrong had the same affect as the Secretary of  State  acting  in  bad
       faith, or acting in a culpable way with undue delay as was  found  in
       FH (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2009 EWCA Civ 385,  and  in  FH  (Bangladesh)
       the appellant was found to be able to benefit from a previous  policy
       because of that delay. He also identified that the  policy  had  been
       put to the Secretary of State in the  grounds  and  by  the  previous
       representatives and there had been a  failure  by  the  Secretary  of
       State to say that they would not  have  applied  the  policy  to  the
       claimant had it been still in force on  public  policy  grounds,  and
       hence the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the applicant  was
       entitled to the consideration and benefit of this policy, as set  out
       at paragraph 39 of that decision, was entirely proper.

   16. Mr Malik accepted that there was a failure to look for the  issue  of
       reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation of citizenship  in
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal when  considering  Article  8
       ECHR but argued that the First-tier Tribunal were permitted  to  look
       at discretion under s.40(3) of the British Nationality  Act  1981  as
       was found in Deliallisi (British citizen: deprivation appeal:  Scope)
       [2013] UKUT 00439. As a result it  was  correct  for  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to have looked at  the  issue  of  balancing  public  policy
       considerations against an individuals rights.

   17. Mr Malik also drew attention to the fact that at paragraph 7  of  the
       decision the First-tier Tribunal  had  seemingly  applied  the  wrong
       burden of proof as it was said to be on the claimant when clearly  it
       was for the Secretary of  State  to  show  that  the  conditions  for
       deprivation of citizenship in s.40(3) of the British Nationality  Act
       1981 were met.

   18. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination, but  I  sought
       the views of the parties on where the matter should be  remade  if  I
       found that there was an error of law. It was agreed that it should be
       remade in the Upper Tribunal if an error was found.

       Conclusions - Error of Law

   19. Under s.40(3) of the British Nationality, Act 1981 the  Secretary  of
       State may deprive a person of citizenship if the Secretary  of  State
       is satisfied that the naturalisation was obtained by means of  fraud,
       false misrepresentations or concealment of material fact. As set  out
       in Pirzada at paragraph 9C the deception must have motivated and been
       operative in the grant of citizenship.

   20. At paragraph 33 of the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  finds  that
       the Secretary  of  State  has  "not  elaborated  what  the  operative
       misrepresentations were" and that there was a "lack of evidence" that
       the reason the claimant got his exceptional leave was  just  age  and
       nationality. At paragraph 39 the First-tier Tribunal  find  that  for
       all of these reasons the deprivation is not lawful or appropriate, so
       I find that this was one basis on which the deprivation decision  was
       found not to be lawful, along with the argument about the failure  to
       apply  the  previous  policy  in  Chapter  55  of   the   Nationality
       Instructions and the incompatibility with Article 8 ECHR.

   21. I find that there was an error of law by way of a failure to consider
       material evidence and give reasons for why the evidence as set out in
       the reasons for refusal letter of 14th December 2018 did not  satisfy
       the First-tier Tribunal  that  it  was  for  reason  of  his  falsely
       provided age and nationality that the grant of exceptional leave  was
       made to the claimant. The Secretary of State says at paragraph  9  of
       that letter explicitly that the grant  was  on  the  basis  that  the
       claimant was an unaccompanied minor from  Kosovo,  and  reference  is
       made at paragraph 12 to policies relating to unaccompanied minors and
       to a country policy relating to "Nationals of Kosovo". I do not  find
       that the statement in paragraph 12 that the claimant would  not  have
       been granted refugee status as an  Albanian  adult  is  contradictory
       with the grant of discretionary leave papers issued in March 2000  to
       the claimant. This statement is added to explain that whilst  he  was
       granted discretionary leave under the above policies  (and  obviously
       therefore not refugee status) if he had told the truth he  would  not
       have qualified for refugee status on the true facts either.

   22. I likewise find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  finding
       that the decision was legally flawed for want  of  consideration  and
       benefit from the respondent's previous policy at Chapter  55  of  the
       Nationality Instructions, which was removed in August 2014 and  which
       gave weight to presence in the UK for 14  years  as  a  factor  which
       would generally not lead to deprivation proceedings being  initiated.
       The Secretary of State acted properly, and not in bad faith or in any
       way which could properly be described as culpable,  in  pursuing  the
       nullity proceedings against the claimant as  there  was  a  generally
       accepted basis in law for those proceedings prior to the decision  in
       the Supreme Court in Hysaj. There is a long  line  of  caselaw  which
       flows from the House of Lords decision in Odelola v SSHD [2009]  UKHL
       25 which says that the policies of the Secretary of  State  (in  that
       case as set out in the Immigration Rules) which prevail at  the  time
       of decision are the ones that must be  applied  and  not  those  that
       prevail at the time of application. This policy was not in  force  at
       the time of decision on  the 14th December 2018, and in  addition  it
       would create considerable legal uncertainty if absent  bad  faith  or
       some other culpable or undue behaviour leading to  delay  in  dealing
       with a matter, as identified in  FH  (Bangladesh),  that  a  previous
       policy could be deemed to have applicability.

   23. As accepted by Mr Malik the discussion of Article 8 ECHR errs in  law
       as it fails to focus on the foreseeable consequences  of  deprivation
       as is  required,  see  AB,  as  the  reasons  for  finding  that  the
       deprivation is a disproportionate interference  with  the  claimant's
       Article 8 ECHR rights relate to the past (the conduct of the  nullity
       proceedings and the failure to apply the previous policy  at  Chapter
       55 of the Nationality Instructions).

   24. As a result I find that all three separate reasons for the First-tier
       Tribunal finding that the deprivation  proceedings  were  not  lawful
       contain errors of law, and conclude that the decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal must be set aside with no findings preserved.



Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. I adjourn the remaking hearing.



       Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do  so  in  order  to
       protect the anonymity of family members.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 17th July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

