
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00003/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|26 September 2014                             |10 October 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           EGEGBARA ANTHONY OKERE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hamid K&S @ Law, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   We will refer to  the  Secretary  of  State,  the  appellant  in  these
    proceedings, as the Secretary of State and to the respondent, Mr Okere,
    as the appellant for ease of reference.  This is an appeal against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State to deprive the appellant of  British
    nationality under Section 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981.



2.   The appellant originally entered the UK some time around 1991  using  a
    false name, namely Nicholas Olajide, with a date of birth of 10 October
    1958.  He was granted leave for six months and thereafter  remained  in
    the UK, having submitted a number of applications for leave  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  He was married using the name Nicholas Olajide  and
    a further application for leave to remain on the basis of his  marriage
    was  made  on  10  August  1994  and  granted  until  10  August  1995.
    Eventually he was granted naturalisation on the basis of his  residence
    on 27 February 2009, again in the identity of Nicholas Olajide.

3.   The appellant's real name is Egegbara Anthony Okere.  Using  that  name
    he applied for and obtained a residence  permit  on  22  November  2002
    until 10 March 2008.  He also applied for a transfer of  conditions  on
    to a new passport.  On 27 February 2008  he  made  an  application  for
    permanent residency which was lodged with the Home  Office.   That  was
    initially refused but  then  granted  on  28  September  2009.   On  16
    February 2012 he was naturalised in the identity  of  Anthony  Egegbara
    Okere with a date of birth of 10 July 1959.  In making this application
    for naturalisation he failed  to  disclose  in  paragraph  1.8  of  the
    application that he already held British citizenship  in  the  name  of
    Nicholas Olajide.  He also failed to disclose that  he  had  previously
    been known to immigration authorities in that  name.   The  explanation
    that was given by the appellant was that his father had died in Nigeria
    on 24 May 1990 and his uncle  had  started  to  threaten  him  over  an
    inheritance.  Believing his life was at risk he  managed  to  obtain  a
    Nigerian  passport  in  the  false  name  of   Nicholas   Olajide   and
    subsequently obtained a visa in that name.

4.   The Secretary of State in the decision letter dated 18 March 2004  gave
    consideration to the guidance which was in force at that  time,  namely
    chapter 55.7.2.6 of the Nationality Staff instructions.   The  guidance
    states:

         "Although the Secretary of State will not normally deprive  someone
         of their British citizenship where they have more  than  14  years'
         residence in the United Kingdom (long residence), circumstances  in
         which the Secretary of  State  may  still  proceed  to  deprive  of
         British citizenship include, but are not limited to, where:

             'Deception has been used more than once in individuals dealing
             with the UKBA e.g. multiple frauds using different identities,
             rather than repeat episodes of the same factual  deception  at
             different immigration stages'."

     At paragraph 10 the Home Office letter states:

         "Due to the nature of your client's case and  the  fact  that  your
         client has been involved in major immigration fraud since 1991 when
         your client was granted Entry Code 5N as a visitor with  valid  LTE
         until  12/01/1992  and  eventually  overstayed  and  has  now  been
         naturalised  as  a  British  citizen  in  two  identities,  it   is
         considered appropriate to  take  deprivation  action  against  your
         client regardless of the length of your client's residence."

5.   Judge Herbert in his determination  at  paragraph  58  considered  that
    this was not a case of using multiple false identities or  using  false
    or bogus claims or relatives to obtain leave to enter or remain in  the
    United Kingdom. He found as a matter of fact that while the appellant's
    conduct was extremely serious and clearly fraudulent it did not  amount
    to multiple frauds using different identities "but rather instead as  a
    repeat episode of the same fact of deception at different stages of the
    immigration process unusually at this point where  it  is  repeated  to
    regularise his stay in his legitimate identity".

6.   The Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  effectively  narrate  two
    alleged errors of law.

7.   The first related to the way in which Judge Herbert had considered  the
    Article 8 submissions and whether he had  taken  into  account  in  the
    determination the possibility of the appellant being removed  from  the
    UK.  If he had it was said that this was irrelevant.

8.   The second was that he had misapplied the guidance.

9.   In submissions Mr Duffy, the  Presenting  Officer,  said  that  he  was
    relying on the second of those - the misapplication  of  the  guidance.
    His point was a short one: that there were at least  two  instances  of
    fraud - the applications to the immigration authorities which  arguably
    constituted a continuing act of deception and the separate  application
    for British citizenship. This in effect amounted to multiple frauds.

10.  Ms Hamid, for the appellant, on the other  hand  submitted  that  there
    were only two instances of fraud. "Multiple", according to  the  Oxford
    English Dictionary meant numerous, that is to say more  than  two.  The
    decision was in accordance with the guidance. There  was  no  error  of
    law.

11.  We note that the reason given by the Secretary of  State  at  paragraph
    10 of the letter of 18 March 2014 relies on the length of  time  during
    which the deception was maintained, since 1991, and the  fact  that  he
    was now naturalised in two separate identities.    In  our  view  there
    must have been more than two  fraudulent  applications  (even  assuming
    that there was one course of  fraudulent  conduct  to  the  immigration
    authorities between 1991 and his application for citizenship under  the
    name of Nicholas Olajide) including the application to the registrar in
    respect of his marriage, the application in respect of his  citizenship
    in the name of Nicholas Olajide  and  the  misrepresentations  when  he
    submitted his application for citizenship in his real name.

12.  The guidance which pertained at the time  was  to  the  effect  that  a
    person, such as the appellant who had  long  residence  (more  than  14
    years) would not normally be deprived of  their  citizenship.  It  then
    states that the Secretary of State may still deprive such a  person  of
    citizenship in circumstances which include but are  not  limited  to  a
    situation where deception has been used more than once in dealings with
    UKBA (our emphasis).

13.  We are satisfied that the evidence shows that there was more  than  one
    instance of fraud or deception carried out over a period of many years.
    Accordingly there is an error of law. The appeal must  be  allowed  and
    Judge Herbert's decision set aside.

14.  Having decided to allow the appeal and to set  aside  the  decision  we
    then heard submissions in relation to the re-hearing.

15.  Mr Duffy referred us  of  the  case  of  Deliallisi  (British  citizen:
    deprivation appeal: scope) [2013] UKUT 00439 (IAC) which made it  clear
    that the appeal is at large and it is for us now to make  the  decision
    anew.

16.  Mr Duffy gave us the new updated guidance in chapter  55  and  referred
    us in particular to paragraphs 55.7.3 and 55.7.5, both of which he said
    were in point. He also pointed to the fact that the power to deprive  a
    person of their citizenship comes from the terms of Section 40A of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981 and relates  to  fraud,  misrepresentation
    and the concealment of material facts amongst  others.   All  of  these
    applied in this case.

17.  We asked Mr Duffy in particular about  a  section  of  Judge  Herbert's
    determination at paragraph  68  where  he  said  that  the  appellant's
    daughter would also be deprived of her UK citizenship through no  fault
    of her own.  Mr Duffy told us that he did not have any  information  in
    relation to any move by the Secretary of State to deprive the child  of
    her citizenship.  However, in our view, nothing turns  on  this  point.
    The guidance that we have seen suggests that such an action should  not
    be taken against a child. In any event, if it was, it  would  be  dealt
    with separately.  A British citizen cannot be deprived  of  nationality
    by implication in a process to which he or she is not a party.

18.  For the appellant Ms Hamid initially questioned whether  we  should  be
    looking to the new guidance rather than the guidance that was in  force
    when the original decision was taken.  In relation to the new  guidance
    she submitted the Secretary of State should have exercised her decision
    differently.  She should have borne in  mind  that  the  appellant  had
    remained in the UK for some 23 years. She  took  us  in  particular  to
    paragraphs  55.7.10.1  of  the  new  guidance:  the  caseworker  should
    consider whether deprivation  would  be  seen  to  be  a  balanced  and
    reasonable step to take, taking into account  the  seriousness  of  the
    fraud, misrepresentation of concealment, the level of evidence for this
    and  what  information  was  available  to  UKBA   at   the   time   of
    consideration.  While accepting that the appellant had been involved in
    a fraud she said that this was limited to the false name given  on  two
    occasions and for that reason the reasonable test could not be met.

19.  She also submitted that the caseworker would  have  had  to  take  into
    account  paragraph  55.7.11.6  in  relation  to  the  impact   of   the
    deprivation  on  the  individual's  human  rights  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights. In particular the caseworker is directed to
    consider whether deprivation and/or  removal  would  interfere  with  a
    person's private and family and,  if  so,  whether  such  action  would
    nevertheless be proportionate.  In some cases it might  be  appropriate
    to remove citizenship but allow the person to remain  in  the  UK.   In
    such case the case worker should consider granting leave in  accordance
    with the guidance on family and private life.  Ms Hamid made two points
    in relation to this:

        . First, she submitted that the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
          granted indefinite leave to remain or at least leave to remain in
          accordance with the guidance  of  family  and  private  life  and
          should have done so at the same time as removing citizenship.

        . Secondly she submitted that  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights
          would be infringed.  In particular she  said  that  these  rights
          under Article 8 he would be able to pass on  his  status  through
          those who have derived blood ties through him . There is the risk
          she submitted that the child would be  deprived  of  her  British
          nationality.

     Accordingly she said the Article 8 rights are  affected  by  his  being
    deprived of his citizenship and that was wrong.

20.  It is clear that the  appellant  engaged  in  a  course  of  fraud  and
    deception over a considerable period of time. He used a false  identity
    to enter this country illegally. He submitted applications on  numerous
    occasions to remain in the UK using the same false  identity.  He  then
    made an application in the  false  identity  of  Nicholas  Olajide  for
    naturalisation.   That  was  followed  by   another   application   for
    naturalisation using his true identity which  failed  to  disclose  the
    fact that he had already obtained naturalisation under a false identity
    and failed to disclose the fact that  he  had  dealt  with  immigration
    authorities using that false identity.

21.  British citizenship carries with it important  rights  and  privileges.
    There is an important public interest in maintaining the  integrity  of
    the status which citizenship confers on an individual and  the  process
    by which it is obtained. Removal of citizenship where that integrity is
    infringed is an important factor in maintaining public  confidence  and
    providing a deterrent against fraud and deception.

22.  We note in the appellant's favour the fact that he  has  been  in  this
    country for 23 years, the fact that so far as is known he has otherwise
    been of good behaviour in this country and that he  has  established  a
    family life here.

23.  So far as Article 8 is concerned we note that this is  not  a  decision
    to remove the appellant from the UK. Any infringement that there may be
    in depriving the applicant of citizenship is minor. We accept that they
    may greater if the Secretary of State were to take a decision to remove
    the appellant from the UK but we cannot say that such a decision is  an
    inevitable consequence of this decision.

24.  The relevant parts of the new guidance can  be  found  in  chapter  55.
    Article 55.7.1 provides that had the relevant facts been known  at  the
    time the application was considered it would have affected the decision
    to  grant  citizenship  the  caseworker  should  consider  deprivation.
    Article 55.7.5 sets out the circumstances in  which  the  Secretary  of
    State will not consider deprivation; none of them apply  here.  Article
    55.7.6 states that length  of  residence  in  the  UK  alone  will  not
    normally be a reason not to deprive a person of their citizenship.  The
    caseworker should  be  satisfied  that  an  intention  to  deceive  was
    deliberate (55.7.7.1).

25.  It is clear that there was a deliberate and  sustained  deception.  Had
    it been known at the time of  the  application  we  do  not  doubt  the
    application would not have been granted. We note  the  length  of  time
    that the appellant has been in  the  UK  but  consider  that  does  not
    provide a reason not to deprive the appellant of citizenship.  We  have
    considered whether a decision to deprive the appellant  of  citizenship
    would be reasonable and balanced and we are satisfied that it is. There
    are no other mitigating factors.

26.  For completeness we should add that our decision would be the  same  if
    we were considering the matter anew but applying the guidance in  force
    at the time of the original decision.

27.  Accordingly, we have come to the  view  without  any  great  difficulty
    that we should  allow  the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
    consequence is that the appellant will be deprived of  his  citizenship
    under Section 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981.









                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


