
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00007/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 February 2020              | On 20 April 2020                |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     samuel smith (A.KA. PHILIP GYAMPOH)
                        (nO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Krushner, instructed by Anchor Legal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision which was sent to the parties on 28 November 2019, I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which  had  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to deprive him  of
    British Citizenship.  I held that the FtT had erred in law  in  failing
    to deal adequately or at all with crucial aspects of  the  respondent's
    case which is, in basic summary, that the appellant has used  the  name
    Samuel Smith for the best part of two decades in order to hide the fact
    that he had thrice been refused  entry  clearance  in  his  real  name,
    Philip Gyampoh.  Having set aside the decision of the  FtT,  I  ordered
    that the matter would  be  retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
    decision on the appeal to be remade afresh.


 2. The appeal was due to resume before me on 9 December 2019  but  it  was
    adjourned because there was a potential conflict  of  interest  between
    the appellant and the solicitors with conduct of  the  matter  at  that
    stage.  The appeal was adjourned to  enable  the  appellant  to  secure
    alternative representation, which he duly did.  It is for these reasons
    that there was something of a delay between the initial and the resumed
    hearings.  With that short introduction to the history of the appeal, I
    turn to the factual background.

Factual Background


 3. The appellant is a Ghanaian national who  appeals  against  a  decision
    which was made by the Secretary of State on 16 January 2019.   By  that
    decision, the respondent decided  to  deprive  the  respondent  of  his
    British citizenship, which had been obtained by way  of  naturalisation
    on 18 May 2011.


 4. On 15 July 2003, in Accra, the appellant applied for entry clearance as
    a student.  He gave his name as Philip Gyampoh.  He said  that  he  had
    been born on 27 March 1979 and that his parents  were  Kenneth  Gyampoh
    and Loretta Afua Gyampoh.  That application was  refused  on  the  same
    day.

 5. On 12 August 2003, the appellant made a second  application  for  entry
    clearance as a student.  He gave the same personal details  as  before.
    That application was refused on 20 August 2003.

 6. On 22 August 2003, the appellant made a  third  application  for  entry
    clearance as a student.  He gave the same details as  before,  although
    his parents' names were spelt slightly differently.   This  application
    was refused on 26 August 2003.

 7. On 12 November 2003, the appellant applied for a visit visa.   He  gave
    his name as Samuel Smith.  He stated that his date of birth was 13  May
    1968 and that his parents were Henry  Kwabena  Smith  and  Mary  Adjowa
    Annan.  This application was successful and the appellant  was  granted
    entry clearance which was valid for six months from 5 November 2003  to
    5 May 2004.

 8. The appellant duly entered the United  Kingdom  as  Samuel  Smith.   He
    married a lady called [AY], who was in the UK as a Work Permit  Holder.
    He was granted leave as her dependent on 7 July 2004, valid  for  three
    years. The appellant and Ms [Y] divorced, however, and he  returned  to
    Ghana.

 9. On 14 September 2007, in Ghana, the appellant  married  a  lady  called
    [DW].  On 31 October 2007,  he  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  her
    spouse.  He gave his name as Samuel Smith, with the same date of  birth
    and parents' names.  That application was successful,  and  he  entered
    the UK with entry clearance as a spouse which was valid from 24 January
    2008 to 24 January 2010.

10. The appellant subsequently  applied  for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
    ("ILR") as Ms [W]'s spouse.  Once again, he provided the details I have
    set out [7] above in support of that application.  The application  for
    ILR was granted on 21 February 2010.

11. On 9 March 2011, the appellant applied for naturalisation as a  British
    citizen.  He completed Form AN in order to make that  application.   He
    was not represented at that time, and he completed  the  form  himself.
    He gave his name as Samuel Smith and his date of birth as 13 May  1968.
    He gave his parents' names as  Henry  Kwabena  Smith  and  Mary  Adjowa
    Annan.  At question 1.7 and 1.8 of the application form, the  appellant
    was asked the following questions:

         1.7 Name at birth if different from above.  (If the names you  have
         given are different or spelt differently from  the  name  shown  on
         your passport, please explain why on page 13).


         1.8 If you are or have ever been known by any name or  names  apart
         from those mentioned above, please give details here.

12. The appellant made no entry in answer to these questions.   At  question
   3.12, he was asked whether he had engaged in any other activities  which
   might indicate that he may not be considered a person of good character.
    He ticked the box marked "No".


13. On 11 March 2011, the appellant was naturalised as  a  British  citizen.
   On 2 July 2011, he was issued with a British passport.


14. On 12 January 2012, the appellant travelled  to  the  United  States  to
   visit Samuel Gyampoh, who he has subsequently described as his uncle and
   his biological father.  He was  refused  entry  to  the  United  States,
   however, and he returned to Heathrow airport on  13  January  2012.   He
   attempted to pass through the automatic passport gates  on  arrival  but
   was unable to do so and presented himself to an Immigration Officer.

15. The appellant was interviewed and stated  materially  as  follows.   His
   name was Samuel Smith and he had not previously used a  different  name.
   He had come to the UK in 2003 and he named his first  wife  as  Ms  [Y].
   They had no children and they divorced in 2007.  He returned to  the  UK
   in 2008 after marrying his second wife, Ms [W].   They  had  a  daughter
   together in 2008.  They had divorced in 2011 but they cared jointly  for
   their daughter.

16. At question 27, the appellant was asked if he had used any  other  names
   before coming to the UK.  He stated that he had  not.   The  Immigration
   Officer put it to him that he  had  told  US  Immigration  that  he  had
   changed his name to Sam Smith in 2000 but he said that  words  had  been
   put into his mouth and  they  were  not  listening  to  him.   They  had
   listened to his uncle, and he was not privy to  that  conversation.   At
   question 30, the appellant was asked who Philip Gyampoh was.  He said:


         It is not me.  I don't know.  They were putting words in my mouth.

17. The appellant was asked where  the  US  authorities  had  got  the  name
   Philip Gyampoh from and he said that his uncle  had  said  it.   He  had
   apparently told them that the appellant was not Sam Smith.  He  was  not
   satisfied with the way he had been interviewed by US Immigration and  he
   had not even understood what they were saying.  Asked about his uncle in
   the US, he said that his name was Samuel Gyampoh and that he was married
   to his mother's sister.  He did not know why Mr Gyampoh had  made  up  a
   story.  The appellant  stated  that  his  biological  father  was  Henry
   Kwabena Smith.

18. The Immigration Officer also  interviewed  a  woman  called  [MA].   She
   stated that she was a friend of the appellant's.  She had known him  for
   five years.  She was asked what the  appellant's  full  name  was.   She
   stated that it was  Samuel  Smith.   Asked  "How  do  you  know  him  as
   Philip?", she stated that this was his other name.

19. The appellant was interviewed again on the  same  date.   He  was  asked
   again whether he had applied for a UK visa in a different identity.   He
   said that he had not.  He was asked directly whether he had  been  known
   as Philip Gyampoh before.  He said that he was not, and that he was sure
   of that.  He was then shown a record of the entry clearance  application
   made by Philip Gyampoh in July 2003.   He  said  "That  is  me",  before
   asking to speak to his solicitor.  He was asked who Philip  Gyampoh  is.
   He said that he had used the name for his application but  that  it  was
   not his real name.  He was reminded that it was an offence to lie in  an
   immigration interview, following which he  said  that  he  did  remember
   something about making an application for a  visa  in  the  identity  of
   Philip Gyampoh.  He could not remember any more about it.   He  gave  no
   answer when asked why he had changed his name.   He  said  that  he  was
   Samuel Smith.

Pre-Decision Correspondence

20. On 26 October 2017, the Secretary of  State  put  her  concerns  to  the
   appellant's then solicitors, Quality Solicitors Orion of Hounslow.  This
   letter elicited a letter in response dated 17 November 2017.  At [1]-[4]
   of that letter, the following admissions were made:


         [1] Samuel Smith was born Philip Gyampoh in Accra Ghana.  In August
         2003 he applied for entry clearance in Ghana to study  in  the  UK.
         The application was refused.  Later that  year  his  wife  who  was
         working as a Nurse in Ghana applied to work in the UK as  a  Nurse.
         Our client states that he was anxious to come to the  UK  with  his
         wife as a dependent spouse.  Fearing that if he  made  a  dependent
         application in his name it would be refused, he  consulted  a  visa
         agent who suggested he change his name.  He  changed  his  name  by
         statutory declaration from Philip Gyampoh  to  Samuel  Smith.   The
         agent submitted an entry clearance application and the couple  were
         granted a work permit visa on which our client and his wife arrived
         in the UK in 2003.


         [2] In 2006, following the breakdown of his marriage our client met
         a British woman of Ghanaian ancestry with whom  he  fell  in  love.
         The couple returned to Ghana in 2007 and got married in Ghana.   On
         the basis of his status as a spouse, Mr Smith was granted entry  to
         the UK in 2008.  He subsequently qualified for the  grant  of  ILR.
         ILR was granted in the same year.   He  naturalised  the  following
         year and was issued a British passport.


         [3] Our client admits that he changed his name  because  he  feared
         that if he used his original name there was a risk that he would be
         refused the visa to accompany his wife to the UK.  He felt he would
         be bereft of his wife's companionship for the period  of  time  she
         was in the UK.  He  confirms  that  the  dependent  application  to
         travel with his first wife was completed by an agency in Ghana.  He
         has used the name Samuel Smith throughout his stay in the  UK.   He
         confirms that he has no  criminal  record  either  under  the  name
         Philip Gyampoh or Samuel Smith in Ghana or the UK.


         [4] In 2012 our client decided to go and visit his  father  in  the
         United States.  On disembarking at Boston International Airport  in
         the USA, he was questioned by an immigration officer  who  was  not
         satisfied as to his identity.  During the  interview,  he  panicked
         and gave misleading answers fearing that he would  be  detained  in
         the USA.  He was refused entry and returned to  Heathrow  where  he
         was detained and interviewed by Home Office  officials.   Following
         the interview the British passport was seized.

21. The letter then made reference to the appellant's ties to  the  UK.   He
   had divorced his second  wife  and  was  in  a  relationship  with  Mary
   Amarteifio (who had been  interviewed  at  the  airport).   He  had  two
   children by his former wives and was a good father to them.  He had been
   in regular employment and  had  done  charity  work  too.   He  admitted
   'behaving foolishly in changing his name so as to improve the chances of
   getting entry clearance to the UK in 2003.   He  accepted  that  he  had
   practised deception and expressed contrition and regret  for  that.   In
   light of his ties to the UK, however, the Secretary of State  was  urged
   to be proportionate in any sanction imposed.


22. The appellant subsequently instructed BWF Solicitors of  Tottenham,  who
   wrote to the Secretary of State 29 October 2018 to provide an update  on
   the situation and to submit that no action should be taken  in  relation
   to the appellant's British citizenship.  Their letter  cited  the  Upper
   Tribunal's decision in Sleiman [2017] UKUT 367 (IAC) and submitted  that
   the appellant's  deception  was  not  material  to  the  acquisition  of
   citizenship.  Under the heading  "compassionate  circumstances,  it  was
   submitted as follows:

         Our client changed his name to Samuel Smith and date of birth as he
         was advised  by  his  representative  at  the  time  of  his  entry
         clearance application to the UK that it would increase his  chances
         of his application being successful.


         Our  client  did  not  in  any  way  impersonate  another   person,
         misrepresent his age so he could be treated as minor [sic], conceal
         any criminal offence or change his  nationality.   He  applied  for
         entry clearance using the name Samuel Smith and was  granted  leave
         to enter so he could join his previous wife who was granted a  visa
         to work as a nurse in the  UK.   Any  false  representation  should
         therefore be seen as irrelevant and not material to the acquisition
         of citizenship.


The Respondent's Decision

23. The Secretary of State issued her decision to deprive the  appellant  of
   his British citizenship  on  16  January  2019.   Having  rehearsed  the
   history and the relevant law in some  detail,  she  concluded  that  the
   appellant had made  three  entry  clearance  applications  in  his  true
   identity and had adopted the  identity  of  Samuel  Smith  in  order  to
   circumvent the entry clearance process: [28].  The appellant had secured
   entry clearance, ILR and citizenship in a  false  identity:  [29].   His
   deception was relevant to each one of his applications and he had failed
   to declare his true identity since 2003:  [30]-[33].   His  applications
   would have been unsuccessful if  he  had  told  the  truth:  [36].   The
   Secretary of State considered a decision to deprive  the  respondent  of
   his citizenship was in accordance with Article 8  ECHR  and  section  55
   BCIA 2009: [38]-[41].  The Secretary of State considered  that  she  was
   under no obligation to consider whether the respondent would be rendered
   stateless by a decision under s40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981
   but, in any event, she  considered  that  it  would  be  reasonable  and
   proportionate to take that decision.


The Resumed Hearing

24. At the outset of the resumed hearing, I confirmed with Mr Krushner  that
   the appellant continued to rely on the evidence filed by BWF Solicitors,
   and that there was no  further  material  which  I  would  be  asked  to
   consider.  Mr Krushner confirmed that to be the case.  He stated that he
   would be calling the appellant, his wife and a friend (Mr [A])  to  give
   oral evidence.


25. I asked Mr Whitwell whether the respondent  continued  to  rely  on  the
   bundle filed for the FtT  hearing.   He  confirmed  that  there  was  no
   further material upon which the respondent relied.  He reminded me  that
   there had been some concern expressed in my  first  decision  about  the
   question of whether the appellant  would  be  rendered  stateless  by  a
   decision to revoke his British citizenship but it had subsequently  been
   agreed that Ghana permitted dual  citizenship  and  that  the  appellant
   would retain his Ghanaian citizenship in the event that he was no longer
   British.


26. I then heard oral evidence from the appellant and his two witnesses.   I
   do not propose to rehearse that  evidence  in  this  decision.   It  was
   recorded in full and I will refer to  it  insofar  as  is  necessary  to
   explain my findings of fact.


   Submissions


27. Mr Whitwell relied on the decision under appeal and  submitted  that  it
   was extremely clear.  He reminded me that the respondent had acted under
   section 40(3)(b) or (c) of the British Nationality Act 1981 in depriving
   the appellant of his British citizenship.

28. Mr Whitwell submitted that I should disbelieve  the  appellant  and  his
   witnesses.   He  submitted  that  there  had  been  a  high  degree   of
   dissembling and dissociation in their evidence.  The  appellant  claimed
   not to recall or not  to  have  said  a  number  of  things  which  were
   subsequently relied upon by the respondent.

29. The appellant claimed that he had changed his name  in  either  1998  or
   2000 but  it  remained  the  case  that  there  was  no  contemporaneous
   documentary evidence which showed that he had done  so.   The  appellant
   claimed that various individuals had been  unable  to  assist  him  with
   obtaining this evidence but there was a copy of a statutory  declaration
   made in 2012, which made  reference  to  the  change  of  name.   Oddly,
   however, that document had not been provided to the Secretary  of  State
   when the appellant came to make his application for naturalisation.

30. The appellant had made three  applications  for  entry  clearance  as  a
   student in the Philip Gyampoh identity.  That was accepted on all sides.
    The appellant now stated that he had no input into  these  applications
   but this was merely a convenient means of avoiding the  truth.   It  was
   highly unlikely that the appellant would be so badly served by an  agent
   in Ghana, only to be equally badly served  by  two  different  firms  of
   solicitors in the United Kingdom.

31. The appellant had been asked the clearest possible question in Form  AN;
   whether he had a different name at birth.  He had been asked  in  cross-
   examination and from the bench why he had failed to give  an  answer  to
   that question and there was  still  no  response.   He  had  been  asked
   equally clear questions about the date of his first arrival  to  the  UK
   and his good character, and he had failed throughout to reveal his  full
   dealings with the Home Office and the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office.
   The appellant had plainly understood these questions, and had  signed  a
   declaration in which he accepted that his citizenship might  be  revoked
   in the event of misrepresentation.

32. The appellant's lack of truthfulness had continued in the  interview  at
   Heathrow Airport.  He said today that he was stressed and tired  but  he
   had signed many of the pages of that interview.  It was  clear  that  he
   had maintained a denial that he was in any way  associated  with  Philip
   Gyampoh until he was confronted with the entry clearance applications in
   that name.  If it was to be asserted, as appeared to be the  case,  that
   an Immigration Officer had falsified the record of interview,  that  had
   not been asserted before and should be rejected.

33. Two different firms of  solicitors  had  made  admissions  after  taking
   instructions  over  the  course  of  two  interviews  with  a  qualified
   solicitor.  There had been no complaint made to the solicitors or to the
   SRA.  It  was  to  be  noted  that  the  detailed  letter  from  Quality
   Solicitors Orion was accepted to be correct in every other respect.  The
   appellant also attempted to distance himself from the  letter  from  BWF
   Solicitors, in which  similar  admissions  were  made  but  it  was  not
   credible that the appellant would have  been  so  badly  served  by  two
   different  firms.   In  sum,  the  appellant  had  either   made   false
   representations or had concealed material facts from the  Home  Office's
   Nationality Department when he applied for British citizenship.

34. As for Article 8 ECHR, Mr Whitwell submitted that the proper course  was
   clear from the authorities.  It was for the  Tribunal  to  consider  the
   likely  effect  of  the  appellant  being  deprived   of   his   British
   citizenship.  In the appellant's case, there would  be  no  interference
   with his relationships in the UK as a result of  any  such  deprivation.
   The next step, instead, would be for the respondent to take  a  decision
   to remove  the  appellant,  against  which  course  there  would  be  an
   opportunity to make representations on human rights grounds.  It was not
   presently suggested by Mr Whitwell that the refusal of  any  such  claim
   could be certified under section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002, so the appellant would be likely to  have  a  right  of
   appeal to the FtT.

35. Mr Krushner submitted that I should accept that the appellant had  given
   a truthful account to the Home Office and to the  Tribunal.   The  legal
   parameters were agreed, and were set out in the skeleton argument  filed
   by Mr Malik of counsel on the previous occasion.  The  tests  applicable
   in relation to deprivation and  Article  8  ECHR  were  not  in  dispute
   between the parties.  The operative issue was  the  credibility  of  the
   appellant's account.  The burden fell on  the  respondent  to  establish
   that the appellant had attempted to mislead.  That burden had  not  been
   discharged.  The appellant had explained that he  changed  his  name  in
   1998 because his mother had remarried a man called Mr Smith and  he  had
   wanted to adopt his surname for a variety of reasons, including  out  of
   respect.  The appellant had also explained in oral evidence why  he  had
   chosen the name Samuel; it  was  a  biblical  name.   It  had  not  been
   possible to locate the Deed Poll records relating to the change of  name
   but what was clear was that he had been  able  to  change  his  name  to
   Samuel Smith.  Had that not been the case, the appellant would not  have
   been issued a passport in that name.  There had only been a  short  time
   between the unsuccessful  applications  in  the  Gyampoh  name  and  the
   successful applications in the Smith identity.  The agent  who  assisted
   with the  Gyampoh  applications  had  subjected  the  appellant  to  one
   extended let down, making the same applications with  the  same  details
   time after time.


36. The appellant was granted entry clearance and was in the United  Kingdom
   from 2003 to 2007.  He had then applied for further entry clearance when
   he wished to return to the UK.  This behaviour  demonstrated  compliance
   on his part, and suggested  that  he  would  not  have  engaged  in  the
   deception suggested by the respondent.  The  respondent  had  failed  to
   produce the SET (M) form which the appellant would have  completed  when
   he applied for ILR.  The appellant had filled in Form  AN  himself.   It
   was accepted that he could have been more careful when he completed that
   form but was it necessarily the case that he had been dishonest?

37. The appellant had been to visit his father  in  the  USA  and  this  was
   corroborative of his account of having been  adopted  and  changing  his
   name.  There was no evidence from his father in the  USA  but  that  was
   explicable by reference to  the  lack  of  a  close  relationship.   The
   appellant's answers at interview were to be  examined  in  their  proper
   context.  He had flown to the USA and returned  immediately  upon  being
   refused entry.  He was then subjected to  an  interview  of  the  utmost
   significance.  There was a clear clash between what he  is  recorded  to
   have said in parts of that interview and the account he  now  gives.   I
   was invited to accept that the  appellant  lacked  recollection  of  the
   answers given after such a long period of time, and to note that he  had
   refused to sign the final few pages of the transcript.

38. The representations made by Orion Solicitors clearly  missed  the  point
   raised by the Secretary of State.  The letter from the second firm - BWF
   Solicitors - was in the same format and had probably  just  been  copied
   from the first, as suggested by the appellant.  Mr Krushner  invited  me
   to accept what the appellant said in that respect.  It was to  be  noted
   that the appellant's current wife was interviewed at the same time,  and
   she had given his correct name and date  of  birth  to  the  Immigration
   Officer.  When asked questions at the hearing, the  appellant's  witness
   had also stated that the appellant's age corresponded with that given in
   the Smith identity.

39. There had been a significant delay in this case, between 2012 and  2019,
   which was relevant to Article 8 ECHR.  A certain stigma would attach  to
   the removal of British citizenship and there were young British  citizen
   children involved.  The appellant would be unable to work in  the  event
   that he was deprived of his nationality.  Nor would he be able to access
   state resources.  The appellant suffered two types  of  prejudice  as  a
   result.  Firstly, there was procedural prejudice as to the  age  of  the
   interview.  He was  obviously  in  difficulty  in  responding  to  those
   records now.  Secondly, the children were now aged 11 and  7,  and  were
   old enough to appreciate the consequences of the  current  process.  The
   respondent had failed to explain why this was  not  dealt  with  in  the
   intervening years.  In all the circumstances, it was disproportionate to
   deprive the appellant of his nationality.


Analysis
40. The respondent's decision was taken under section 40(3)(b)  and  (c)  of
   the British Nationality Act 1981, which provides that she may  by  order
   deprive a  person  of  a  citizenship  status  which  results  from  his
   registration or naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied
   that the  registration  or  naturalisation  was  obtained  by  means  of
   (fraud), false representation or concealment of a  material  fact.   The
   appellant's appeal against that decision is brought under section 40A of
   the 1981 Act.


41. The proper approach to such appeals  has  been  defined  in  a  line  of
   authority which began with Arusha & Demushi [2012]  UKUT  80  (IAC)  and
   continued with Deliallisi [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) and AB (Nigeria)  [2016]
   UKUT 451 (IAC).  In BA [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal  held
   that the Tribunal's first task in such a case was to  establish  whether
   the conditions precedent in section 40(2) or 40(3) were present.   In  a
   s40(3) case such as the present,  the  Tribunal  must  consider  whether
   British citizenship was acquired by means of fraud, false representation
   or concealment of a material fact.  The burden is on the respondent,  to
   the civil standard, and the Tribunal may consider evidence which was not
   before the Secretary of State.

42. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, the guidance given by the Upper  Tribunal
   in the cases mentioned above was considered by the Court  of  Appeal  in
   Aziz & Ors v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1884; [2019] 1 WLR  266.   The  single
   full judgment was given by Sales LJ, as he then was.  At  [27]-[29],  he
   stated that a Tribunal considering an appeal such as the present  should
   not conduct a proleptic analysis  of  whether  the  appellant  would  be
   likely to be removed or deported at a later stage,  and  should  confine
   its analysis to the impact of deprivation upon  the  appellant  and  his
   family.  Sir Stephen Richards and the Master of the Rolls agreed.

43. In considering the first question posed by section  40(3)  BNA  1981,  I
   remind myself that it is necessary for the respondent to establish  that
   the appellant was dishonest in his application for British  citizenship,
   whether by making representations which were  positively  untrue  or  by
   intentionally concealing material facts: Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673;
   [2019] 1 WLR 4647.  In considering any such question, it is  appropriate
   to use the three stage approach discussed  in  cases  such  as  Majumder
   [2016] EWCA Civ 1167; [2017] 3 All ER  756.   The  Tribunal  should  ask
   itself, firstly whether the respondent has adduced  sufficient  evidence
   to discharge the evidential burden.  Secondly,  it  must  be  considered
   whether the appellant had discharged the burden upon him, which again is
   merely evidential, of adducing an innocent explanation.  Thirdly, if so,
   the Tribunal must consider all of the evidence  to  decide  whether  the
   respondent has discharged the legal burden upon her.

44. I have no difficulty in  concluding  that  the  respondent  has  adduced
   sufficient evidence to discharge the initial evidential burden upon her.
    Her bundle contains records of the entry clearance  applications  which
   the appellant made in the identity of Philip Gyampoh.  It also contains,
   amongst other documents, the application  form  which  he  completed  in
   order to apply for naturalisation, in which he failed to declare that he
   had a different name at birth.  The bundle also contains the records  of
   interview with the appellant at Heathrow Airport,  during  which  he  is
   recorded to have denied ever using the Gyampoh identity, only to  change
   his account when he was confronted with the entry clearance applications
   in that name.  There is plainly more than  enough  here  to  require  an
   answer.  In fairness to Mr Krushner, who said all that could be said  in
   support of the appellant, he did not attempt to submit  that  there  was
   simply no case for the appellant to answer.

45. In respect of the second stage, when confronted with the  core  elements
   of the respondent's case, the appellant has either failed to provide any
   explanation or has failed to provide an explanation with a basic  degree
   of plausibility.  The appellant  was  a  poor  witness,  who  was  quite
   properly described by Mr Whitwell as a man who had  engaged  in  a  high
   degree of dissembling and dissociation when he  thought  that  it  would
   further his cause.  The following are the most notable difficulties with
   his case.

46. Firstly, the appellant has  failed  to  provide  any  remotely  adequate
   reason for his failure to disclose that he was born Philip Gyampoh  when
   asked the most direct of questions  at  1.7  and  1.8  of  Form  AN  (as
   reproduced at [11] above).  He has used the English language  throughout
   his life.  He completed this form himself.  The warning at  the  end  of
   the form is especially clear, as one would expect, that there can be the
   most  serious  consequences  if  it  is  filled  out  incorrectly.   The
   appellant was asked by Mr Whitwell about the absence  of  an  answer  to
   question 1.7 on the form.  He said that he thought he  should  give  the
   name by which he was known in the United Kingdom.  Referred again to the
   precise question he had been asked in the form,  he  said  that  he  had
   changed his name (to Samuel Smith) and he thought that this was the name
   he should give.  When I sought clarification from the appellant  at  the
   end of his evidence, he said to me that he should 'put the  name  I  was
   using here' and that it was 'the right thing to do'.  But  there  is  no
   conceivable way that the question could be read in that way; it  is  the
   simplest of questions and would have been entirely otiose had it  simply
   sought the name by which an individual is known in the UK.


47. Secondly, there are the  admissions  made  by  two  different  firms  of
   solicitors in the UK.  I have set the  admissions  out  in  full  above.
   When the appellant was asked about these admissions, he stated that  the
   solicitors in question must have made a mistake.   The  plausibility  of
   that suggestion is to be assessed with reference to the remainder of the
   letters, and the circumstances in which they came to be  produced.   The
   first letter in particular is  well  written  and  very  detailed.   The
   appellant accepted in his oral evidence that all of the detail  in  that
   letter  is   accurate,   including   his   professional   and   personal
   relationships and the other aspects of what might otherwise be described
   as mitigation.  The letter came to be written in response  to  a  letter
   from the respondent dated 26 October 2017.  In that letter (a full  copy
   of which was only provided at the hearing), the respondent  invited  the
   appellant to provide a response to  the  developing  case  against  him,
   which was that he had failed to disclose his previous identity of Philip
   Gyampoh in his dealings with immigration officials.

48. The appellant  explained  in  his  evidence  how  the  response  to  the
   respondent's letter was compiled by Quality Solicitors  Orion.   He  had
   dealt with a solicitor at that firm named Mr Agyemang.   He  thought  he
   had had two meetings with him at the Hounslow branch of the  firm.   The
   meetings had been between half an hour and  an  hour.   Following  these
   meetings, Mr Agyemang had written a letter  in  which  he  had  provided
   entirely correct information, supported by  relevant  documentation  (as
   itemised therein), but he had erred when he stated  that  the  appellant
   had changed his name "because he feared that if  he  used  his  original
   name there was a risk that he would be refused the visa to accompany his
   wife to the UK." The appellant was unable to explain why the  solicitor,
   who had otherwise created a perfectly good response to the  respondent's
   enquiry, had erred in this fundamental respect.


49. As Mr Whitwell noted  in  his  submissions,  it  was  not  only  Quality
   Solicitors Orion who were said to have erred so fundamentally.  The firm
   who previously represented the appellant in his appeal - BWF  Solicitors
   - had also written a  letter  in  similar  terms,  containing  the  same
   admission.  The appellant  suggested  in  his  oral  evidence  that  BWF
   Solicitors had merely copied this from the previous solicitors.  That is
   inherently unlikely, given the gravity of the admission and  its  likely
   consequences.  It is even more unlikely when considered in  the  context
   of the rest of the appellant's evidence.  He stated in answer to further
   questions that he had gone to  BWF  Solicitors  because  he  had  become
   frustrated at the amount of time it had taken the respondent to come  to
   a decision.  He had taken the case from Mr Agyemang and instructed  BWF,
   after which he had had 'two or three meetings' with them, each of  which
   he thought was around 35 to 40 minutes in length.  He said in  his  oral
   evidence that he had been asked questions during  these  meetings  about
   why he had come to the UK, why he had gone to the USA  and  the  matters
   which had led to the seizure of the passport.  The  appellant's  account
   of the questions asked by both firms is  precisely  in  accordance  with
   what one would expect of a solicitor representing  an  individual  faced
   with allegations such as those contained in the respondent's  letter  of
   26 October 2017.  At the end of the interviews with BWF Solicitors, that
   firm produced a letter in which it was accepted that the  appellant  had
   changed his name because 'it would increase his chances  of  his  [entry
   clearance] application being successful.'


50. Mr Whitwell submitted that it was inherently unlikely for  two  separate
   solicitors to represent the same man so ineptly that  they  made  wholly
   unwarranted admissions which went directly to the  question  of  whether
   his British citizenship should be the subject of a deprivation order.  I
   agree.  Parellels are perhaps unhelpful but  it  is  equivalent  to  two
   separate solicitors wrongly admitting that a man  committed  a  criminal
   offence or accepting that a pivotal term in a  contract  was  introduced
   orally.  These are not likely to be matters on which mistakes are  made,
   and they are certainly not likely to be mistakes which are made  by  two
   separate professionals, one after the other.

51. There is a further point, which was also quite  properly  raised  by  Mr
   Whitwell.  If, as appears to be the case, the appellant states now  that
   he was so poorly represented by these individuals that  his  citizenship
   is under threat partly as a result of  their  negligence,  there  is  no
   evidence of any complaint having been made.  In BT (Nepal) [2004]  UKIAT
   311 and other cases, the Tribunal has explained that it is very easy  to
   blame such matters on a previous representative but that decision makers
   should be slow to accept such an account in the absence of  a  complaint
   to the firm and/or the professional body.  That  must  be  correct;  the
   appellant asks me, in effect, to accept  that  two  separate  solicitors
   have been wholly unprofessional in taking his instructions or in putting
   those instructions to the respondent.  The credibility of  that  account
   is seriously undermined, in my judgment, by  his  failure  to  give  the
   solicitors  in  question  any  opportunity  to  answer  such  a  serious
   allegation.

52. As Mr Whitwell also noted, however, this is not  a  case  in  which  the
   appellant must rely on lightning striking the same place only twice.  It
   is not only solicitors in the UK who he states have let him down in  the
   most serious of ways.  He also makes that allegation in respect  of  the
   man who supposedly assisted him with the  first  three  application  for
   entry clearance.  He said in oral evidence that he and this  man,  Scott
   Kojo, had known each other as children.  The appellant  stated  that  Mr
   Kojo was an unregulated immigration adviser who he had paid to help  him
   with the application forms.  He said that he had not seen Mr Kojo for  a
   number of years before he 'helped' him with the application forms.   The
   consequence of this, the appellant maintained,  was  that  Mr  Kojo  had
   called him 'Philip' when they met, although on the  appellant's  account
   he had changed his name to  Sam  Smith  by  this  stage.   I  asked  the
   appellant to explain to me whether he had allowed Mr  Kojo  to  continue
   calling him Philip, or whether he had  explained  to  him  that  he  had
   changed his name.  The appellant stated that he had not  only  corrected
   Mr Kojo immediately; he had also then provided him with a  copy  of  the
   Deed Poll certificate to confirm the change of name.  It was after these
   exchanges of information, the appellant maintained,  that  Mr  Kojo  had
   submitted three applications for entry clearance for  the  appellant  in
   the Gyampoh identity, supported by a passport in that identity.


53. I obviously accept that immigration advisers are not regulated  in  West
   Africa as they are in the UK, just as I accept that some roguish conduct
   might be attributed  to  such  advisers,  even  where  that  conduct  is
   unsolicited by the client.  The appellant's  explanation  need  only  be
   considered for a moment to realise how absurd it is,  however.   On  the
   appellant's account, Mr Kojo had been provided with all that  he  needed
   to make a legitimate application for entry clearance for a man  who  had
   changed his name to Samuel Smith.  Instead of doing that,  however,  the
   appellant would have me believe that Mr Kojo made three applications  in
   the appellant's former identity, supported by a passport in  the  former
   identity, supposedly sourced by Mr Kojo. He also suggested in answer  to
   questions from Mr Krushner that Mr Kojo  had  manufactured  all  of  the
   family details given in each of the student entry clearance applications
   in the Gyampoh identity.  This is not roguish conduct; it is a man going
   out of  his  way  to  make  his  own  life,  and  that  of  his  client,
   considerably more difficult for no reason whatsover.

54. In a further attempt to distance himself from documents relied  upon  by
   the respondent, the appellant claimed before  me  that  aspects  of  the
   interviews  at  Heathrow  had  been  inaccurately  transcribed  by   the
   Immigration Officers, or that he  had  no  recollection  of  giving  the
   answers recorded.  In evaluating that claim, I  will  state  immediately
   that I accept that the appellant would have been  very  tired  and  very
   stressed when he gave those interviews.  He had travelled  to  the  USA,
   only to be refused entry, whereupon he returned, only to be  interviewed
   at some length by Immigration Officers in the UK.  Mr Krushner  asked  a
   number  of  very  detailed  questions  of  the  appellant  about   those
   interviews.  Amongst other answers from  which  he  sought  to  distance
   himself, the appellant did not accept that he had  stated  that  he  had
   used the name Philip Gyampoh 'but this is not my real name'.  Nor did he
   accept that he had said that Henry  Smith  was  his  real  father.   The
   insinuation was - just as it was in respect of his former solicitors and
   his entry clearance agent -  that  other  people  were  responsible  for
   errors and that it was those errors which had placed  the  appellant  in
   his  present  predicament.   The  allegations  against  the  Immigration
   Officers were not made in his statement before the FtT, however and they
   had every hallmark, in my judgment, of false exculpatory statements made
   long after the event.


55. The reality of this appeal is that the respondent has  presented  potent
   evidence  that  the  appellant  relied  on  false  representations   and
   concealed material facts when he made his application to naturalise as a
   British citizen.  He failed to declare in that application that  he  had
   been known by another name  at  birth.   The  appellant  has  manifestly
   failed to raise an innocent explanation  of  the  prima  facie  case  of
   deception established against him.  The true position  was  revealed  by
   the two solicitor's letters to which I have referred.  In  my  judgment,
   those letters were not the product of incompetent representation, as the
   appellant suggested.  Those letters properly reflected  the  appellant's
   instructions at the time.  He changed his name after he had been refused
   entry clearance on three occasions and he acquired  a  passport  in  the
   second identity  in  order  to  conceal  those  applications  for  entry
   clearance.  I do not accept that he did so for some reason connected  to
   his family; his clear  motivation  was  as  stated  in  the  solicitors'
   letters: to conceal the fact that he had been refused entry clearance on
   three previous occasions.


56. The appellant made two successful applications for  entry  clearance  in
   the second identity and he subsequently acquired ILR in  that  identity.
   When he applied for naturalisation, he knowingly and dishonestly  failed
   to disclose his birth name, knowing that disclosure of that  information
   would link him to the refused applications and potentially undermine his
   status in the United Kingdom throughout.  He attempted to maintain  that
   deception in his interviews at Heathrow and before the FtT and the Upper
   Tribunal.  The only glimpse of the true position has  been  provided  by
   the letters from his former representatives.

57. It follows that I need not  progress  to  the  third  of  the  issues  I
   described at [43] above.  The appellant having failed to  discharge  the
   evidential burden upon him at the second of those stages, the  Secretary
   of State succeeds in establishing both of the  conditions  precedent  to
   the deprivation of citizenship under s40.

58. Mr Krushner did not attempt to rely on an argument  which  has  featured
   previously  in  this  appeal,  which  was  that  any  deception  on  the
   appellant's part was not material to the appellant's naturalisation.  He
   was sensible to abandon that submission.  The appellant's deception  was
   obviously material to the acquisition of British  citizenship,  and  the
   circumstances are readily distinguishable from those considered  by  UTJ
   Kopieczek  in  Sleiman  [2017]  UKUT  367  (IAC).   In  this  case,  the
   respondent  would  inevitably   have   refused   the   application   for
   naturalisation if she had known that the appellant had changed his  name
   in order to conceal the fact that he had been refused entry clearance on
   three  previous  occasions.   Subject  to  consideration  of  the  ECHR,
   therefore, I conclude that the respondent was entitled  to  deprive  the
   appellant of his British citizenship.

59. Both advocates properly confined their Article  8  ECHR  submissions  in
   accordance with the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Aziz.   The
   material question, if I can be forgiven for summarising what was said by
   Sales  LJ,  is  whether  the  deprivation  itself,  as  opposed  to  any
   subsequent administrative decisions which might  be  taken  against  the
   appellant as a foreign national, is contrary to Article 8 ECHR.


60. There was quite properly no suggestion on the part of Mr  Krushner  that
   the deprivation of citizenship  would  interfere  with  the  appellant's
   right to a family life with his  partner  and  children  in  the  United
   Kingdom.  What was  submitted,  instead,  was  that  there  would  be  a
   diminution in the scope of the appellant's private life as a  result  of
   the deprivation of citizenship, and that there would be an impact on the
   best interests of the appellant's children, aged seven and eleven.

61. I did not receive detailed argument on the rather  elusive  scope[1]  of
   the concept of private life  under  Article  8  ECHR,  and  whether  the
   appellant's ability to take employment and/or to receive state  benefits
   fall within the scope of that  Article.   Nor  did  I  receive  detailed
   argument on the precise consequences to the appellant's children in  the
   event that he is no longer a British citizen.  For present  purposes,  I
   am prepared to accept that the appellant will not be able to continue in
   his employment or be able to receive state benefits in the event that he
   is deprived of his citizenship.  I am also prepared to accept  that  the
   resulting financial consequences and the distress felt by the  appellant
   and his partner are likely to have an impact on the  best  interests  of
   his children from previous relationships.  It would obviously be in  the
   best interests of the appellant's children that their father is able  to
   continue working and provide support for them as  he  does  at  present.
   The best interests of the children are a primary consideration, however,
   and are not the paramount consideration in such  an  appeal.   They  may
   yield to countervailing considerations of sufficient strength.


62. In this appeal, I am entirely satisfied that the immediate  consequences
   which will be felt by the appellant and his family are proportionate  to
   the legitimate aim pursued by the respondent.  I consider there to be  a
   strong public interest in  ensuring  that  people  who  are  subject  to
   immigration control are truthful in their dealings with the  respondent,
   particularly as regards applications for  naturalisation.   In  reaching
   that conclusion, I have borne in mind the submission made by Mr Krushner
   regarding the lengthy delay in the respondent  taking  the  decision  to
   deprive the appellant of his citizenship.  The delay  in  this  case  is
   relevant in the first two ways identified by Lord Bingham  at  [14]-[16]
   of EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41; [2008]  1  AC  1159.   Even  taking  full
   account of that delay, however, I do not consider that the  severity  of
   the consequences to the appellant and his family even begin to  outweigh
   what remains a pressing public interest in deprivation.

63. I do not consider the delay to be relevant in the  third  way  envisaged
   by Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo).   The  delay  was  not  the  product  of
   arbitrary or inconsistent decision making.  In fact, the reason for that
   delay is well known to all those who practise  in  this  field.   As  is
   clear from 2.96- 2.102 of the current edition of Macdonald's Immigration
   Law and Practice,  the  law  in  this  area  was  in  an  uncertain  and
   unsatisfactory  state  for  some  years.   It  was  unclear  whether  an
   individual such as the appellant - who had dishonestly changed  his  own
   identity rather than impersonating another person - should  be  deprived
   of his citizenship under s40 of the BNA 1981 or whether the Secretary of
   State should instead treat the grant of citizenship as  null  and  void.
   The test cases on the point were decided in favour of the respondent  in
   March 2014 (R (Kaziu & Ors) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 832 (Admin)) and November
   2015 (R (Hysaj & Ors) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1195) but the Supreme Court
   reached the opposite conclusion in December 2017, in R (Hysaj &  Ors)  v
   SSHD [2017] UKSC 82; [2018] 1 WLR 221.  The state of the  law  following
   the Supreme Court's decision  is  summarised  concisely  at  [2.102]  of
   Macdonald's:


         If a person impersonates another real person, living  or  dead,  to
         make an application for citizenship then the citizenship granted to
         the impersonator is a nullity.  However, if a  person  creates  for
         him or herself an identity which is false in some  or  all  of  its
         material particulars (eg as to name, date or place  of  birth)  and
         successfully uses that identity  to  obtain  citizenship  then  the
         citizenship is not a nullity but may be revoked by the Secretary of
         State as having been obtained by fraud.

64. The respondent placed a number of cases on hold  whilst  the  litigation
   described above progressed slowly to the Supreme Court.   That  decision
   placed individuals such as the appellant in a situation  of  uncertainty
   but there was a proper  and  proportionate  reason  for  the  respondent
   staying her hand whilst she awaited a final decision in the  litigation.
   That decision having been reached, the respondent opted not to treat the
   appellant's citizenship as a nullity (that being the course she had been
   considering when she wrote to his solicitors in 2017) but to deprive him
   of citizenship under s40 BNA  1981.   It  would  doubtlessly  have  been
   better for the respondent to write to the appellant to  explain  to  him
   why it was taking so long for her  to  take  a  decision  following  the
   interviews which took place at  Heathrow  Airport.   The  suspension  of
   decision-making in light of the Kaziu litigation was sufficiently  well-
   known, however, that the appellant - who was professionally  represented
   - might reasonably have been expected to know about it.  Even if he  did
   not, I do not regard the delay as  unexplained  or  capricious;  it  was
   brought about as a result of a legitimate desire to achieve certainty on
   the applicable law.

65. In the circumstances, having taken full account of the severity  of  the
   consequences which follow directly from the deprivation of  citizenship,
   I  conclude  that  the   public   interest   clearly   outweighs   those
   consequences.


Notice of Decision

Having set aside the decision of the FtT,  I  remake  the  decision  on  the
appeal by dismissing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                25 March 2020
                           -----------------------
[1] Razgar [2004] 2 AC 368 refers

