


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00034/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 2 May 2018                       |On: 08 May 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               siva nadarajan
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini of Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Nadarajan's  appeal
against the decision of 9 November  2015  to  deprive  him  of  his  British
nationality under section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981.
For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as the respondent and  Mr  Nadarajan  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka,  born  on  1  October  1980.  He
arrived in the UK in August 2001 and claimed asylum. His  asylum  claim  was
refused on 4  February  2002  and  his  appeal  against  that  decision  was
dismissed on 22 June 2002. On 17 September 2002 his representatives  applied
on his behalf for exceptional leave to remain in the UK.


The appellant was advised in a letter dated 11 June 2003 that  he  had  been
granted indefinite leave to remain and he was  subsequently  issued  with  a
certificate of naturalisation as a British citizen on 15  January  2008.  On
12 May 2009 the appellant was  advised  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
reason to believe that he had obtained his status as a British citizen as  a
result of fraud and that the grant of indefinite leave to  remain  had  been
fraudulently obtained. On 9 June 2009 the  respondent  made  a  decision  to
deprive him of his British nationality  under  section  40  of  the  British
nationality Act 1981. In the absence of any response by  the  appellant  the
case was closed, but was subsequently re-opened in November  2014  following
the determination of various other similar appeals.


On 5 February 2015 a letter was sent to the appellant advising him that  the
Secretary of State had reason to believe that he had obtained his status  as
a British citizen  as  a  result  of  fraud  and  he  was  invited  to  make
representations. A similar letter was sent on 11  May  2015.  The  appellant
did not respond and on 9 November 2015 the respondent  gave  notice  of  her
decision  to  make  an  order  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  his  British
citizenship under section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981.


The  respondent  gave  details,  in  that  letter,  of  a  widespread  fraud
perpetrated by a Home Office caseworker who had been arrested  in  2008  and
subsequently committed suicide. The respondent provided reasons why  it  was
considered that the appellant was  a  beneficiary  of  that  fraud  and  was
complicit in the fraud. As a result of the fraud the  appellant  was  issued
with  an  illegitimate  grant  of  status,  which  in  turn   led   to   his
naturalisation as a British citizen. It was accordingly considered  that  he
had concealed a material fact which led to  the  grant  of  citizenship  and
obtained naturalisation by misrepresentation and the  respondent  considered
that deprivation as necessary.


The appellant appealed against that decision under  section  40A(1)  of  the
British Nationality Act 1981 and the appeal was heard on 2 February 2018  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer. Judge  Metzer  noted  that  the  appellant
denied complicity in the fraudulent grant of indefinite leave to remain  and
considered that the respondent had failed to supply any evidence to back  up
the assertions in the refusal letter.  He  found  that  the  respondent  had
failed to establish that the appellant  had  obtained  indefinite  leave  to
remain and British citizenship fraudulently and he allowed the appeal.

Permission to appeal was sought by the respondent on the  grounds  that  the
judge, in finding there to  be  no  evidence  to  support  the  respondent's
assertions, had completely ignored a  supplementary  decision  letter  of  2
March 2016 with attached appendices of evidence which had been produced  for
the appeal.


Permission was granted on 28 February 2018.


Having heard submissions from both parties at the hearing, I concluded  that
Judge Metzer's decision could not stand and that remittal  of  the  case  to
the First-tier Tribunal was inevitable. It was plain that,  aside  from  the
brevity of his conclusions arising from the refusal decision of  9  November
2015, the judge had not considered at  all  the  respondent's  supplementary
refusal letter of 2 March 2016 together with appendices. There could  be  no
doubt from correspondence before me that the letter had been served  on  the
Tribunal, as well as on the appellant's representatives, well in advance  of
the hearing before Judge Metzer. Given  that  Judge  Metzer's  decision  was
made on the basis of a lack of supporting evidence from the respondent,  and
that evidence had been produced by the  respondent  with  the  letter  of  2
March 2016, the matter had clearly to  be  considered  de  novo  by  another
judge so that full and proper findings could be made on the evidence.


The appropriate course, therefore, is for the matter to be remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


DECISION


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The Secretary of State's  appeal  is  allowed
and the decision is set aside.

The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  and  Practice
Statement 7.2(b), to be heard before any judge aside from Judge Metzer.




Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
 Dated: 2 May 2018



