
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00050/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 28 August 2019                            |on 11 September 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AVDI DIDA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Sardar, Counsel, instructed by Oliver & Hasani
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (the appellant) against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal J K Swaney (the judge), promulgated on  31  May  2019,  in
        which she allowed the appeal of Mr A Dida (the respondent)  against
        the appellant's decision dated 10 September 2018 to deprive him  of
        his British nationality under s.40 of the British  Nationality  Act
        1981 (the 1981 Act).

   Background


     2. The respondent was born in Albania on 15 May 1986 and is a  citizen
        of that country. He entered the UK on 7 April 2004 and made a bogus
        asylum claim the following day. He said he was born in  Kosovo  and
        that his date of birth was 4 April 1988. He claimed his father  had
        been killed by the Kosovan Liberation Army and that he would be  at
        risk on return to the region based on his mixed  ethnicity  and  an
        imputed political opinion. On 6 May 2004 the respondent refused the
        asylum claim citing a  material  change  of  circumstances  in  the
        Kosovan region. The respondent was  however  granted  Discretionary
        Leave to Remain (DLR) in accordance with the published Home  Office
        Asylum Policy Instruction on Discretionary Leave, valid until 5 May
        2005.


     3. The Respondent made an application for Indefinite Leave  to  Remain
        (ILR) on  2  May  2005.  In  his  ILR  application  the  respondent
        maintained his claim to hail from Kosovo and his claim to have been
        born on 4 April 1988. A decision in respect of this application was
        not however made until 28 April 2010. On that  date  the  appellant
        granted the respondent ILR exceptionally, outside  the  immigration
        rules. The grant was issued by "Legacy CRT".

     4. On 5 July 2011 the  respondent  applied  for  naturalisation  as  a
        British citizen. In his application form he maintained that he  was
        born in Kosovo and that his date of birth was 4 April 1988. He  was
        issued with a certificate of naturalisation on 17 October 2011.

     5. On 4 July 2018 the appellant informed the respondent of her  belief
        that he was a citizen of Albania born on 15 May 1986, and that  she
        was considering depriving him of his British  citizenship  pursuant
        to s.40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981 (the 1981  Act).  On
        10 September 2018 the appellant decided to deprive  the  respondent
        of his British citizenship. In her deprivation  decision  (DD)  the
        appellant stated that the respondent was granted DLR because he was
        an unaccompanied child from  Kosovo  for  whom  adequate  reception
        arrangements could not be made in his "own" country.  Although  the
        appellant acknowledged that the respondent was still a minor  on  6
        May 2004 it was "not at all clear" that he would have been  granted
        leave as a minor had his true nationality been  known  as  it  "may
        have been possible to make reception arrangements and remove  [him]
        to Albania" (DD, at paragraphs 14 & 15). The appellant acknowledged
        that the respondent "may have been granted leave even if [his] true
        identity and nationality had been known" (DD, at paragraph 17). Due
        to a "backlog in unresolved asylum cases" the respondent accrued  5
        years length of residence in the UK. At paragraph 27 of the DD  the
        appellant stated that if the respondent had told the truth prior to
        the grant of ILR "it is possible" that he would have  been  refused
        further leave and removed to Albania. At paragraph 30 the appellant
        stated, "as noted previously, the ILR caseworker was not privy  all
        the facts and had she been, it is quite possible you would not have
        been granted ILR."


     6. The appellant concluded that the decision to deprive the respondent
        of his British citizenship would not render him stateless and  that
        it did not breach Article 8  ECHR.  The  respondent  exercised  his
        right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to s.40A(1)  of
        the 1981 Act.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     7. The judge set out the relevant  facts,  accurately  summarised  the
        position  of   the   parties,   summarised   the   representatives'
        submissions, and correctly directed herself on the relevant law and
        the burden and standard of proof. The judge had before her a bundle
        of documents prepared by the appellant and a  bundle  of  documents
        produced  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  included   witness
        statements from  the  respondent  and  his  wife,  the  appellant's
        Operational Guidance Notes (OGN) on Albania for 2003 and 2004,  and
        the copies of chapter 55 of the appellant's guidance on deprivation
        and nullity of British citizenship dating from 2012, 2014 and 2017.
        The judge heard oral evidence from the respondent and his  wife  (a
        British  citizen  pregnant  with  twins)  and  the  impact  of  the
        deprivation decision on their family (they have two young children)
        and their private lives.


     8. In the section of her decision headed 'Findings  and  reasons'  the
        judge found that the respondent made a false representation in  his
        application for naturalisation as a British citizen, that  he  knew
        the details were not correct and that his false representation  was
        deliberate. The judge then considered whether  the  representations
        made by the respondent was material to the grant of citizenship.

     9. At [31] the judge noted that the respondent was 17 years old  on  6
        May 2004 and that he would have been entitled to a grant  of  leave
        to remain for 9 days until his 18th birthday in accordance with the
        appellant's policy at the time. The OGN for Albania dated May  2003
        indicated there were no adequate reception  arrangements  in  place
        for unaccompanied minors in Albania. The judge found that  even  if
        the appellant had known the respondent was from  Albania  he  would
        have been entitled to a grant of leave to remain  on  6  May  2004.
        "The [respondent's] age and place of birth, had he provided genuine
        details when he claimed asylum, may have affected the  duration  of
        the leave to remain he was granted, but on the evidence  before  me
        would not have been material to the grant of  leave  to  remain  in
        itself."

    10. The judge then considered the circumstances surrounding  the  grant
        of ILR. At [33] the judge  gave  a  broad  outline  of  the  legacy
        exercise and referred to Chapter 53 of the Enforcement Instructions
        and Guidance (EIG) on how caseworkers were to consider  cases.  The
        judge noted that,  at  the  date  of  the  decision  to  grant  the
        respondent ILR, his application had been pending for over 5  years.
        The judge found that the respondent fell squarely within Chapter 53
        of the EIG. At [35] the judge stated,

             The  EIG  contains  guidance  about  an  applicant's  personal
             history including character, conduct and  employment  history.
             This section does not suggest that someone who provided  false
             details in respect of an earlier claim would be precluded from
             a grant leave  to  remain  or  that  it  is  even  a  relevant
             consideration.

    11. At [36] the judge found the fact that the grant of  ILR  signed  by
        the "Legacy CRT - South 19" supported the  respondent's  contention
        that his application was determined under the legacy exercise.  The
        judge found on the balance of probabilities that the respondent was
        granted ILR  under  the  legacy  exercise  on  application  of  the
        guidance in Chapter 53  of  the  EIG.  The  judge  found  that  the
        respondent's false representation regarding his age  and  place  of
        birth was not material to the decision to grant him ILR.


    12. At [37] the judge considered that  the  appellant  had  established
        specific guidance contemplating the respondents' circumstances. She
        referred  to  'Case  Study  C'  contained  in  Chapter  55  of  the
        Nationality Instructions in which an Albanian impersonating someone
        from Kosovo was granted ILR under the family ILR  concession  would
        not be deprived of their citizenship because their nationality  was
        not relevant to how ILR was  granted  under  that  concession.  The
        judge acknowledged that the respondent was not granted ILR under  a
        concession, but that he  was  granted  ILR  pursuant  to  published
        guidance and not as a refugee. As such, his nationality and date of
        birth were not sufficiently material to the grant of leave.

    13.  The  judge  then  considered,  in  the  alternative,  whether  the
        deprivation decision was disproportionate under Article  8  or  was
        otherwise  unlawful  or  unfair.  The  judge  considered  that  the
        reasonably  foreseeable  consequences   of   the   deprivation   of
        citizenship  were  significant  as  the  respondent  would  not  be
        permitted to work and would fall foul of the measures introduced by
        the Immigration Act 2014 such as being  prohibited  from  having  a
        bank account or holding a driver's license. At [41] the judge noted
        that the respondent owned a business and that  the  deprivation  of
        his citizenship would significantly impair his ability to  run  the
        business lawfully. Although the respondent's partner worked in  the
        business she was not a partner and had no experience of running the
        business. She also had 2  young  children  and  was  pregnant  with
        twins, factors that would impede her ability to run the business or
        even continue to work. This would have a negative  and  detrimental
        effect on the family's  ability  to  support  itself.  It  was  not
        desirable  or  in  the  public  interest  to  force  a   previously
        financially independent family to access social security  benefits.
        At  [42]  the  judge  found  that,  given  the  strength   of   the
        respondent's family life,  private  life  and  the  length  of  his
        residence in the UK, he would have a strongly arguable rights claim
        which, if refused by the appellant, would have a realistic prospect
        of success before the First-tier Tribunal. Accordingly,  the  judge
        did  not  consider  the  respondent's  removal  was  a   reasonably
        foreseeable consequence of being deprived of  his  citizenship.  At
        [43] the judge acknowledged a statement by the appellant  that  she
        would make a decision on whether to either remove the respondent or
        grant him leave to remain within 8  weeks  of  the  making  of  the
        deportation order, but  found  there  was  no  guarantee  that  the
        appellant would make a decision within that timescale. At [44]  the
        judge concluded that the decision to deprive the respondent of  his
        British citizenship was a disproportionate  interference  with  his
        Article 8 rights and, as his deception was not material to  whether
        or not he met the statutory criteria for naturalisation, the public
        interest in deprivation was low. The judge accordingly allowed  the
        respondent's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and the parties' submissions

    14. The first ground of  appeal  contends  that  the  judge  mistakenly
        relied on an out of date version of Chapter 55 of  the  Nationality
        Instructions. 'Case Study C' was not contained  in  the  July  2017
        guidance, which was published on 14 July 2017. The  extract  relied
        on by the judge was taken from the policy in existence between June
        2010 and 2014. This ground, somewhat confusingly, referred  to  the
        case study as a 'policy' and asserted that statements of  executive
        policy, in the absence of an express  provision  to  the  contrary,
        took affect when they say so. In  her  oral  submissions  Ms  Cunha
        accepted that this ground was "somewhat confusing to an extent" and
        was unable to explain the reference  to  'policy'.  She  ultimately
        submitted that the judge was  wrong  to  reach  her  conclusion  by
        reference to a case study that was not contained  in  the  relevant
        iteration of Chapter 55.


    15. The 2nd ground of appeal contends that the  judge  failed  to  take
        into account relevant considerations, made a mistake  of  fact  and
        failed  to  give  adequate  reasons   for   concluding   that   the
        respondent's false representation regarding his age  and  place  of
        birth were not material to the decision  to  grant  him  ILR.  This
        ground relies on the Administrative Court decision in Hakemi &  Ors
        v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWHC  1967
        (Admin),  a  decision  that  was  before  the  judge.  The  judge's
        conclusion at [35] was said to be inconsistent with the version  of
        the policy set out in Hakemi at paragraph  36,  which  stated  that
        "caseworkers must also take account of any  evidence  of  deception
        practised at any stage in the process, attempts  to  frustrate  the
        process (for example, failure to attend interviews, supply required
        documentation), whether the individual has maintained contact  with
        the UK Border Agency, as  required,  and  whether  they  have  been
        actively pressing for resolution of their immigration  status.  The
        caseowner must assess all evidence of compliance and non-compliance
        in the round. The weight placed on periods of absconsion should  be
        proportionate to the length of compliant residence in the  UK.  For
        example, additional weight should be placed on lengthy  periods  of
        absconsion which form a significant proportion of the  individual's
        residence in the UK."


    16. At paragraph 41 of Hakemi the Administrative Court found  that  the
        4th claimant plainly fell  within  the  aforementioned  passage  of
        Chapter 53 EIG relating to deception because, had he told the truth
        he would never have had an arguable asylum claim at all as  he  was
        from Albania and not Kosovo. The written grounds contend  that  the
        judge failed to engage with Hakemi, failed to give any reasons  for
        distinguishing the 4th claimant in that case, and mistakenly  found
        that deception was not a relevant consideration  under  the  legacy
        programme. At the 'error of  law'  hearing  Ms  Cunha  adopted  the
        written grounds and submitted that the mere fact that someone  lied
        in their asylum claim constituted deception within the terms of the
        Chapter 53 extract. Ms Cunha did not  however  provide  a  copy  of
        Chapter 53 extant at the date the respondent  was  granted  ILR.  I
        granted her request, made at the end of the hearing, to file a copy
        of the relevant version of Chapter 53 by  4pm.  No  such  copy  was
        provided to me within the agreed timescale.

    17. The 3rd ground contends that the judge made  inconsistent  findings
        of fact. On the one hand the judge found that the respondent made a
        false representation in his application  for  naturalisation  as  a
        British citizen and that this false representation was deliberately
        made. This was said to be inconsistent with the  judge's  statement
        at [39] that "given my decision, it is not strictly necessary to go
        one and consider whether  or  not  the  appellant's]  decision  was
        otherwise unlawful or unfair. I have nevertheless done so."

    18. The 4th round of appeal challenges the judge's alternative  finding
        that the discretion to remove the respondent's British  citizenship
        should have been exercised differently, that the judge was wrong to
        find that the respondent had not been involved  in  criminality  as
        his deception constituted a criminal offence  under  s.24A  of  the
        Immigration Act 1971, and that no due regard had been  accorded  to
        the public interest in deprivation.  In  her  oral  submissions  Ms
        Cunha submitted that the judge failed to consider the impact of the
        decision to deprive the respondent of his  British  nationality  on
        him and his family in the short 'limbo'  period  before  a  further
        decision was made, and that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
        support the judge's findings.

    19. I indicated that I would reserve my decision.

Discussion

    20. It was not in dispute between the parties at  the  'error  of  law'
        hearing that the 4th ground would only need to be determined if the
        judge's primary finding - that the respondent's citizenship was not
        obtained by means of fraud - was found to involve the making of  an
        error on a point of law.


    21. S.40(3) of the 1981 Act reads,

          The Secretary of State  may  by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
          citizenship  status  which  results  from  his  registration   or
          naturalisation if the Secretary of State is  satisfied  that  the
          registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -


           (a) fraud,
           (b) false representation, or
           (c) concealment of a material fact.

    22. In  an  appeal  against  a  decision  to  deprive  a  person  of  a
        citizenship  status,  in  assessing  whether  the  person  obtained
        registration  or  naturalisation  "by  means   of"   fraud,   false
        representation, or concealment of a  material  fact,  the  impugned
        behaviour must be  directly  material  to  the  decision  to  grant
        citizenship (Sleiman (deprivation of citizenship;  conduct)  [2017]
        UKUT 00367 (IAC)).


    23. In BA (deprivation of citizenship: appeals) [2018] UKUT 00085 (IAC)
        the Upper Tribunal endorsed the principle  established  in  Pirzada
        (Deception of citizenship:  general  principles)  [2017]  UKUT  196
        (IAC) that the deception must have  motivated  the  acquisition  of
        citizenship. Chapter 55 of the  Nationality  Instructions,  in  its
        various iterations, makes clear that the  question  of  deprivation
        only arises where any fraud, false representation or concealment of
        a material fact had a direct bearing on the grant of citizenship.

    24. Although the judge mistakenly referred to 'Case study C'  as  being
        contained in the  Nationality  Instructions  at  the  date  of  the
        decision  under  appeal,  the  purpose  of  her  reference  was  to
        establish  a  principle  that  is  uncontroversial  and  which   is
        contained both in BA and Pirzada (see above at paragraph 23 of this
        decision) and in the Nationality Instructions that were  extant  at
        the date of the decision as well as the previous versions,  all  of
        which were  in  the  bundle  of  documents  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. 55.7.2.3 of the Nationality Instructions dating from 2012
        reads, "if  the  fraud,  false  representation  or  concealment  of
        material fact did not  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  grant  of
        citizenship, it will  not  be  appropriate  to  pursue  deprivation
        action." The same appears at 55.7.3 of the 2014  iteration  of  the
        Nationality Instructions, and, significantly, at 55.7.3 of the 2017
        iteration of the Nationality Instructions which were  (and  remain)
        in force at the date of the appellant's decision. 'Case study C' is
        not a 'policy' but merely a worked example of how  the  requirement
        for the deception to have 'a direct  bearing'  may  be  applied  in
        practice. I accept the respondent's submission that  the  appellant
        has failed to show how the version of Chapter  55  upon  which  she
        relied runs contrary to the case study, which merely  outlined  how
        the principle of 'direct bearing' may apply in practice. The  judge
        gave cogent and legally sustainable reasons for concluding that the
        respondent would have been entitled to  an  initial  grant  of  DLR
        regardless of his deception because he was, at the  relevant  date,
        still a minor. The grounds do  not  take  issue  with  the  judge's
        reliance on the OGN for Albania which indicated  that  the  country
        did not have any adequate reception arrangements  at  the  material
        time. The judge's reasoning in respect of the basis for  the  grant
        of DLR is unassailable. Ground 1 is not made out.


    25. Ground 2 relies on an extract of Chapter 53 EIG as  it  appears  in
        Hakemi as set out in paragraph 15 above. The version of Chapter  53
        that was applicable to the claimants in  Hakemi  would  have  dated
        from at least 15 October 2010 (the earliest  date  of  any  of  the
        decisions under challenge in those proceedings).  The  decision  to
        grant the respondent ILR was made 28  April  2010,  some  6  months
        prior to the earliest decision in Hakemi.  The  appellant  has  not
        produced the iteration of Chapter 53 applicable  at  the  date  the
        respondent was granted ILR. the appellant's reliance on the extract
        set out at paragraph 36 of  Hakemi  cannot  therefore  support  her
        contention that the judge failed to properly consider or apply  the
        relevant policy. As a consequence, the appellant's  ground  is  not
        made out.

    26. However, even if  the  terms  of  the  policy  are  the  same,  the
        respondent  could  not  have  established,  on  the  basis  of  the
        particular evidence before the judge,  that  the  respondent's  ILR
        application would have been refused had his  real  nationality  and
        date of birth been known. Whilst caseowners had to take account  of
        any evidence of deception, this did not preclude a grant  of  leave
        to remain, as pointed out by the judge. The guidance did not expand
        upon the nature or extent of  the  type  of  deception  that  would
        prevent a person from being granted ILR under the  legacy  exercise
        if there had been a delay of over 5  years  in  dealing  with  that
        person's application. In Sleiman the Upper Tribunal recognised that
        grants of leave to remain under the legacy exercise  were  made  in
        cases where individuals had no right to be in the UK which no doubt
        included many whose asylum claims were false. The  mere  fact  that
        there had been  deception  did  not  preclude  an  individual  from
        benefiting from the application of Chapter 53. Mr Sleiman had  lied
        about his age but the Upper Tribunal found that this  lie  was  not
        directly material to the grant of ILR under the legacy exercise  or
        to the grant of British citizenship. The  DD  itself  only  asserts
        that  it  was  "possible"  and  "quite  possible"  that,  had   the
        respondent told the truth prior to the grant of ILR, it  would  not
        have been granted (see paragraph 5 of this  decision).  Given  that
        the burden of proof rests on the appellant the judge was unarguably
        entitled to conclude that the respondent's ILR was granted  on  the
        basis of his length of residence and the appellant's delay and that
        his nationality and date of birth were not material to  that  grant
        of leave.


    27. The respondent contends that the judge failed to give  reasons  for
        distinguishing the 4th claimant in Hakemi who was also an  Albanian
        who had pretended to be from Kosovo and who  was  not  granted  any
        leave under the legacy enterprise. Hakemi was  however  a  judicial
        review challenge to the lawfulness  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
        decision and not a decision to deprive  someone  of  their  British
        citizenship. The Administrative Court was concerned  with  judicial
        review principles and, in  particular,  whether  the  Secretary  of
        State's decision was one she was rationally entitled  to  reach  on
        the evidence before her. The Secretary of State's decision was held
        to be lawful, but the case was decided on its own particular  facts
        and it did not establish that  all  cases  that  involved  a  false
        asylum claim had to be decided in the same way.  Ground  2  is  not
        made out.

    28. I can deal with the 3rd ground briefly. The  judge's  finding  that
        the respondent deliberately made  a  false  representation  in  his
        application  for  naturalisation  as  a  British  citizen  is   not
        inconsistent with her finding that the false representation did not
        have a direct bearing on the grant of citizenship. The  judge  gave
        rationally and legally sustainable reasons for concluding that  the
        grants of DLR and ILR did not depend on the false  representations.
        The judge was entitled to find that the respondent would have  been
        granted DLR, albeit of a shorter duration, as he was a  minor  from
        Albania and in the absence of any adequate  reception  arrangements
        at that time, and that the grant of ILR was made under  the  legacy
        enterprise and based on the Secretary of State's lengthy  delay  in
        deciding the respondent's application. The judge  was  entitled  to
        find that the respondent  had  exercised  deception  but  that  the
        deception did not motivate the grant of citizenship.  There  is  no
        inconsistency.

    29. Having found no error on a point of law requiring the  decision  to
        be set aside in respect of judge's finding  that  the  respondent's
        citizenship was not obtained by means of fraud, it is not necessary
        for me to consider the 4th ground.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


     D.Blum                             29 August 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
