
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00002/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 April 2019                     |On 31 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 TIFFANY [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 13 March 2019, I set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal and directed a resumed hearing. My reasons  for
    setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent  and  to  the
         respondent as the appellant as they  respectively  appeared  before
         the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant was born on  28  March  1983
         and is a citizen of the  People's  Republic  of  China.  She  first
         entered the United Kingdom in 2001 as a student.  She  was  granted
         indefinite leave to remain on 25 January 2011. On  14  April  2011,
         the appellant received a certificate of naturalisation as a British
         citizen. On 26 September 2017, the Secretary of State notified  the
         appellant of his intention to deprive the appellant of her  British
         nationality. By a decision dated  14  December,  the  Secretary  of
         State deprived the appellant of her British nationality pursuant to
         section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act  1981.  The  appellant
         appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,   in   a   decision
         promulgated on 28 June 2018, allowed the appeal. The  Secretary  of
         State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   In September 2010, the appellant started work for  Law  Direct
         Associates (LDA) in Leeds. She stopped working for the firm in  May
         2013. She applied to be naturalised  as  a  British  citizen  on  3
         February 2011. On 10 October 2013, police  raided  the  offices  of
         LDA. Several individuals, including the appellant, working for  LDR
         were subsequently charged with conspiracy to defraud between  March
         2009 and 10 October 2013.  The  appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  the
         offence of conspiracy to defraud  at  Bradford  Crown  Court  on  8
         December  2016.  She  was  sentenced  to  12  months  imprisonment,
         suspended for 12 months. Her plea (which is reproduced at  Annex  D
         of the respondent's bundle of documents) reads as follows:

             "I Tiffany [P] of my own free will and  without  any  pressure
             being exerted upon myself plead guilty to Count 1  an  offence
             of conspiracy to defraud between 23 March 2009 and 10  October
             2013. I accept that I falsely produced British  naturalisation
             applications and passport applications  during  the  period  I
             worked for Law Direct Associates which was between 2000 10 May
             2013. In doing so I accept that I made  false  representations
             by holding out that I was a proper, qualifying person  to  act
             as referee and I failed to declare that I  was  acting  as  an
             agent of Law Direct Associates. I handed  back  all  forms  to
             whoever was dealing with applications  which  was  usually  Mr
             Bing Gong who was fully aware of the situation."

         3.   At [28], Judge Cox wrote:

             "The Respondent  asserted  that  the  Appellant  had  admitted
             involvement in fraud  between  23/3/2009  and  9/10/2013.   As
             such, the Respondent contends  that  the  Appellant  had  been
             involved in 'criminal activity'  prior  to  obtaining  British
             Citizenship.  However, on the form,  the  Appellant  is  asked
             "whether she had engaged in any other activities  which  might
             indicate that she may not  be  considered  a  person  of  good
             character" and she replied no.   Accordingly,  the  Respondent
             asserted that the Appellant had falsely represented  that  she
             is of good character."

         4.   At [30], Judge Cox  recorded  that  'the  appellant's  counsel
         acknowledged that the relevant period was not limited to  a  period
         prior to her signing the application form [for naturalisation]  but
         included a period up to the naturalisation ceremony in April 2011.'

         5.   The judge considered that the  appeal  was  'finely  balanced'
         [40]. He observed that the instructions  on  the  forms  which  the
         appellant had signed as a referee when working for LDA were 'clear'
         he found that the appellant or to have known  that  she  was  doing
         something wrong. However, he  also  recorded  that  'this  was  the
         appellant's first office job, she had only signed  one  application
         form by the time she obtained the  naturalisation  certificate  and
         criminal case demonstrates that everyone working LDA was doing it.'
         Weighing heavily in the judge's  consideration  was  evidence  that
         OISC (The Office of  the  Immigration  Services  Commissioner)  had
         audited LDA on 1 October 2010 but had failed to warn the proprietor
         of the business that  he  was  committing  a  criminal  offence  by
         himself  acting  as  a  referee  on  behalf   applicants   in   the
         naturalisation process.  The  judge  found  that  'the  appellant's
         understanding cannot be taken to be greater than the OISC  and  she
         cannot reasonably be assumed  to  understand  what  she  was  doing
         something that might indicate that she was not good character.'

         6.   The judge's reasoning is problematic. First, I do not see  the
         relevance of evidence that others at LDA were  committing  criminal
         offences to the failure of the appellant to notify the Secretary of
         State of her own conduct. Likewise, the judge  appears  to  suggest
         that the criminal offending of all those charged was  in  some  way
         mitigated by the failure of OISC to identify the criminality and to
         notify the police.  Moreover, as the Secretary of State submits, by
         pleading guilty the appellant acknowledged that she  possessed  the
         mens rea of conspiracy to defraud  at  the  time  of  the  offence.
         Section 1 of the Criminal Law Act 1977 provides:

             'Subject to the following provisions of this Part of this Act,
             if a person agrees with any other person  or  persons  that  a
             course of conduct shall be pursued which, if the agreement  is
             carried out in accordance with their intentions, either-

             (a)  will necessarily amount to or involve the  commission  of
             any offence or offences by one or more of the parties  to  the
             agreement, or

             (b)  would do so but for the existence of facts  which  render
             the  commission  of  the  offence  or  any  of  the   offences
             impossible, he is guilty of conspiracy to commit  the  offence
             or offences in question.' [my emphasis]

         As the grounds of appeal put it, the  judge  'fell  into  error  by
         failing to  take  into  account  that  the  appellant  had  already
         admitted to planning a criminal offence during the period prior  to
         4 April 2011.' The judge considered that  the  appellant  had  been
         unaware that she had committed a criminal offence at the  time  she
         made application for  naturalisation;  only  subsequently  did  she
         realise that activities  and  been  criminal.  That  reasoning  was
         faulty because it failed to take into  account  that,  by  pleading
         guilty to the offence, the appellant had unequivocally stated  that
         she had the intention to commit the offence of conspiracy which she
         and others at LDA had then committed. In other words, she  did  not
         become possessed of  the  mens  rea  ex  post  facto.  The  judge's
         reasoning seeks wrongly to go behind the  appellant's  guilty  plea
         and criminal conviction.

         7.   There are further problems  with  the  judge's  decision.  The
         judge was referred to  BA  (deprivation  of  citizenship:  appeals)
         [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC). The Upper Tribunal held that:

             "In the case  of  section  40(3),  the  matter  of  which  the
             Secretary of State must be satisfied is much more  hard-edged.
             The fact that the subsection speaks of the Secretary of  State
             being "satisfied" that fraud etc was employed  does  not  mean
             the question for the Tribunal is merely whether the  Secretary
             of State was rationally entitled to conclude as  she  did.  In
             Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Al-Jedda  [2013]
             UKSC 62, the Supreme Court was not disposed to say  more  than
             that the use of the word "satisfied" in section 40(2) and  (3)
             "may afford some  slight  significance",  although  the  Court
             found it difficult to articulate what that significance  might
             be (Lord Wilson at paragraph 30). We consider the Tribunal  is
             in a position to take its own view of whether the requirements
             of subsection (3) are satisfied. If they are, then the  points
             made in paragraph 43 above will apply in this  class  of  case
             also. The Tribunal  will  be  required  to  place  significant
             weight on the fact that the Secretary of State has decided, in
             the public interest, that a person who has employed  deception
             etc to obtain British citizenship should be deprived  of  that
             status. Where statelessness is not in issue, it is  likely  to
             be only in a rare case that the ECHR or some  very  compelling
             feature will require the Tribunal to allow the appeal."

         The Upper Tribunal summarised its guidance as follows:

             (1)  The Tribunal must first establish  whether  the  relevant
             condition precedent exists for the exercise of  the  Secretary
             of State's discretion to  deprive  a  person  (P)  of  British
             citizenship.

             (2)  In a section 40(2) case, the fact that the  Secretary  of
             State is satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public
             good is to be given very significant weight  and  will  almost
             inevitably be determinative of that issue.

             (3)  In a section 40(3)  case,  the  Tribunal  must  establish
             whether one or more  of  the  means  described  in  subsection
             (3)(a), (b) and (c) were used by P in order to obtain  British
             citizenship. As held  in  Pirzada,  the  deception  must  have
             motivated the acquisition of that citizenship.

             (4)  In both section 40(2) and (3) cases, the  fact  that  the
             Secretary  of  State  has  decided  in  the  exercise  of  her
             discretion  to  deprive  P  of  British  citizenship  will  in
             practice mean the  Tribunal  can  allow  P's  appeal  only  if
             satisfied  that  the  reasonably  foreseeable  consequence  of
             deprivation  would  violate  the  obligations  of  the  United
             Kingdom government under the Human Rights Act 1998 and/or that
             there is some exceptional feature of the case which means  the
             discretion in the subsection  concerned  should  be  exercised
             differently.

             (5)  As can be seen from AB, the stronger P's case appears  to
             the Tribunal to be for resisting any future (post-deprivation)
             removal on ECHR grounds, the less likely it will be  that  P's
             removal from the United Kingdom will be one of the foreseeable
             consequences of deprivation.

             (6)  The appeal is  to  be  determined  by  reference  to  the
             evidence adduced to the Tribunal,  whether  or  not  the  same
             evidence was before the Secretary of State when she  made  her
             decision to deprive.

         The question of statelessness did not arise in the instant  appeal.
         It is not referred to in the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. Likewise, despite the guidance of BA,  no  reference  was
         made to the ECHR. The decision letter of  the  Secretary  of  State
         made it clear that deprivation of citizenship  did  not  mean  that
         removal was inevitable. At [25], the decision letter recorded  that
         the appellant has a child (K) who is a British citizen and who  was
         born in 2007. This child, the appellant's British husband and other
         matters relevant to Article 8 ECHR did not figure  at  all  in  the
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal despite the fact  that  we  learn
         from BA that, 'the Tribunal can allow P's appeal only if  satisfied
         that the reasonably foreseeable consequence  of  deprivation  would
         violate the obligations of the United Kingdom government under  the
         Human Rights  Act  1998...'  On  the  face  of  the  limited  facts
         concerning the appellant's private and family life  in  the  United
         Kingdom, she would appear to have a strong  prima  facie  case  for
         remaining in the United Kingdom under  Article  8  ECHR  (see,  for
         example, section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act). However, the judge  made
         no finding in respect of Article 8 ECHR nor did he make a  specific
         finding that this is an 'exceptional' case which indicated that the
         discretion to deprive the appellant of her citizenship should  have
         been exercised differently.

         I find that the judge's decision should be set aside.  His  finding
         that, at the time she made an application for  naturalisation,  the
         appellant was unaware that she was committing  a  criminal  offence
         cannot stand in the face of her  guilty  plea  to  the  offence  of
         conspiracy to defraud. I refer to the guidance set out above in BA;
         the judge also failed  to  follow  that  guidance  to  examine,  in
         particular in failing to examine issues surrounding Article 8 ECHR.
         I shall remake the decision at or following the resumed hearing  at
         Bradford before me on a date  to  be  fixed.  Both  parties  should
         attend prepared to address in their submissions the  exceptionality
         of the appellant's case (if that  is  what  she  seeks  to  argue),
         Article 8 ECHR and statelessness (if appropriate). Both parties may
         adduce new evidence provided that they serve it on each  other  and
         file it at the Upper Tribunal at least 10 days prior to the resumed
         hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         This decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None of  the
         findings shall stand. The  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Lane) shall remake the decision at or following a  resumed  hearing
         at Bradford on the first available date (No  interpreter:  2  hours
         allowed)"

 2. The representatives of both parties made  submissions  at  the  resumed
    hearing following which I reserved my decision.

 3. I refer in my error of law decision to the recent decision of the Upper
    Tribunal in BA (see error of law decision at [7]). Subsequent  to  that
    decision, the Court of Appeal has given its judgement in KV [2018] EWCA
    Civ 2483. At [6] the Court of Appeal  to  endorsed  principles  of  law
    articulated in the earlier Upper Tribunal  decisions  of  BA  and  also
    Deliallisi [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC):

         "(1)  Like  an  appeal  under  section  82  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, an appeal under section 40A of the
         1981 Act is not a review of the Secretary of State's decision but a
         full  reconsideration  of  the  decision  whether  to  deprive  the
         appellant of British citizenship.

         (2)  It is thus for the tribunal to find the relevant facts on  the
         basis of the evidence adduced to the tribunal, whether or not  that
         evidence was before the Secretary of State when deciding to make  a
         deprivation order.

         (3)   The  tribunal  must  first  establish  whether  the  relevant
         condition precedent specified in section 40(2) or  (3)  exists  for
         the exercise of the discretion whether to deprive the appellant  of
         British citizenship. In a section 40(3)  case,  this  requires  the
         tribunal to establish whether citizenship was obtained  by  one  or
         more of the means specified in that subsection.

         (4)  If the condition precedent is established,  the  tribunal  has
         then to ask whether the Secretary of State's discretion to  deprive
         the  appellant  of  British   citizenship   should   be   exercised
         differently. For this purpose, the tribunal  must  first  determine
         the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation.

         (5)  If the rights of the appellant or any  other  relevant  person
         under article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  are
         engaged, the tribunal will have to  decide  whether  depriving  the
         appellant   of   British    citizenship    would    constitute    a
         disproportionate  interference  with  those  rights.  But  even  if
         article 8 is not engaged, the tribunal must still consider  whether
         the discretion should be exercised differently.

         (6)  As it is the Secretary  of  State  who  has  been  charged  by
         Parliament with  responsibility  for  making  decisions  concerning
         deprivation of citizenship, insofar as the Secretary of  State  has
         considered the relevant facts, the Secretary of  State's  view  and
         any  published  policy  regarding  how  the  discretion  should  be
         exercised should normally be accorded considerable weight (in which
         regard see Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]
         UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799)."

 4. Moreover, in KV the Court of Appeal  considered  whether,  in  deciding
    whether a person should be deprived of citizenship, it is necessary  to
    consider the proportionality  of  that  decision.  At  [16]  the  court
    concluded

         "In making a decision whether to order deprivation  of  citizenship
         in the exercise of a discretionary  power  under  section  40,  the
         decision-maker (whether that be  the  Secretary  of  State  or  the
         tribunal on an appeal) has to form a view, not just as  to  whether
         it would be rational to make such an order, but whether it is right
         to do so. This necessarily involves an evaluation of  the  relative
         weight to be accorded to  the  public  interest  in  depriving  the
         person concerned of citizenship and  any  competing  interests  and
         considerations, including the impact of deprivation  on  the  legal
         status of the individual concerned."

 5. By the provisions of section 40 (3)  of  the  British  Nationality  Act
    1981, The Secretary of State  may  by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
    citizenship   status   which   results   from   his   registration   or
    naturalisation  if  the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
    registration or naturalisation was obtained by means  of  fraud,  false
    representation or concealment of a material fact. Both parties agree in
    the present appeal that the appellant's citizenship status was  derived
    by fraud and/or false representation.

 6. The appellant appeals under the provisions of Section 40A of  the  1981
    Act:

         "A person who is given notice under section 40(5) of a decision  to
         make an order in respect of him under section 40 may appeal against
         the decision to the First-tier Tribunal."

 7. As I understand the grounds of  appeal  and  also  given  the  reliance
    placed by Miss Khan, who appeared for  the  appellant  at  the  resumed
    hearing, on KV, the appellant advances her appeal on the ground, first,
    that the decision of the Secretary of State to exercise his  discretion
    by depriving the appellant of her  citizenship  was  not  proportionate
    and, secondly, on Article 8 grounds.

 8. Dealing first with the proportionality of the decision,  the  appellant
    relies on the expert report of Guofu Liu just dated 22 April 2019. I am
    able to consider this report in remaking the  decision  notwithstanding
    the fact that it was not before the Secretary of State at the  time  of
    the decision to deprive (see BA, headnote (6)). Mr Liu  concluded  that
    the appellant lost  her  Chinese  nationality  automatically  when  she
    became a British citizen; China does not recognise the dual citizenship
    for any Chinese national  [7].  There  is  a  procedure  by  which  the
    appellant could reapply for Chinese nationality having lost her British
    citizenship but this gives rise  to  two  potential  problems  for  the
    appellant. First, the appellant would have  to  disclose  any  criminal
    convictions which had been imposed upon her by  courts  outside  China.
    The existence of a conviction (such as  the  appellant  has)  would  be
    inevitably  prove  a  negative  factor  in  the  determination  of  her
    application for citizenship. Secondly, the relevant Chinese statute law
    provides that 'the applicant must settle in China when the  application
    for restoration of the Chinese nationality is lodged [28]'.  Miss  Khan
    submitted but this would involve the appellant and  her  British  child
    having to travel to China, a country of which neither are citizens,  in
    order to live there whilst they await the outcome  of  the  application
    for nationality. As non-citizens, they would  not  be  able  to  access
    public services and would be at risk of destitution and other harm.

 9.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in  KV  addressed  the  question  of  possible
    reacquisition of former citizenship at [19-20]:

         "19. Where, as in the present case, it is established not only that
         deception was  used  but  that,  without  it,  an  application  for
         naturalisation as a citizen would not have been granted,  it  seems
         to me that it will be an unusual case in which  the  applicant  can
         legitimately complain of the  withdrawal  of  the  rights  that  he
         acquired as  a  result  of  naturalisation.  That  is  because  the
         withdrawal of those rights does  no  more  than  place  the  person
         concerned in the same position as if he had not been fraudulent and
         had acted honestly in making the application. The position  may  be
         different, however, in a case where, as a result of naturalisation,
         the individual has lost other rights previously enjoyed which  will
         not  or  may  not  be  restored  if  he  is  now  deprived  of  his
         citizenship. In such a case depriving  the  person  of  citizenship
         will not simply return him to the status quo ante  but  will  place
         him in a worse position than if he had not been granted citizenship
         in the first place.

         20.  That may occur where a person who was a  national  of  another
         state has lost that nationality as a result of becoming  a  British
         citizen and would not be entitled to resume his former  nationality
         if deprived of his British citizenship. In such a case the decision-
         maker (whether it be the Secretary of State or the tribunal  on  an
         appeal) will need to consider whether deprivation of citizenship is
         justified having regard to that consequence.  Relevant  factors  in
         making that determination are likely to include both the nature and
         circumstances of the deception by means of which naturalisation was
         obtained but also, on the other side of the scales, the  likelihood
         (if any) that the individual would be able to re-acquire his former
         citizenship and the extent to which the inability  to  do  so  will
         have practical  detrimental  consequences  for  the  individual  or
         others. Although  it  does  not  seem  to  me  necessary  that  the
         assessment should have to be conducted using the formal four  stage
         test of proportionality adopted in cases such as Bank Mellat  v  HM
         Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC 39; [2014] AC 700,  para  74,  it  will
         necessarily involve a balancing  exercise  and  a  judgment  as  to
         whether in all the  circumstances  deprivation  of  citizenship  is
         proportionate."

10. First, I have no evidence before me to show that  it  would  either  be
    necessary for the appellant to be joined by her  British  child  during
    the time he spends in China re-acquiring her nationality and, secondly,
    to show that either the appellant (or, if he  did  accompany  her,  the
    child also) would experience significant hardship pending  the  outcome
    of the application. If they did travel  to  China,  the  appellant  and
    child would, in effect, be in the position of visitors;  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that their financial circumstances  are  such  that
    they could not afford to remain living abroad  for  a  period  of  time
    without becoming destitute. It also seems likely  that  they  may  have
    family members or friends in China who may be able  to  accommodate  or
    otherwise assist them. Thirdly, although Mr Liu does  not  characterise
    the chances of the appellant re-acquiring a nationality  as  'big',  he
    does state at [29] that the Chinese authorities have a 'big discretion'
    in  respect  of  such  applications.  The  prospect  of  the  appellant
    reacquiring her Chinese citizenship therefore cannot  be  described  as
    hopeless.

11. These findings are relevant in the light of  the  guidance  in  KV.  Is
    important  to  note  that  the  Court  of  Appeal   did   not   discuss
    statelessness and problems in reacquiring citizenship as if these  were
    abstract or academic matters of no practical consequence.  Rather,  the
    court stressed the need to have regard to  any  'practical  detrimental
    consequences for the individual or  others.'  I  have  found  that  the
    appellant has not  provided  evidence  to  show  that  such  'practical
    detrimental consequences' would, on a balance of  probabilities,  arise
    for her or others.

12. I accept that 'the nature and circumstances of the deception  by  means
    of which  naturalisation  was  obtained'  were  not,  perhaps,  in  the
    appellant's case of the most egregious kind. I consider it likely  that
    the appellant was not the instigator  of  the  nationality  application
    fraud perpetrated at the office where she  worked.  However,  the  fact
    remains that she pleaded guilty in a criminal court to the  offence  as
    charged.  As  a  factor  in  the  assessment  of  proportionality,  the
    circumstances  of   the   offence   which   led   to   the   fraudulent
    misrepresentation do not weigh heavily in the appellant's favour, if at
    all. The fact that she has been  unable  to  prove  the  likelihood  of
    'practical  detrimental   consequences'   arising   from   any   future
    application to regain her Chinese  citizenship  leads  me,  having  had
    regard to all the circumstances, to  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to deprive the appellant of  her  British  nationality
    was proportionate.

13. The principles of law extracted by the Court of Appeal in  KV  from  BA
    and other Upper Tribunal decisions do not include the guidance given by
    in BA at headnotes (4) and (5) although there is nothing in  the  Court
    of Appeal's judgement which would indicate that it disapproved of  that
    guidance. I have quoted the guidance above in my error of law  decision
    but repeat it here for ease of reference:

         "(4) In both section  40(2)  and  (3)  cases,  the  fact  that  the
         Secretary of State has decided in the exercise of her discretion to
         deprive P of British citizenship will in practice mean the Tribunal
         can  allow  P's  appeal  only  if  satisfied  that  the  reasonably
         foreseeable  consequence   of   deprivation   would   violate   the
         obligations of the United Kingdom government under the Human Rights
         Act 1998 and/or that there is some exceptional feature of the  case
         which means the discretion in the subsection  concerned  should  be
         exercised differently.

         (5)  As can be seen from AB, the stronger P's case appears  to  the
         Tribunal to be for resisting any future (post-deprivation)  removal
         on ECHR grounds, the less likely it will be that P's  removal  from
         the United Kingdom will be one of the foreseeable  consequences  of
         deprivation."

14. The appellant is married to a British citizen and her child is British.
    The Secretary of State has not suggested that he intends to remove  the
    appellant from the  United  Kingdom  having  deprived  her  of  British
    nationality. Following the judgement in KV,  the  second  part  of  the
    guidance in (4)  above  ('some  exceptional  feature')  may  have  been
    supplanted  by  the  need  for  decision   makers   to   consider   the
    proportionality of the decision to deprive. As regards  her  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds, as BA shows, the stronger an  appellant's  case
    to remain under Article 8 may be, the less likely that her removal from
    the United Kingdom  will  be  a  consequence  of  the  removal  of  her
    citizenship. To that extent, any problems  which  the  appellant  might
    face  in  China  seeking  to  regain  her  citizenship   there   remain
    hypothetical.

15. As Court of Appeal noted in KV [16], there is no right not to  be  made
    stateless for persons whose nationality has been obtained by fraud.  At
    [19], Court of Appeal observed that it would 'be  an  unusual  case  in
    which the applicant can legitimately complain of the withdrawal of  the
    rights which he acquired as a result  of  naturalisation  [obtained  by
    fraud].' I have concluded that the decision to deprive the appellant of
    a nationality was proportionate and that, in the light of  the  obvious
    strength of her Article 8 family rights in this jurisdiction, she would
    not face any 'practical detrimental consequences' of the  loss  of  her
    Chinese nationality and/or any difficulties she may  encounter  seeking
    to reacquire it. In the circumstances, her appeal against the Secretary
    of State's decision is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    I have remade the decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 14 December 2017 is dismissed.


         Signed                              Date 2 July 2019

         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

