
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
DC/00019/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                           |On 12 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

               THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                              MR MOSES BUSHIRI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Did not attend the hearing and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT")  with  leave
    of the Upper Tribunal ("the UT")  granted  on  6  February  2017.   The
    appellant had appealed to the FtT against its decision to  dismiss  his
    appeal to it against the decision of the Secretary of State  to  revoke
    his British citizenship on the grounds that it  had  been  obtained  by
    material non-disclosure.  The UT in its grant of permission  to  appeal
    said that four specified grounds "merit[ed] consideration" in the UT.

    (i)  The appellant argued that an applicant for British citizenship  is
         not obliged to disclose in his application conduct  in  respect  of
         which he has not been convicted of any offence even if he is  aware
         of an investigation since he  is  entitled  to  regard  himself  as
         innocent until proven guilty.

    (ii) The appellant had asked for his appeal to be  dealt  with  on  the
         papers.  The principle of equality of arms was completely  breached
         with malice when Home Office Presenting  Officers  were  unlawfully
         invited to present arguments in a case that should be heard on  the
         papers because the appellant was "out of the country for  the  time
         being".  This showed bias by the FtT.  The FtT  had  colluded  with
         the Secretary of State to the appellant's disadvantage.

    (iii)    In Katsonga v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC) the UT said that after the enactment  of  the
         Immigration Act 2014 and the repeal of some of  the  provisions  in
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act")
         the FtT appears to have no duty or power to  allow  to  dismiss  an
         appeal.

    (iv) The judge erred in refusing to  consider  the  appellant's  appeal
         under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  ("the
         ECHR").

 2. Unhelpfully in our view the Upper Tribunal Judge who granted permission
    to appeal also said that the  appellant's  grounds,  which  are  twenty
    pages long, raised other  complaints  "each  of  which  the  respondent
    should address in any response to this grant of permission".  We do not
    understand this instruction.  We do not interpret  it  as  a  grant  of
    permission to appeal because it does not say that that is what  it  is.
    If permission to appeal is not granted in respect of a complaint, there
    is no point in requiring the respondent to address  it.   We  deprecate
    this approach to the grant of permission to  appeal.   All  grounds  on
    which permission to appeal is granted must be specifically  identified.
    Permission will not be treated as having been granted in respect of any
    other grounds and the respondent must not be expected, or required,  to
    comment on any such grounds.  We have read the documents in  the  file,
    in particular the grounds of appeal, and the document dated  3  January
    2017 produced by the appellant, which is 61 pages long,  and  in  which
    the appellant makes many points, some of which, on  our  interpretation
    for grant of permission to appeal,  he  does  not  have  permission  to
    argue.  The grounds of appeal summarised the appellant's points on page
    20.  They overlap to an extent with the four points identified  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal and it is on those four points, and those
    points alone, that we will focus.

3.   This appeal has been before the UT on several previous occasions,  most
    materially in May 2017 as we have already mentioned in our decision  on
    preliminary matters, when Mr Justice Lewis sitting with Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen decided to adjourn the appeal,  the  appellant  not  having
    appeared and having as on this occasion asked  for  the  appeal  to  be
    dealt with on  the  papers.   As  we  have  already  indicated  in  our
    decisions on the preliminary matters we are satisfied for  the  reasons
    given by the UT, on that occasion that we have  power  both  to  decide
    this appeal at a hearing even if the appellant  objects  to  that,  and
    that we should exercise that power by holding a hearing, and  that  the
    appellant knows about the time and date of the hearing (as his repeated
    correspondence with the Tribunal shows) we are satisfied that  we  have
    power to hold the hearing in his absence  and  given,  the  delays  and
    previous adjournments  we  have  decided  that  it  would  further  the
    overriding objective for us to hear the appeal today, and that it would
    not further the overriding objective for us to adjourn it again.

The Facts

 4. The significant points in this appeal mean that we do not need  to  say
    much about the facts.  The appellant was born in 1962.  He was formerly
    a citizen of Burundi.  In 2001 his asylum claim was refused but he  was
    given exceptional leave to remain.  He applied for naturalisation on  4
    March 2008.  His  application  was  granted  on  23  April  2009.   The
    application form asked him whether he had done  anything  which  "might
    indicate that you may not be a person of good character" he said  "No".
    In brief the appellant  was  involved  in  setting  up  and  running  a
    charity.  There was an investigation into the affairs of the charity by
    the Charity Commission and by the police.   According  to  one  of  the
    appellant's written submissions there was a decision by the  police  to
    take no further action in 2006 but the prosecution was revived in 2008.
     According to a document from  the  Charity  Commission  (determination
    paragraph 24) the police told the Charity Commission on 26 January 2006
    that the appellant was to be arrested again.   He  was  suspended  from
    being involved in charitable work from 8  September  2005  and  removed
    from such involvement from 8 May 2006 by the Charity Commission because
    of misconduct or mismanagement in the affairs of the charity.   He  was
    indicted on 20 January 2009 (determination,  paragraph  49).   The  FtT
    found (ibid) that it was likely that the appellant knew before the date
    of  his  application  for   naturalisation   that   the   police   were
    investigating his case and that he was being prosecuted.   On  30  June
    2010 the appellant was sentenced  to  three  years  and  seven  months'
    imprisonment on ten counts relating to obtaining a  money  transfer  by
    deception and false accounting.  He had defrauded  the  charity  of  at
    least �20,000 between 2001 and 2004.  He pleaded guilty to some of  the
    counts as we shall describe.

5.   His case is that he is married to a woman who is a British citizen  and
    that they have four children who are also British citizens.

The Reasoning of the FtT

6.   The FtT referred to the relevant provisions of the British  Nationality
    Act 1981 ("the 1981 Act").  The FtT considered whether  recent  changes
    to the 1981 Act and to the 2002 Act had any impact on its  approach  to
    the appeal.  The FtT was aware of problems which had been identified in
    cases such as Katsonga.  On their face the FtT said the new  provisions
    did not permit the FtT to consider a human  rights  ground  of  appeal.
    However the effect of the European Communities  Act  1972  and  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 was that the FtT  could  not  make  any  decision
    which was contrary to a person's EU  rights  and  could  not  make  any
    decision which violated the rights protected by the ECHR.  The FtT  was
    therefore confident that it should apply the approach in Deliallisi  to
    the appeal despite the repeal of the former appeal  provisions  in  the
    2002 Act.  The FtT also took into  account  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Nationality  Instructions   ("the   Instructions")   directing   itself
    correctly that if the Secretary of State  had  acted  contrary  to  her
    published guidance her decision would be unlawful.  The FtT  considered
    the Instructions as they were at the date of the  decision,  again,  in
    our view, correctly.  The FtT considered rightly that it had to  decide
    whether -

    (i)  the Appellant had concealed a material fact when  he  applied  for
         naturalisation; and

    (ii) if so, whether deprivation  of  nationality  was  the  appropriate
         step.

    There was no dispute that the appellant had been convicted in 2010 of a
    fraud committed between 2001 and 2004 and that the  Charity  Commission
    had made an order against him in 2005.   Whether  or  not  the  Charity
    Commission had acted fairly, the FtT said, it was  concerned  with  the
    outcome of that process.  The appellant could  not  have  declared  his
    convictions in his application because he had not been  convicted  when
    he applied for naturalisation.  The FtT said, however, in paragraph  41
    of  the  determination  that  the  good  character  test  is  a  "self-
    declaration about a person's good character.   The  appellant  did  not
    declare what he himself knew.  I reach the  same  conclusion  from  the
    Charity Commission order against the appellant".  In  the  language  of
    Section 40(3) of the 1981 Act the appellant had obtained naturalisation
    by concealing a material fact.  The issue was whether  he  should  have
    declared that he was the subject of a police enquiry under  subject  of
    an order from the Charity Commission.  The FtT referred  to  the  Queen
    (Al Fayed) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (No. 3)  [2000]
    EWCA Civ 523  and  2DA  (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 654.  The  appellant's  circumstances,  said
    the FtT, did not fall clearly into any of the  examples  given  in  the
    Instructions.  It is clear from the Instructions the FtT said that  the
    list was not exhaustive.   The  FtT  quoted  a  passage  about  pending
    prosecutions from the Instructions.  That passage  the  FtT  said  made
    clear that a decision-maker will not normally grant an application when
    a prosecution is pending against the applicant.  In the  light  of  the
    Instructions and of the findings made in paragraph 49 the FtT held that
    the appellant's knowledge of the prosecution was information which  was
    material to his application.  The respondent would not necessarily have
    refused to grant naturalisation but would have held the case until  the
    outcome of the trial.  The  FtT  considered  and  dismissed  procedural
    arguments in paragraphs 53 to 56 of the determination. The  appellant's
    reliance on his residence in the United Kingdom for fourteen years  was
    misplaced since this was no longer relevant under the  version  of  the
    Instructions which was in force at the date of the deprivation decision
    (see paragraph 55 of the determination of the FtT).  The FtT could find
    no evidence that the decision would undermine the appellant's rights of
    free movement.  He had never sought to exercise them, on the  evidence.



7.   The FtT considered Article 8 of the ECHR in paragraphs 58 to  60.   The
    FtT referred to the appellant's wife and children.  No action was being
    taken in relation to their citizenship.   All  were  British  citizens.
    The FtT observed that as a result of the  naturalisation  decision  the
    appellant would now have no lawful immigration  status.   In  order  to
    stay in the United  Kingdom  he  would  have  to  make  an  immigration
    application or a protection or human rights claim.  The impact  on  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights could  be  significant  but  the  decision
    letter made it clear that the appellant would be  entitled  to  make  a
    protection  or  human  rights  claim  if  he  were  deprived   of   his
    citizenship.  This had been confirmed to the FtT in the course  of  the
    hearing by the Home Office Presenting  Officers.   The  FtT  considered
    whether to, but declined to, decide any  such  claim  at  the  hearing.
    There was no cogent evidence on any such issue from the  appellant  and
    therefore any decision would be against the appellant as the burden  of
    proof was on him.  It was reasonable to infer, the FtT said,  that  the
    appellant had provided no such evidence as he had not realised that  it
    might be relevant to the issues on the appeal, that the  appellant  was
    entitled to rely on the concession in the decision letter that he could
    make a human rights or protection  claim  if  the  Secretary  of  State
    decided to deprive him of his nationality.  In that situation  the  FtT
    held that it would be contrary to the overriding objective for the  FtT
    to intervene.

Discussion

8.   We deal with the grounds on which permission to appeal was  granted  in
    turn.

9.   We consider that the FtT was right  to  reject  the  argument  that  an
    applicant for naturalisation is only obliged to  declare  a  conviction
    and not obliged to declare a pending prosecution, and right  to  decide
    that a pending prosecution is a material fact for the  purposes  of  an
    application  for  naturalisation.   That  much  is   clear   from   the
    Instructions, but even without the Instructions, we consider that it is
    obvious that the fact that a  person  is  under  a  cloud  cast  by  an
    official  investigation  such  as  an  investigation  by  the   Charity
    Commission, which has resulted in an order  against  the  applicant  by
    them, or by his knowledge that the police are investigating him,  is  a
    material fact which must be declared.  It is  something  which  in  the
    words of question 3.12 on the application form (see paragraph 5 of  the
    determination) might indicate that you may not  be  a  person  of  good
    character" (our emphasis).  The question is a wide question  framed  to
    elicit any adverse information of which the applicant is aware so as to
    enable the Secretary of State, not the applicant, to make the judgement
    about good character.  We go somewhat further.  We  consider  that  the
    conviction is prima facie evidence to the criminal  standard  that  the
    appellant  did  commit  fraud.   He  has  not  appealed  against   that
    conviction.  Moreover it is clear from  paragraph  6  of  the  decision
    letter that the appellant pleaded guilty to two of the  counts  on  the
    indictment.  We are therefore satisfied that even though he had not yet
    been convicted the appellant knew when he made his application that  he
    was guilty of criminal offences in relation to the  management  of  the
    charity.  He also knew that an order had been made against him  by  the
    Charity Commission and that he was being investigated  by  the  police.
    All of those were material facts.  He disclosed none of them.  There is
    nothing therefore in this ground of appeal, and we dismiss it.

10.  We turn to ground 2 which concerns the hearing held by the FtT  in  the
    teeth of the appellant's request that the appeal be decided  without  a
    hearing.  We are satisfied that the FtT had power to have a hearing  in
    this case.  Rule 25 of the FtT Rules requires the FtT to have a hearing
    unless one of the exceptions in Rule 25(1) applies.  Rule 25 is  headed
    "Consideration of decision with or without a hearing".

         "25(1)   The Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a  decision
               which disposes of proceedings except where -

                (a)    each party has consented to, or has not objected  to,
                    the matter being decided without a hearing;

                (b)    the appellant has not consented to the  appeal  being
                    determined without a hearing but the Lord Chancellor has
                    refused to issue a certificate of fee  satisfaction  for
                    the fee payable for a hearing;

                (c)    the appellant is outside the United Kingdom and  does
                    not have a representative who has an address for service
                    in the United Kingdom;

                (d)    it is impracticable to give the appellant  notice  of
                    the hearing;

                (e)    a party has failed to comply with the  provisions  of
                    these Rules, a practice direction or a direction and the
                    Tribunal is satisfied  that  in  all  the  circumstances
                    including the extent of the failure and any reasons  for
                    it, it is appropriate to determine the appeal without  a
                    hearing;

                (f)    the appeal is  one  to  which  Rule  16(2)  or  18(2)
                    applies; or

                (g)    subject to paragraph (2), the Tribunal considers that
                    it can justly determine the matter without a hearing."

    If we assume that the appellant was not in  the  country,  although  we
    pause to observe that that is not the way the case seems to  have  been
    put before the FtT, rule 25(1)(c) applied.  The  consequence  was  that
    the FtT was not obliged to have a hearing but it does not  follow  that
    it was obliged not to have a hearing.  It  had  an  option  to  have  a
    hearing or not to have one.  It was open to the FtT to decide to have a
    hearing in that situation.  We note that the respondent, the  Secretary
    of State, wished there to be a hearing.  We cannot see how that  begins
    to show bias or any lack of equality of arms.  The appellant chose  not
    to attend, we infer (he does seem to have a correspondence  address  in
    England and also communicates by e-mail).  But as we have indicated it,
    does not look as though the appellant was arguing at  that  stage  that
    the exception in rule 25(1)(c) applied (see paragraph 12 of  the  FtT's
    decision).  It seems that he relied on  rule  25(1)(a)  which  did  not
    apply. That being the case rule 25 obliged the FtT to have  a  hearing.
    The appellant suggests that there was collusion between the Home Office
    Presenting Officers and the FtT.  It seems to us that it would be wrong
    for us to go behind what is recorded on the face of the decision of the
    FtT.   The  determination  recites  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officers produced the relevant documents and  made  submissions  "which
    were in line with the reasons for refusal and added little"  (paragraph
    22).  In our judgment there is nothing in this ground of appeal and  we
    dismiss it.

11.  The next ground of appeal relies on the decision in  Katsonga.   If  we
    were to suppose for a moment that  this  argument  is  correct  we  are
    unable to see how it helps the appellant.  If indeed  the  FtT  had  no
    power to allow or dismiss the appeal the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State depriving the appellant of his nationality would stand.  Moreover
    if the FtT had no power to allow or dismiss the appeal there  would  be
    no basis for an appeal to the UT.  We consider in any event that  there
    is nothing in this argument.  The observation of the UT on  this  point
    in Katsonga was obiter.  It was not part of  the  reasoning  which  was
    essential to the decision in Katsonga.  We are satisfied  that  on  the
    repeal of the old provisions the powers of the FtT are now contained in
    the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  and  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014.  In our judgment  there  is  nothing  in
    this ground of appeal and we dismiss it.

12.   The  final  ground  of  appeal  concerns  Convention  rights  and   in
    particular Article 8.  The FtT recognised that Section 6 of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 obliged it not to act incompatibly with the appellant's
    Convention rights (paragraphs 35 and  36  of  the  determination).   We
    consider that the FtT's consideration of Article 8  was  sufficient  in
    the light of the evidence which was before it, and what  that  evidence
    showed.  The FtT's  reasoning  in  essence  was  that  the  deprivation
    decision  did  not  affect  the  citizenship  of  the  members  of  the
    appellant's family and that the deprivation decision  did  not  prevent
    the appellant from making an immigration application or human rights or
    protection claim.  It did not therefore  directly  interfere  with  his
    Article 8 rights because while he is not now  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom he can prevent his removal and therefore an  interference  with
    his Article 8 rights by making one of those applications and if he does
    make one of those  applications  the  question  whether  there  is  any
    interference and  whether  it  is  lawful  and  proportionate  will  be
    investigated and decided.  We consider that there is  nothing  in  this
    ground of appeal either, and we dismiss it.

13.  Finally before leaving the appeal we should say that we have both  read
    a document from the appellant dated 21 January 2018.  In that  document
    he contends that he had applied  for  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  to
    recuse himself and that application had been passed  to  the  President
    and that the application had not been decided.  It if  it  was  decided
    the decision would be appealable then the proceedings must  stop  until
    the application is dealt with.  We observe that in the  course  of  our
    decision today we had  decided  the  application  for  recusal  and  it
    together with the rest of our  reasoning  will  be  appealable  if  the
    appellant obtains leave to appeal.

14.  Various other points are made in the letter.  It seems to  us  that  it
    is not necessary for us to deal with them further in the decision.   To
    some extent the points are irrelevant and to some extent they duplicate
    the points with which  we  have  already  dealt.   We  have  taken  the
    representations in the letter into account but they do not in  any  way
    change our decision on appeal.  We dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   ELISABETH LAING                     Date 8 February 2018
Mrs Justice Elisabeth Laing DBE
