

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00015/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11/01/2016                            |On 09/03/2016                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                         Kumareswararaja Varatharaj

                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:         Mr Eric Fripp of Counsel, instructed by Barnes
Harrild & Dyer

For the respondent:        Mr Steven Whitworth, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   deprive him of his British citizenship under  sections  40(3)  and  40(5)
   with reference to section 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981.

2. The appellant when he came to the United Kingdom was  a  citizen  of  Sri
   Lanka.  There is an issue as to whether he has lost, and if  so,  whether
   he can resume, his Sri Lankan citizenship.

3. The First-tier  Tribunal  also  dismissed  his  appeal  on  human  rights
   grounds with reference to Article 8 ECHR.

Respondent's decision under section 40 (the deprivation decision)

4. The factual matrix relied on by the respondent in her decision letter  of
   27 May 2015, uncontested by the appellant, was as follows.  The appellant
   came to the United Kingdom from Sri Lanka on or  before  June  1997,  and
   claimed asylum in his real identity on  9  June  1997.   He  was  granted
   refugee status on 12 June 1999  with  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  The
   timing of his refugee status grant had been disrupted by a conviction  on
   8 July 1998 for conspiracy to defraud, for which he was sentenced  to  2�
   years' imprisonment.

5. The appellant was naturalised as a British citizen on 16  December  2003,
   posing as a Sri Lankan national born on 1 June  1970  with  the  identity
   Markandu Selvakumaran.  He now says that he used the false identity under
   duress, to avoid removal to Sri Lanka.

6. On 11 December 2007, he was naturalised again in  his  true  identity  of
   Kumareswararaja Varatharaj, also a Sri Lankan  national,  but  this  time
   born on 30 December 1973.  The appellant did  not  disclose  his  earlier
   naturalisation in a fraudulent identity and his  representatives  advised
   that he had not used any deception or withheld relevant information.

7. The appellant has children born in the United  Kingdom  who  are  British
   citizens.  Their nationality is unaffected  by  the  deprivation  of  his
   citizenship and the respondent's decision letter confirms that they  will
   remain British citizens.

8. The decision letter makes it clear that the  appellant  has  a  right  of
   appeal.  If the appeal  is  unsuccessful,  and  subject  to  satisfactory
   checks, the respondent indicated that he  would  be  granted  30  months'
   limited leave, in recognition of the barriers to removal which existed at
   the date of decision.

9. The grant  of  naturalisation  had  ended  his  refugee  status  but  the
   decision letter informed the appellant that he could  apply  to  the  Sri
   Lankan authorities if he needed a travel document, or  alternatively,  it
   remained open to him to make an asylum claim under the Refugee Convention
   if he wished to do so.  His refugee status would not revive by  operation
   of law.



Appeal to First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,
   both under the 1981 Act and Article 8 ECHR, the  latter  in  relation  to
   interference with his ability to work, because  his  employment  involved
   him travelling to Europe, and in particular Spain.  He  was  employed  by
   European Business Machines Ltd as  its  Overseas  Sales  Director,  which
   required  him  to  travel  around  Europe  negotiating  the  purchase  of
   machinery and  oil,  which  would  not  be  possible  without  a  British
   passport.  If he lost his citizenship he would lose his job and  have  to
   take his children out of private school. The appellant contended that the
   respondent had not applied her own guidance on deprivation of citizenship
   at Chapter 55 of the IDIs.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  appellant  had  made  a  false
   representation in relation to the second  citizenship  obtained  by  this
   appellant and that the  respondent's  decision  to  deprive  him  of  his
   citizenship was lawful.

12. The appellant relied on his  high  powered  and  highly  paid  job:  the
   appellant's employer told the Tribunal in his witness statement  that  if
   the appellant lost his citizenship he would also lose his job  'and  that
   is my final decision which will not  change'.   The  appellant  would  be
   unable to afford to keep his children in private school without that job.



13. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, the First-tier Tribunal  considered  that
   the consequences of the deprivation decision  were  not  to  prevent  the
   appellant from working, even if he lost that particular job. It was  open
   to the appellant to find local work not requiring him to travel to  Spain
   and other places, or to get a passport or travel document from Sri  Lanka
   and apply for visas.  The risk that he might need to  take  his  children
   out of private education was not  sufficient  to  make  the  respondent's
   decision disproportionate, especially as she had indicated that he  would
   be granted discretionary leave  for  30  months  so  that  there  was  no
   immediate risk of removal.  If he lost his job and  could  not  get  work
   immediately, the appellant could rely on state  benefits  and  the  state
   education system.

14. The First-tier Tribunal considered the respondent's decision  to  be  in
   accordance with law and dismissed the appeal under the Act and the  ECHR.



Grounds of appeal

15. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.   He  contended  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal had not properly considered the best interests of the
   children; that removal  of  his  British  citizenship  would  render  him
   stateless; and that the judge had not considered  whether  he  could  now
   resume his Sri Lankan citizenship.  He relied  on  the  decision  of  the
   Supreme Court in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Al-Jedda
   [2013] UKSC 62, which concerned an Iraqi man who had been  able  to  show
   that the acquisition of British citizenship meant that under Iraqi law he
   had lost his Iraqi citizenship,  by  operation  of  law  and  that  under
   section 40(4) the respondent was required  to  identify  whether  another
   citizenship was available  before  she  could  lawfully  deprive  him  of
   British citizenship. The appeal of Mr Al-Jedda failed thereafter  as  the
   evidence showed  that  he  held  a  genuine  Iraqi  passport  and  travel
   documents with which it was open to him to resume his Iraqi nationality.

16. As regards the best interests of the children under section  55  of  the
   Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the appellant continued to
   assert that depriving his children of private education was  contrary  to
   their best interests and that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  dealt
   adequately with that point.

17. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the appellant reminded the Upper Tribunal  of
   his previous successful business, which in the course of time he hoped to
   re-establish in the United Kingdom.  He would lose his present job if  he
   lost his citizenship. The appellant  also  contended  that  there  was  a
   mistake of fact by the First-tier Tribunal in failing to have  regard  to
   the inapplicability of the European Agreement on the Abolition  of  Visas
   for Refugees to  persons in paid employment.

Permission to appeal

18. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  Judge  Murray  who
   considered, in particular, that the  statelessness  point  had  not  been
   properly considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  She directed  that
   all grounds of appeal were arguable.

Rule 24 Reply

19. The respondent in her Reply said that the  grounds  of  appeal  were  no
   more than a disagreement.  In relation to the statelessness  ground,  the
   respondent  noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  considered   the
   possibility of the appellant applying for a  Sri  Lankan  passport;  that
   whether or not he could use such a passport was not determinative of  his
   nationality  only  of  his  ability  to  travel;  and  that  the   Ceylon
   Citizenship Act No 18 of 1948 at sections 19(2) and  19(3)  provided  for
   the  resumption  of  citizenship  when  an  alternative  citizenship  was
   renounced.  The appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  would  in  fact  be
   stateless.

20. The education point regarding the children's  best  interests  was  also
   considered to be a weak point: Article 8 ECHR did not protect the type of
   schooling available.

21. In relation to the broader Article 8 arguments, the First-tier  Tribunal
   had made clear findings and the grounds were  again  simply  an  argument
   that different findings should have been made.  There was no question  of
   removal of the appellant as a result of the deprivation decision  as  the
   respondent had stated that she  would  grant  discretionary  leave.  That
   would allow the appellant to work, and where he did so,  and  whether  he
   could travel and on what documents, were a matter for the  appellant  and
   not an indicator of the lawfulness of the deprivation decision.  European
   Union community law was not engaged by the deprivation decision:  see  G1
   v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 867.

22. The case in question had no cross-border element  save  the  appellant's
   wish to travel. The risk that the appellant might lose his  present  job,
   as stated in evidence  by  his  employer,  had  been  considered  in  the
   decision.  It was the consequence of the appellant's own actions and  the
   judge had been entitled to consider that the appellant could properly  be
   required to solve that problem by finding  a  local  job  in  the  United
   Kingdom.

23. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

24. Mr Fripp produced a skeleton argument and  I  was  also  handed  by  the
   respondent a copy of the 1948 Ceylon Citizenship  Act  as  amended  (most
   recently in 2003).  I have had regard to both of those documents  despite
   the lateness of their production. The appellant's skeleton argument deals
   at length  with  statelessness  and  with  the  loss  of  European  Union
   citizenship which is since 1992 a benefit of the  acquisition  of  United
   Kingdom citizenship.

25. Mr Fripp's skeleton  argument  summarises  the  appellant's  submissions
   with helpful brevity:

         "18. The appellant's submissions can be  put  briefly.   There  was
         evidence before the [First-tier Tribunal] to show that at  least  a
         prima facie risk that the effect of [deprivation of citizenship] by
         the respondent would be  to  render  the  appellant  stateless  (or
         effectively stateless/de facto stateless).  If so  this  would  not
         engage any statutory bar on [deprivation  of  citizenship]  by  the
         United Kingdom, but it would be very relevant to any analysis going
         to justification for the action.

         To adequately assess the  rationality  or  proportionality  of  the
         action (whether the  rubric  at  first  instance  is  factual/legal
         error, proportionality in re Article 8 ECHR, or European Union  law
         proportionality) it was necessary to  understand,  so  far  as  the
         evidence permitted this, its material  consequences.   The  [First-
         tier Tribunal] failed to address the evidence raised in this regard
         and the  decision  should  be  set  aside.  The  appeal  should  be
         reconvened/reheard, ideally with opportunity to the parties to seek
         to provide any further/updated evidence regarding  the  nationality
         point.  That resolution also  permits  adequate  attention  to  the
         substantial point  of  law  arising  here,  which  the  [First-tier
         Tribunal] has not addressed."

26. The substantial point of law which is identified is  that  of  potential
   de jure or de facto statelessness, and the appellant seeks to distinguish
   the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Deliallisi  (British  citizen:
   deprivation appeal: scope) Albania [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) on  that  point,
   because the appellant in Deliallisi did not  contend  that  the  decision
   would render him stateless.

27. The second question  is  identified  is  whether,  applying  Rottmann  v
   Freistaat Bayers [2010] EUECJ C-135/08, European Union law applies  to  a
   case such as the present one and if so, what European Union law requires,
   and how that interacts with the statutory appeal and with Article 8 ECHR.



28. In his oral submissions, Mr Fripp sought to distinguish  KK  and  others
   (Nationality: North Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC) alternatively to
   characterise it as wrong in law.  I observed that the decision  had  been
   approved by the Court of  Appeal.   Mr  Fripp  then  contended  that  the
   question of statelessness had not been dealt with at all in the decision.
   Mr Fripp argued that it was open to the appellant to sustain his position
   of being unwilling to apply to the Sri Lankan Embassy to seek  to  resume
   his citizenship, but accepted  that  without  such  an  application,  the
   inability  to  resume  Sri  Lankan  citizenship   was   speculative   and
   conjectural.

29. The  primary  question  was  whether  the  issue  had  been  dealt  with
   adequately by the First-tier Tribunal  and  he  maintained  that  it  was
   necessary to reopen the decision to deal with the question.

30. For the respondent, Mr Whitwell adopted  and  relied  on  the  extensive
   Rule 24 Reply filed by the respondent.  He relied on KK, in particular at
   [8] and [10] in the Upper Tribunal's decision.

31. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Legal framework

32. The material parts of section  40  applicable  to  this  appeal  are  as
   follows:

         "40  Deprivation of citizenship.E+W+S+N.I.
         (1)   In this  section  a  reference  to  a  person's  "citizenship
         status" is a reference to his status as- (a) a British citizen ...
         (2)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
         citizenship status if the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that
         deprivation is conducive to the public good.
         (3)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
         citizenship  status  which  results  from   his   registration   or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-
              (a) fraud,
              (b) false representation, or
              (c) concealment of a material fact.
         (4)  The Secretary of State may not make an order under  subsection
         (2) if  he  is  satisfied  that  the  order  would  make  a  person
         stateless.
         (4A) But that does not prevent the Secretary of State  from  making
         an order under subsection (2) to deprive a person of a  citizenship
         status if-
              (a)  the  citizenship  status  results  from   the   person's
              naturalisation, ...
         (5)  Before making an order under this  section  in  respect  of  a
         person the Secretary of State must give the person  written  notice
         specifying-
              (a) that the Secretary of State has decided to make an order,
              (b) the reasons for the order, and
              (c) the person's right of  appeal  under  section  40A(1)  or
              under  section  2B  of  the   Special   Immigration   Appeals
              Commission Act 1997 (c. 68)..."

33. Section 40A provides a right of appeal against  a  deprivation  decision
   under section 40(5), subject to a power for the respondent to remove  the
   right of appeal by certification where the decision was taken  wholly  or
   partly in reliance on information which she considers should not be  made
   public  for  national  security  reasons,  in  the   interests   of   the
   relationship between the United Kingdom and another country, or otherwise
   in the public  interest.  The  deprivation  in  this  appeal  is  not  so
   certified and the appellant has a right of appeal.

34. The most recent consideration of the operation of that section 40 is  in
   Hysa & Ors, R.( On the Application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home
   Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1195.  At [24], the court recorded the  agreed
   position of the parties that the question of whether a purported grant of
   citizenship is a nullity is a question of fact to be  determined  by  the
   court,  rather  than  a  matter  for  the  reasonable  judgment  of   the
   respondent. At [50]-[52], Lord Justice Sales, giving  the  only  reasoned
   judgment, examined all the existing authorities and concluded that:
        "50.      ... Where does this leave the law so far as material  for
        present purposes? In my judgment, ... this court is  bound  by  its
        decisions in Sultan Mahmood, Parvaz Akhtar and Tohura Bibi to  hold
        that there  is  an  implied  limitation  upon  the  powers  of  the
        Secretary of State to grant citizenship  under  the  1948  Act  and
        under  the  equivalent  provisions  in  the  1981  Act  which   are
        applicable in this case. ...In my view, the principles of statutory
        interpretation reviewed in that decision ought also to be taken  to
        provide guidance as to the ambit of the  implied  limitation.  They
        require that in interpreting the  1981  Act  the  different  public
        interests in issue have to be taken into account, that  is  to  say
        both the usual public interest to ensure that a criminal  fraudster
        should not benefit from his crime and the public interest regarding
        the desirability  of  innocent  third  parties  having  stable  and
        certain citizenship status conferred upon them pursuant to the 1981
        Act.
        51.        This  is  not  a  process  of  interpretation  which  is
        particularly  easy  to  undertake.  Apart  from  the  question   of
        authority,  it  may  also  be  noted  that,   notwithstanding   the
        difficulties which might  arise  in  relation  to  the  citizenship
        status of third parties, there is significant force in the argument
        based on  the  interpretive  presumptions  referred  to  in  Welwyn
        Hatfield BC by reason of the gap in time that  will  exist  between
        the grant of citizenship on the basis of  a  successful  fraudulent
        application and the Secretary of State discovering the fraud,  that
        being the earliest time at which  she  would  be  able  to  make  a
        deprivation  order  under  section  40(3)  which  would  only  have
        prospective effect. During the gap period the  fraudster  may  have
        secured advantages for himself or his family which he  ought  never
        to have had which cannot be undone by the making of  a  prospective
        deprivation order under section 40(3), and it is  not  unreasonable
        to think that Parliament would not have intended him to be able  to
        have those benefits as a result of his fraud. ..."

    The respondent in the present appeal has not sought to argue in  detail
    the implied limitation point. The appellant has secured advantages  for
    his children, in that they are British citizens.  Those advantages will
    not be lost, whatever the outcome of this appeal.





Discussion

35. I do not understand it to be the appellant's case that he  disputes  the
   fraud in the first application for citizenship or the failure to disclose
   that earlier 'naturalisation' when applying later in his own name.

36. This  case  raises  three  questions:  the  first  is  whether,  if  the
   appellant has lost his Sri Lankan citizenship, he is now  stateless;  the
   second, whether even if he  is  not,  the  loss  of  his  European  Union
   citizenship with the free movement rights which that comprises makes  the
   decision to remove  his  citizenship  disproportionate;  and  the  third,
   whether the effect on  the  appellant's  employment  and  his  children's
   education is sufficient to render the decision disproportionate and/or to
   make the decision unlawful having regard to  the  children's  section  55
   best interests.

37. Applying Hysa, the deprivation  decision  operates  prospectively.   The
   respondent has now deprived the appellant of British citizenship. As  the
   respondent has stated, the British  citizen  status  of  the  appellant's
   children is unaffected. The decision in Deliallisi sets out  the  correct
   approach to deprivation decision appeals.   The  guidance  given  in  the
   Upper Tribunal's judicial headnote was as follows:

         "(1)  An appeal under section 40A of the  British  Nationality  Act
         1981 against a decision to deprive a person of British  citizenship
         requires the Tribunal to consider whether the Secretary of  State's
         discretionary decision to deprive should be exercised  differently.
         This will involve (but not be limited to) ECHR Article 8 issues, as
         well   as   the   question   whether   deprivation   would   be   a
         disproportionate interference with a person's EU rights.

         (2)   Although,  unlike  section  84(1)(g)  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, section 40A of the 1981  Act  does
         not involve any statutory hypothesis that  the  appellant  will  be
         removed from the United Kingdom in consequence of  the  deprivation
         decision, the Tribunal is  required  to  determine  the  reasonably
         foreseeable consequences of deprivation, which  may,  depending  on
         the facts, include removal.

         (3)  A person who, immediately before becoming a  British  citizen,
         had indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  does  not
         automatically become entitled to such leave, upon being deprived of
         such citizenship."


38. The obvious and reasonably foreseeable consequences of the  deprivation
    decision are that the appellant may well lose  his  well-paid  job  and
    have more difficulty travelling (depending on  his  travel  documents);
    and that his financial position may mean that he has  to  access  state
    benefits and use the state education system for his children.

39. There remain the questions  of  the  loss  of  European  Union  citizen
    benefits from no longer having British citizen status.   The  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union in Rottmann took a robust  line  on  that
    point:

         "55.  In such a case, it is, however, for  the  national  court  to
         ascertain whether the withdrawal decision  at  issue  in  the  main
         proceedings observes the principle of  proportionality  so  far  as
         concerns the consequences it  entails  for  the  situation  of  the
         person concerned in the light of European Union law,  in  addition,
         where appropriate, to examination of  the  proportionality  of  the
         decision in the light of national law.

         56.    Having regard to the importance which primary  law  attaches
         to the status of citizen of the Union, when  examining  a  decision
         withdrawing naturalisation it is necessary, therefore, to take into
         account the consequences that the decision entails for  the  person
         concerned and, if relevant, for the  members  of  his  family  with
         regard to the loss of the rights enjoyed by every  citizen  of  the
         Union.   In  this  respect  it  is  necessary  to   establish,   in
         particular, whether that loss  is  justified  in  relation  to  the
         gravity of the offence committed by that person, to  the  lapse  of
         time  between  the  naturalisation  decision  and  the   withdrawal
         decision and to whether it is possible for that person  to  recover
         his original nationality.

         57.    With regard, in particular, to that last  aspect,  a  Member
         State whose nationality has been acquired by  deception  cannot  be
         considered  bound,  pursuant  to  Article  17EC,  to  refrain  from
         withdrawing naturalisation merely because the person concerned  has
         not recovered the nationality of his Member State of origin.

         58.    It is, nevertheless, for the  national  court  to  determine
         whether, before such a decision  withdrawing  naturalisation  takes
         effect, having regard to all the relevant circumstances, observance
         of the principle of proportionality requires the  person  concerned
         to be afforded a reasonable period of  time  in  order  to  try  to
         recover the nationality of his Member State of origin.

         59.    Having regard to the foregoing,  the  answer  to  the  first
         question and to the first part of the second question must be  that
         it is not contrary to European Union law, in particular to  Article
         17 EC, for a Member State to withdraw from a citizen of  the  Union
         the nationality of that State acquired by naturalisation when  that
         nationality has been obtained by deception, on condition  that  the
         decision to withdraw observes the principle of proportionality."

40. The appellant will be given discretionary leave for 30 months  if  this
    appeal fails.  He will therefore have had more than a reasonable period
    of time in order to try to  recover  his  Sri  Lankan  citizenship,  if
    indeed he has lost it.  The deprivation decision was in May  2015:  the
    earliest that the appellant's discretionary leave could  end  would  be
    September 2018, a period of well over 3 years to enable him to  clarify
    the question of his Sri Lankan citizenship.

41. There is no  free  movement  issue  here:  the  appellant,  unlike  the
    appellant in Rottmann has never lived in another European Union  member
    state, although he travels between member states for work. At  19.2  of
    Fransman's British Nationality Law (3rd Edition)  the  author  observed
    that the Rottmann case "did not test the  proposition  of  whether  the
    acquisition by deception and subsequent  loss  of  the  nationality  of
    another Member State is within the scope of  EU  law  in  circumstances
    where the person remains within the Member State of origin  during  the
    period of acquisition and loss and does not move to that other  state."
    That is the factual position here:  the  appellant  in  this  case  has
    remained resident in the United Kingdom throughout, although he travels
    to other Member States in the course of his work.

42. It is  right  that  the  issue  of  statelessness  was  raised  in  the
    appellant's written submissions to the First-tier Tribunal and  is  not
    the subject of any findings in the decision.  The  question  which  the
    Tribunal should have considered is whether the appellant had shown that
    he was now stateless.  There is no expert evidence before the  Tribunal
    dealing with the point.

43. The Upper Tribunal decision in KK  (Korea)  analysed  the  question  of
    citizenship in the first part of the judicial headnote:

         "(a) For the purposes of determining whether a person  is  "of"  or
         "has" a nationality within the meaning  of  Article  1A(2)  of  the
         Refugee Convention, it is convenient to distinguish  between  cases
         where a person (i) is (already) of that nationality; (ii) is not of
         that nationality but is entitled to acquire it; and (iii) is not of
         that nationality but may be able to acquire it.

         (b) Cases within (i) and (ii) are cases where the person is "of" or
         "has" the nationality in question; cases within (iii) are not.

         (c) For these purposes there is no separate concept of  "effective"
         nationality; the issue is the availability  of  protection  in  the
         country in question.

         (d) Nationality of any State is a  matter  for  that  State's  law,
         constitution and (to a limited extent) practice, proof  of  any  of
         which is by evidence, the assessment of  which  is  for  the  court
         deciding the protection claim.

         (e) As eligibility for  Refugee  Convention  protection  is  not  a
         matter of choice, evidence going to a person's status within  cases
         (i) and (ii) has to be on "best efforts" basis, and evidence of the
         attitude of the State in question to a person who seeks reasons for
         not being removed to that State may be of very limited relevance."


44. The appellant, upon whom rests the burden of proof of citizenship, must
    show which category applies to him.  There is  no  evidence  before  me
    which assists in that exercise.  In particular, there  is  no  evidence
    that the appellant has renounced his Sri Lankan citizenship or that  he
    has lost it by operation of law: the appellant is Sri Lankan by  birth.
    The 1948 Ceylon Citizenship Act, on which the  appellant  relies,  does
    not  as  Mr  Fripp  asserts  provide  for  automatic   deprivation   of
    citizenship for those who are Sri Lankan citizens by birth: instead, at
    section 19, it provides that they may, if they choose,  make  a  formal
    declaration of renunciation of Sri Lankan citizenship, and the  statute
    also provides a process for resumption  of  citizenship  where  such  a
    declaration of renunciation has been made.

45. At sections 20 and 21, the statute deals with those  whose  Sri  Lankan
    citizenship is acquired by registration or by descent.  In  that  case,
    there is automatic loss of  such  citizenship  on  the  acquisition  of
    another nationality, again subject to provisions for  resumption.   The
    appellant has made no attempt to  discover  what  the  position  is  by
    applying to the Sri Lankan Embassy in London to clarify his status  and
    if appropriate, resume his Sri Lankan citizenship.

46. I am satisfied that, although the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in
    failing to make an express finding as to whether this appellant is  now
    stateless, such error is immaterial, since there was no evidence before
    the First-tier Tribunal and is none before me on which such  a  finding
    could rationally be made. The burden of proving statelessness is on the
    party asserting it, the appellant,  and  he  has  not  discharged  that
    burden.

47. There  remains  the  question  of  his  job  loss  and  his  children's
    education.   As  regards  the  job  loss,  if  it  occurs,  that  is  a
    consequence of the appellant's own fraud,  deception,  and  failure  to
    disclose material facts.  The First-tier Tribunal dealt  properly  with
    that element of the consequences of the deprivation decision.

48. As regards his children's education, the ECHR does not give an absolute
    right to any particular type of education and the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not err in law or in fact in observing that  free  state  education
    remains available to the children, who are British citizens,  and  that
    in the light of that provision, there is no breach either of Article  8
    ECHR or of Article 2 of the 1952 Protocol  to  that  Convention,  which
    provides for a right to education.

49. In conclusion, the First-tier Tribunal did err in  law  in  failing  to
    consider statelessness and European Union citizenship in  its  decision
    but those matters are, on the facts, immaterial to the outcome  of  the
    appeal, which was bound to fail.  I decline to  reopen  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.

DECISION

50. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Date:         1 March 2016              Signed        Judith A J C Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson




