
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00015/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2020                     |On 12 August 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 DITAN DEMA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 3 June 2020 it was found a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had
        erred in law in a manner material to the decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal and that decision set aside.
     2. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal today by way of a remote
        Skype hearing to enable it to substitute a decision to either allow
        or dismiss the appeal.



Preliminary matters




     3. These proceedings, along with a number of appeals involving similar
        issues, were stayed awaiting the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
        Hysaj (Deprivation of  Citizenship:  Delay)  [2020]  UKUT  128.  An
        application was made to the Upper  Tribunal  by  the  appellant  in
        writing for the proceedings on 5 August 2020 to be  further  stayed
        pending the outcome of an appeal against that decision to the Court
        of Appeal. That application was refused by a lawyer  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal exercising delegated powers in an order dated 28 July 2020
        for the following reasons:


        Reasons:


        1. By email and  covering  letter sent  to   the   Upper   Tribunal
           on  26 July  2020,  the Appellant  has  applied  to  stay  these
           appeal proceedings  until  the  application  for  permission  to
           appeal to the Court of Appeal in Hysaj v  SSHD  (Deprivation  of
           Citizenship: Delay)  [2020]  UKUT  128  has  been  decided.  The
           Appellant has noted that the Respondent has placed  reliance  on
           Hysaj in her written submissions to the Tribunal. The  Appellant
           has explained that he  did  not  file  any  submissions  to  the
           Tribunal and was not aware of its error of law decision dated  3
           June 2020. In the circumstances,  the  Appellant  seeks  a  stay
           until the legal position as set out in Hysaj is settled which he
           submits would be in the interests of justice especially given he
           has been in the UK for the past 24 years.


        2. This application is opposed by the Respondent in an  email  sent
           on 28 July 2020. The Respondent notes that an ongoing permission
           to appeal application is not a sufficient basis for staying this
           appeal. It is noted that if this  was  a  sufficient  basis  for
           staying the case then many appeals would not be  resolved  in  a
           reasonable time, which would also not  be  compatible  with  the
           overriding objective. The Respondent has asked that  the  appeal
           remain listed and that any further representations on  the  stay
           can be made by the Appellant at that hearing.


         3.   I agree with the Respondent. The fact that there is a  pending
           permission to appeal application is not a good  reason  to  stay
           this appeal. The Tribunal has a duty to list cases expeditiously
           and without  delay  and  staying  this  appeal  for  the  reason
           advanced by the Appellant would be to this duty. It  would  lead
           to this appeal and many others being adjourned for an indefinite
           period and result in delays to the  administration  of  justice.
           Given the Appellant is aware of the legal issues in Hysaj, there
           is no reason why he could not make oral representations  on  the
           relevance of this case to his appeal at the resumed hearing.  In
           my view, the  resumed  hearing  should proceed as  listed on   5
           August  2020,  whereupon  the  Appellant may make  further  oral
           representations with  respect  to  a  stay  which  can  then  be
           considered by the Upper Tribunal Judge seized of this appeal  at
           the beginning of the hearing.
         4.   I note both parties  were  directed  to  file  and  serve  any
           additional documents, including witness statements,  upon  which
           they intend to rely by 22 July 2020. I note that  neither  party
           has filed any additional documents thus far.  Given the fact the
           Appellant has not filed any written submissions,  I  am  of  the
           view that the Upper Tribunal Judge seized of this  appeal  would
           be assisted by written submissions from him relating to, but not
           limited to the case of Hysaj. Accordingly, I  will  extend  time
           for both parties to comply with this direction.


     4. Mr Dema made a further application for a stay on the same basis  as
        that  previously  considered  but  failed  to   establish   it   is
        appropriate in all the circumstances to grant a stay  resulting  in
        delay and loss of allocated resources to this case, solely  on  the
        basis of an application which had not been  shown  to  be  granted,
        which is not accompanied by any order staying  the  effect  of  the
        Upper Tribunal decision, and which has not been  shown  to  warrant
        the proposed course  of  action  when  considering  the  overriding
        objectives.
     5. Mr Dema also applied for an adjournment as  he  was  without  legal
        representation.  The  Upper  Tribunal  file  shows   Mr   Dema   is
        represented by Fountain Solicitors. Mr Dema confirmed he had spoken
        to a Mr Khan,  a  consultant  at  that  firm,  asking  Mr  Khan  to
        represent him before the tribunal today but was advised by Mr  Khan
        that he had an alternative commitment that he could not change  and
        was unable to assist on this occasion. It  is  not  made  out  that
        other than this Mr Dema did anything else. It is not  made  out  he
        made telephone contact with the offices of Fountain  Solicitors  to
        enquire whether any other representative was available  or  whether
        alternative   counsel   could   be   instructed.    There   is   no
        correspondence from Fountain Solicitors seeking an  adjournment  on
        the  basis  of   any   difficulties   they   faced   in   providing
        representation.
     6. Mr Dema claimed he only received notification of the remote hearing
        two weeks ago but such a claim is questioned as there is within the
        tribunal file a copy of the Notice of Resumed Hearing  sent  on  10
        July 2020 by email to both Mr Dema and the Home  Office  Presenting
        Officer's Unit in Solihull. This was four weeks before  the  remote
        hearing. Notwithstanding, Mr Dema claimed  he  only  telephoned  Mr
        Khan 3 to 4 days ago. There is no satisfactory explanation for  the
        failure to act promptly and  with  due  diligence  to  ensure  that
        representation would be available.
     7. Mr Dema also claimed that on the facts  of  his  case  he  required
        professional representation. When asked to expand on this  argument
        no satisfactory explanation was given to establish that the  issues
        now at hand in this case are such that  the  interests  of  justice
        cannot be served without Mr Dema being professionally  represented.
        The main issues in cases such as this have now been resolved by the
        decision in Hysaj [2020] UKUT 128 which is a reported  decision  of
        the Upper Tribunal. The main  matter  of  concern  in  case  is  to
        establish Mr Dema's personal circumstances and how the  application
        of the principles established in Hysaj impact upon him.
     8. It is also the case that a substantial number of  people  appearing
        before the immigration tribunals' are without legal  representation
        as a result of the lack of access to  public  funding  or  personal
        resources.  Both  the   First-tier   and   Upper   Tribunals   have
        considerable  experience  in  dealing  with  those   appearing   as
        litigants in person to ensure they receive a fair hearing.
     9. The application  to  adjourn  to  enable  a  representative  to  be
        instructed was  refused  as  it  was  not  established  it  was  in
        accordance with the overriding objectives or, more importantly, the
        principle of fairness, to grant it as it was not  established  that
        Mr Dema would not receive a fair hearing if he proceeded as a self-
        representing   person   without   the   benefit   of   professional
        representation. Having indicated the refusal of the application  on
        this ground Mr Dema was advised that if anything arose  during  the
        course of the hearing that  indicated  the  need  for  professional
        representation  further  consideration  will  be   given   to   his
        application. In the event, no such need arose.



Background


    10. It is not disputed that Mr Dema arrived in the United Kingdom on  6
        June 1996 and claimed asylum  shortly  thereafter.  It  is  not  in
        dispute that when he made such claim Mr Dema  stated  he  was  from
        Kosovo in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, claiming he will face
        a real risk of persecution on return on that basis.
    11. It is not disputed  that  the  application  was  initially  refused
        against which Mr Dema appealed  but  that  before  the  appeal  was
        listed the respondent granted 4 years leave to remain, valid  until
        30th September 2001.
    12. It is not disputed that Mr Dema applied for  naturalisation  on  21
        November 2001 using the same  identity  details  resulting  in  his
        receiving his naturalisation certificate on 6 August 2002.
    13. It is not disputed that on 1  March  2011  Mr  Dema  wrote  to  the
        Secretary of State asking for his certificate to be amended  as  he
        wanted to apply for a new passport at which point he confirmed  his
        true nationality as a national of Albania, not Kosovo.
    14. The Secretary of State served Mr Dema with a  decision  to  nullify
        the grant of citizenship on 4 November  2013.  As  a  result  of  a
        decision in the Supreme Court in  Hysaj  [2017]  UKSC  82  Mr  Dema
        received a letter from the Home Office dated 3 February 2018 in the
        following terms:


        Dear Mr Dema


        Re: Mr Driton Dema Kosovo 25 April 1974


        Real identity: Mr Dritan Dema Albania 5 April 1974


        You were issued with a certificate of naturalisation  on  6  August
        2002, but after the Secretary of State  received  information  that
        you had falsified elements of your identity, you were served with a
        decision nullifying the grant of citizenship on 4 November 2013. We
        have reviewed the nullity decision in  light  of  a  Supreme  Court
        judgement that was handed down on 21 December 2017 ([2017] UKSC  82
        on appeal from: [2015] EWCA Civ 1195)).


        The review of that decision has been completed and the Secretary of
        State accepts that you are a British citizen under section 6(1)  of
        the British Nationality Act 1981 and the nullity decision has  been
        withdrawn.


        However, in light of the false information provided by you in  your
        dealings with the Home  Office,  consideration  will  be  given  to
        whether  it  is  appropriate  to  deprive  you  of  citizenship  in
        accordance with section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981.  We
        will contact you as quickly as possible and no later than 3  months
        from today's date.

    15. On 10 February 2018 Mr Dema received a letter advising him his case
        had  been  reviewed  that  that  the  respondent  was   considering
        depriving him of his British citizen status under section 40(3)  of
        the British Nationality Act 1981  (as  amended)  and  providing  an
        opportunity for Mr Dema to provide further information which he did
        a letter dated 18th February 2018.
    16. Mr Dema was served with notice of decision to deprive  him  of  his
        British citizenship pursuant to section 40(3) in a document dated 5
        February 2019. Having set out the relevant provisions of Chapter 55
        of the Nationality Instructions it states at [31 - 32]:


        31.  For the reasons stated above it is not accepted that there  is
             a  plausible,  innocent   explanation   for   the   misleading
             information which led to the decision  to  grant  you  British
             citizenship  rather,  on  balance  of  probabilities,  it   is
             considered that you provided information with the intention of
             obtaining  a   grant   of   status   and/or   citizenship   in
             circumstances  where  your  application(s)  would  have   been
             unsuccessful if you  had  told  the  truth.  It  is  therefore
             considered that the fraud was deliberate and material  to  the
             acquisition of British citizenship.


        32.  It is acknowledged that the decision to deprive on the grounds
             of fraud is at the Secretary of States discretion.  In  making
             the decision to deprive you of citizenship, the  Secretary  of
             State has taken into  account  the  following  factors,  which
             include the representations made by you in your  letter  dated
             18 February 2018 and concluded that deprivation will  be  both
             reasonable and proportionate.


    17. The author then sets out the conclusions in relation to  article  8
        ECHR and statelessness. Mr Jarvis confirmed that  the  respondent's
        position is as set out at [39] of the reasons for  refusal  letter.
        It is relevant to set out the conclusions between [27 -  41]  which
        are in the following terms:


        27.  You responded to our letter on 18 February  2018,  apologising
             for  providing  false  details  and  claiming  that  you  were
             exhausted after an extremely long journey, fell  prey  to  the
             wrong advice and was caught in a 'vicious circle until 1 March
             2011' (Annex T1, Sec. 1).


        28.  The mitigating  circumstances  you  have  stated  hold  little
             weight as you have not  provided  any  objective  evidence  to
             support your account, such as an admission of  culpability  or
             letter of support,  or  at  least  named  the  individual  who
             advised you to fabricate your identity to the SSHD.   Even  if
             your account was accepted as true, you chose  to  follow  that
             advice and as an adult, you are responsible and  culpable  for
             your actions (Annex V8, 55.7.8.4 &  55.7.8.5).  You  are  also
             responsible for the information you provided in your name  and
             under your signature, such as  the  various  applications  you
             submitted in your long immigration history, and  in  each  you
             signed declarations to confirm the accuracy of the information
             contained  therein.  It  is  now  apparent  you   made   false
             declarations in each applications  from  1996  to  2011,  thus
             undermining your credibility as a witness  and  providing  the
             SSHD with grounds to treat your uncorroborated statements with
             caution.


        29.  You are now  being  deprived  of  your  fraudulently  obtained
             British citizenship in the identity of 'Dritan Dema,  born  on
             25 April 1974 in Bec,  Kosovo'  under  section  40(3)  of  the
             British Nationality Act of 1981, for the reasons cited in this
             letter.


        30.  You have stated that you have  a  partner  who  you  currently
             living with and have resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
             considerably long time. Full consideration will  be  given  to
             family/private life in the United Kingdom  should  you  choose
             not to appeal our decision or if your appeal is dismissed.


        31.  For the reasons stated above it is not accepted that there  is
             a  plausible,  innocent   explanation   for   the   misleading
             information which led to the decision  to  grant  you  British
             citizenship. Rather, on the balance of  probabilities,  it  is
             considered that you provided information with the intention of
             obtaining  a   grant   of   status   and/or   citizenship   in
             circumstances  where  your  application(s)  would  have   been
             unsuccessful if you  had  told  the  truth.  It  is  therefore
             considered that the fraud was deliberate and material  to  the
             acquisition of British citizenship.


        32.  It is acknowledged that the decision to deprive on the grounds
             of fraud is at the Secretary of State's discretion. In  making
             the decision to deprive you of citizenship, the  Secretary  of
             State has taken into  account  the  following  factors,  which
             include the representations made by you in your  letter  dated
             18 February 2018 and concluded that deprivation will  be  both
             reasonable and proportionate.


        Article 8 ECHR


        33.   If  you  held  another  form  of  settled  status  prior   to
             naturalising as a British citizen and obtained  a  certificate
             of entitlement to the right of abode after naturalising  as  a
             British citizen, the loss of citizenship will  result  in  the
             loss of the right of abode and with it the loss of the ability
             to enter and remain in the UK without any restriction on  time
             or purpose. However, a deprivation decision  does  not  itself
             preclude an individual, remaining in the UK. As noted  by  the
             Upper  Tribunal  in  Ahmed  (para  30):  "[a]  deprivation  of
             citizenship order - emphatically - does not equate  to  either
             removal or deportation of the affected subject from the United
             Kingdom. Both removal and deportation are  governed  by  other
             statutory regimes entailing specified procedures, requirements
             and rights". Accordingly, although deprivation  may  culminate
             in a decision to remove you it is not necessary to  take  into
             account the impact that removal would have  on  you  and  your
             family members.


        34.   British  citizenship  also  confers   a   number   of   other
             entitlements and benefits including the  right  to  a  British
             passport and the right to vote in  general  elections.  It  is
             acknowledged that deprivation action will have  the  necessary
             consequence  that  you  will  lose  those   entitlements   and
             benefits. However, these are benefits to  which  you  have  no
             proper entitlement.


        35.  It is also accepted that you held  British  citizenship  since
             2002 and that loss of citizenship will have an impact on  your
             identity, for example, you can no longer identify yourself  as
             British. However,  the  misrepresentation  only  came  to  the
             Secretary of State's attention as a result of  your  admission
             and the evidence you provided on 1 March 2011. The Home Office
             would have considered taking deprivation action earlier if  it
             could have done so.


        Statelessness


        36.   The  1981  Act  imposes  a  statutory  requirement  upon  the
             Secretary  of  State  to  consider  statelessness  only  where
             deprivation is deemed to  be  conducive  to  the  public  good
             (s.40(2)  and  (4)).  This  is  consistent  with  the   U.K.'s
             obligations under the 1961  Convention  on  the  Reduction  of
             Statelessness, which states that a person may be  deprived  of
             citizenship  if  it  was  obtained  by  means  of   fraud   or
             misrepresentation (Article 8 [2] refers). For that  reason  no
             detailed analysis has been carried out as to whether or not to
             the effect of this decision would be to render  you  stateless
             under the laws of Albania of which you were  a  national  when
             you became a British citizen.


        37.  However, taking the  matter  at  its  highest,  even  if  this
             decision to deprive on fraud grounds under s40(3) did have the
             consequence  of  rendering   you   stateless,   in   all   the
             circumstances of the case it is reasonable  and  proportionate
             step to take given the seriousness of the fraud, the  need  to
             protect and maintain confidence in the UK  immigration  system
             and the  public  interest  in  preserving  the  legitimacy  of
             British nationality. Also, it may be open  to  you  to  engage
             with the relevant authorities in Albania to seek reinstatement
             of your original citizenship if it has been lost.


        38.  Once deprived of citizenship you become subject to immigration
             control and so may be removed from the UK  or  prevented  from
             returning to the UK if deprivation action  occurs  whilst  you
             are abroad. Consideration may  also  be  given  on  whether  a
             limited form of leave be given. A decision on this matter will
             follow once the deprivation order is made.


        39.  In order to provide clarity regarding the period  between  the
            loss of citizenship by service of  a  deprivation  order  and  a
            further decision to remove, deport or grant leave, the Secretary
            of State notes this period will be relatively short:


            . A deprivation order will be  made  within  4  weeks  of  your
              appeal  rights  being  exhausted,  or  receipt   of   written
              confirmation from you that you will not appeal this decision,
              whichever is the sooner.
            . Within 8 weeks from the deprivation order being made, subject
              to any representations you may make, a further decision  will
              be made  either  to  remove  you  from  the  United  Kingdom,
              commenced deportation action (only if you has  less  than  18
              months of a custodial sentence to serve or has  already  been
              released from prison), or issue leave.

        40.  The effect of deprivation  action  on  you  [and  your  family
            members]  must  be  weighed  against  the  public  interest   in
            protecting the special relationship of solidarity and good faith
            between the UK and its nationals and  also  the  reciprocity  of
            rights and duties, which  form  the  bedrock  of  the  bonds  of
            nationality. Having weighed those effects, it has been concluded
            that it is  reasonable  and  proportionate  to  deprive  you  of
            British citizenship.


        41.  In accordance with section 40(5) of  the  British  Nationality
            Act 1981, the Secretary of State gives notice of her decision to
            make an order  to  deprive  you  of  British  citizenship  under
            section  40  of  that  act  (as  amended  by  the   Nationality,
            Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).




    18. The headnote of Hysaj (Depravation of  Citizenship:  Delay)  [2020]
        UKUT 128, reads:


        1.   The starting point in  any  consideration  undertaken  by  the
             Secretary of State ("the respondent") as to whether to deprive
             a person of British citizenship must be made by  reference  to
             the rules and policy in force at  the  time  the  decision  is
             made. Rule of law  values  indicate  that  the  respondent  is
             entitled to take advice and act in light of the state  of  law
             and the circumstances known to her. The benefit of  hindsight,
             post the Supreme Court judgment in R (Hysaj) v.  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 82, does not  lessen
             the significant public interest in the deprivation of  British
             citizenship acquired through fraud or deception.
        2.   No legitimate expectation  arises  that  consideration  as  to
             whether or not to deprive citizenship is to be  undertaken  by
             the application of a historic policy that was in  place  prior
             to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hysaj.
        3.   No historic injustice is capable of arising  in  circumstances
             where the respondent erroneously declared British  citizenship
             to be a nullity, rather than seek  to  deprive  under  section
             40(3) of the British Nationality Act  1981,  as  no  prejudice
             arises because it is not possible to establish that a decision
             to deprive should have been  taken  under  a  specific  policy
             within a specific period of time.
        4.   The respondent's  14-year  policy  under  her  deprivation  of
             citizenship policy, which was withdrawn  on  20  August  2014,
             applied a continuous residence requirement that was broken  by
             the imposition of a custodial sentence.
        5.   A refugee is to meet the requirement of article 1A(2)  of  the
             1951 UN Refugee Convention and a person  cannot  have  enjoyed
             Convention status if recognition was consequent to an entirely
             false presentation as to a well-founded fear of  persecution.,


        6.   Upon deprivation of British citizenship, there is no automatic
             revival of previously held indefinite leave to remain status.
        7.   There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the public  interest
             in maintaining the integrity of the system  by  which  foreign
             nationals are naturalised and permitted to enjoy the  benefits
             of British citizenship. Any effect on day-to-day life that may
             result from a person being deprived of British citizenship  is
             a consequence of the that person's  fraud  or  deception  and,
             without more, cannot tip the proportionality balance, so as to
             compel the respondent to grant  a  period  of  leave,  whether
             short or otherwise.
    19. Section 40 British Nationality Act 1981 (as amended) reads:


             40   Deprivation of citizenship.


                  (1)   In  this  section  a   reference   to   a   person's
                      "citizenship status" is a reference to his status as-


                      a) a British citizen,


                      b) a British overseas territories citizen,


                      c) a British Overseas citizen,


                      d) a British National (Overseas),


                      e) a British protected person, or


                      f) a British subject.


                  (2)  The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person
                      of a citizenship status if the Secretary of State  is
                      satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public
                      good.


                  (3)  The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person
                      of  a  citizenship  status  which  results  from  his
                      registration or naturalisation if  the  Secretary  of
                      State  is  satisfied   that   the   registration   or
                      naturalisation was obtained by means of-


                      a) fraud,


                      b) false representation, or


                      c) concealment of a material fact.


                  (4)  The Secretary of State may not make  an  order  under
                      subsection (2) if he  is  satisfied  that  the  order
                      would make a person stateless.


                  (4A) But that does not prevent the Secretary of State from
                      making an order under subsection  (2)  to  deprive  a
                      person of a citizenship status if-


                      a) the citizenship status results  from  the  person's
                         naturalisation,


                      b) the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
                         deprivation is conducive to the public good because
                         the person, while having that  citizenship  status,
                         has conducted him or herself in a manner  which  is
                         seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the
                         United Kingdom, any of the Islands, or any  British
                         overseas territory, and


                      c) the Secretary of State has reasonable  grounds  for
                         believing that the person is able, under the law of
                         a country or territory outside the United  Kingdom,
                         to  become  a  national  of  such  a   country   or
                         territory.


                  (5)  Before making an order under this section in  respect
                      of a person the Secretary  of  State  must  give  the
                      person written notice specifying-


                      a) that the Secretary of State has decided to make  an
                         order,


                      b) the reasons for the order, and


                      c) the person's right of appeal under  section  40A(1)
                         or under section  2B  of  the  Special  Immigration
                         Appeals Commission Act 1997 (c. 68).


                  (6)  Where a person acquired a citizenship status  by  the
                      operation of a law which applied to  him  because  of
                      his registration or naturalisation under an enactment
                      having effect before commencement, the  Secretary  of
                      State  may  by  order  deprive  the  person  of   the
                      citizenship status  if  the  Secretary  of  State  is
                      satisfied that the registration or naturalisation was
                      obtained by means of-


                      a) fraud,


                      b) false representation, or


                      c) concealment of a material fact.




Discussion



    20. Whilst Mr Dema sought to make a comparison between  his  and  other
        cases where similar action to that he faces had not been taken,  or
        leave had been granted, such cases are intently fact  specific  and
        insufficient evidence was provided  to  show  that  such  decisions
        demonstrated a policy held by the decision-maker such that Mr  Dema
        could claim a legitimate expectation his case will  be  handled  in
        the same way.
    21. Mr Dema also sought to rely upon the facts of a case that he stated
        mirrored his closely but his authority for this proposition was  an
        unreported decision of the Upper Tribunal which  he  did  not  have
        permission to rely upon, no application having been  made  for  the
        same in accordance with the relevant practice direction.
    22. Mr Dema also referred to the fact that the respondent believed  his
        nationality was as he  claimed  meaning  that  notwithstanding  his
        admitted deception by providing a false identity  by  reference  to
        his country of origin,  his  appeal  should  be  allowed,  as  such
        deception was not material to  the  grant.  Such  argument  has  no
        merit. So far as it is recorded in the  documents  received  by  Mr
        Dema from the Home Office following a Subject Access Request, it is
        clear that an official of the respondent mistakenly  believed  that
        Mr Dema's appeal had been allowed by an Immigration  Judge  and  on
        that basis granted him the initial period of  leave  to  remain.  A
        proper reading of the chronology clearly  shows  that  although  Mr
        Dema sought to appeal the refusal of his asylum claim  an  official
        of the respondent granted leave to remain before  that  appeal  was
        listed. It is therefore not a case in which the respondent accepted
        an independent judicial body had confirmed Mr Dema's  identity  was
        as claimed but rather as a result of a material mistake of fact.
    23. Mr Dema also submits that his appeal should be allowed  as  it  was
        clear from the documents that the respondent accepted that he might
        not be a Kosovan national as claimed, but Albanian, meaning that  a
        grant  of  leave  to  remain  and  subsequent  grant   of   British
        citizenship did not occur as a result of any fraud or deception  on
        his  behalf.  Such  submission  has  no  arguable  merit.    Whilst
        Immigration Officers may have had a suspicion that Mr Dema was  not
        a Kosovan national as he  claimed,  in  light  of  the  substantial
        number of Albanians entering the United Kingdom seeking a grant  of
        international protection  as  refugees  on  the  basis  of  claimed
        Kosovan nationality at that time, it is not made out that there was
        any evidence  before  the  respondent  in  relation  to  Mr  Dema's
        nationality other than his statement that he was from  Kosovo.   It
        is also clear that any suspicion there may have been in the mind of
        an official was clearly put aside with reliance being  placed  upon
        Mr Dema having been truthful, which it was later discovered he  was
        not.
    24. Although he blames advice received from an agent, which  may  be  a
        credible claim, Mr Dema still knew which country he was a  national
        of but chose not  to  tell  the  respondent's  representatives  the
        truth; either when he initially claimed  asylum  or  on  any  other
        occasion  when  there  was  interaction   between   him   and   the
        respondent's representatives, before 2011.  Deception is the action
        of deceiving  someone.  I  find  Mr  Dema  deliberately,  with  the
        intention of enabling him to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  to
        secure status, misled the respondent by providing a false  identity
        both in relation to his initial asylum application on 16 June  1996
        and on every further application thereafter before he disclosed his
        correct details  on  21  February  2011,  for  which  no  plausible
        justification for such actions has been provided.
    25. Mr Dema stated that the nullity decision put  him  in  considerable
        difficulty.  He  was  made  redundant  but  was  unable  to  obtain
        alternative employment as he no longer had any status or  right  to
        work. He confirmed he has now obtained  full-time  employment  with
        Refugee Action who have provided a letter  of  reference  dated  17
        April 2019 which has  been  included  in  Mr  Dema's  supplementary
        bundle. Mr Dema has been able to  continue  his  employment  during
        lockdown from home near Birmingham but otherwise stated he  travels
        regularly to London four days a week, working one day a  week  from
        home.
    26. Mr Dema lives on the outskirts of Birmingham with his brother,  his
        parents, and a younger family member. Mr Dema is a single man  with
        no children in the United Kingdom but claim to have a 'partner'  in
        the UK who he visits in London and whom he sees often.
    27. Mr Dema also states that during the 24 years he has  lived  in  the
        United Kingdom he has  worked  tirelessly  helping  people  in  all
        situations both in paid employment and in the voluntary sector.  Mr
        Dema claims that as a result of his length of time  in  the  United
        Kingdom and activities his case is exceptional.
    28. Whilst Mr Dema refers to head note (4) of  Hysaj,  which  confirmed
        the removal of the respondent's 14 year policy and a deprivation of
        citizenship policy on 20 August 2014 he is unable to benefit from a
        policy that has not been shown to be applicable on the facts of his
        case.
    29. Mr Dema confirmed he will be devastated as the consequence  of  the
        decision will be that he will lose his job as he will not have  any
        permission to work. He also claims that for the last 3 years he has
        had to apply for permission to work every 6 months,  the  last  one
        being in June 2020.  All his family are in the UK and his nephew is
        to start his studies at university  this  year.   All  have  lawful
        status. Mr Dema states the UK is his home as he has worked hard  to
        make it his home and invested the best years of  his  life  in  the
        United Kingdom.
    30. Although Mr  Dema  provides  an  explanation  for  his  actions  in
        providing a false identity there is no evidence that he faced undue
        pressure from any 3rd party to do so. Mr Dema knew who  he  is  but
        chose to give a false identity as he wished to seek leave to remain
        and did so for the purposes of acquiring that  aim.  I  accept  the
        submission  of  Mr  Jarvis  that  Mr  Dema  make  the  most  of  an
        opportunistic chance  by  claiming  a  new  identity  for  personal
        reasons.
    31. I find  it  made  out  on  the  evidence  that  Mr  Dema  practiced
        significant deception between 1996 to 2011. That is relevant to the
        weight to be given to the public interest which is significant in a
        case where deception has arisen. In Hysaj at  head  note  7  it  is
        written:


        There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the  public  interest  in
        maintaining the integrity of the system by which foreign  nationals
        are naturalised and permitted to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  British
        citizenship. Any effect on day-to-day life that may result  from  a
        person being deprived of British citizenship is  a  consequence  of
        the that person's fraud or deception and, without more, cannot  tip
        the proportionality balance, so as  to  compel  the  respondent  to
        grant a period of leave, whether short or otherwise.


    32. I find Mr Dema used deception  to  claim  citizenship  in  2002.  I
        accept Mr Dema apologised to the respondent that  he  had  lied  in
        relation to his identity but that was only in 2011 when  it  suited
        him to do it to enable him to secure a document that reflected  his
        true identity.
    33. I find any Immigration Officer's suspicion that he may have  had  a
        different identity to that claimed is not contradictory evidence on
        the clear facts of this matter. I find there is no basis for making
        a finding that the respondent's representative knew Mr Dema's  true
        identity details.
    34. It is not made out that considering the rules and policies in force
        at the date the decision under challenge they  were  not  correctly
        applied by the decision-maker in arriving at the impugned decision.
    35. The assertion in relation to the application of  historic  policies
        is an issue that has been resolved by Hysaj in the  Supreme  Court,
        as confirmed by the Upper Tribunal. Mr Dema fails to establish  any
        legitimate expectation, so far as that  term  is  understood  in  a
        legal  context,  that  the  decision  should  have  been  taken  by
        application of historic policies.
    36. This is a case in which the respondent declared Mr  Dema's  British
        citizenship to  be  a  nullity  which  was  found  to  be  unlawful
        resulting in that decision being revoked,  but  Mr  Dema  fails  to
        establish any prejudice as he fails to make out that  the  decision
        to deprive should have been taken any under specific policy  within
        a specific period of time. Any claim based upon delay has not  been
        shown to have merit on the facts of this matter.
    37. It is also of relevance that  had  Mr  Dema  declared  his  correct
        identity details it is highly unlikely he would have  been  allowed
        to remain in the United Kingdom as he would have been  returned  to
        Albania. It is more likely than not to be for this reason  that  he
        provided the false identity.  The only reason he succeeded with his
        application for international protection was as a consequence of an
        entirely false presentation of the facts in relation  to  his  true
        identity  and  claim  to  face  a  credible  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution  arising  therefrom  by  reference   to   the   country
        conditions in Kosovo  at  that  time.  The  deception  was  clearly
        material to the grant of citizenship.
    38. There  is  arguable  merit  in  Mr  Jarvis's  submission  that  the
        situation in which Mr Dema finds himself as a direct consequence of
        his own actions. It is not made out any delay that has occurred  in
        the respondent's decision-making process is sufficient to make  the
        decision unlawful on the facts.
    39. Mr Dema has paid employment which he seeks to rely upon in  support
        of his claim that the effect upon him will  be  devastating  if  he
        lost the same; but the only reason he was able to work in the first
        place is because he obtained permission to work from the respondent
        based upon his declared status, which was clearly a right  to  work
        obtained as a direct consequence of his deception.
    40. It is not disputed that the effect of the respondent's decision  is
        that Mr Dema is likely to lose his paid employment as he will  have
        no right to work unless such a right is granted by the  respondent.
        I do not accept any suggestion or implication that Mr Dema will  be
        turned out of the family home as on his own evidence he  is  living
        in a very close and loving family environment with his sibling  and
        parents. I accept that loss of employment may mean he is unable  to
        make the financial contribution he currently makes  to  the  family
        finances, but it is not made out that he will  become  homeless  or
        destitute or face undue hardship whilst waiting for a  decision  to
        be made as to whether he is to be removed or granted  a  period  of
        leave.
    41. I accept that the timescale set out by the Secretary  of  State  in
        the reasons for refusal letter at [39] may result in Mr Dema  being
        in "limbo" for a period of 8 weeks but I do not find  he  has  made
        out that the impact upon him during such period  is  sufficient  to
        make a finding that the discretion  conferred  in  s40A  should  be
        exercised any differently.
    42. Mr Jarvis accepted there was reference to article 8 in the  refusal
        letter and Mr Dema's submission any interference with  his  private
        life will be disproportionate has been considered as  part  of  the
        review of all relevant matters. Mr Jarvis refers to Section 117B of
        the 2002 Act and there is arguable merit in his assertion that  the
        private life Mr Dema seeks to rely upon should have  little  weight
        attached to it for although it appears on the face  of  it  he  had
        lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom  at  that  time,  such
        leave was obtained as a result of his act of  deception,  resulting
        in leave to which he was never  lawfully  entitled..  As  such  his
        status has always been precarious. I find there is  arguable  merit
        in such a submission.
    43. Having taken all submissions made into account, I conclude that  Mr
        Dema has failed to discharge the burden upon him  to  the  required
        standard to show  there  is  anything  unlawful,  unreasonable,  or
        irrational in the respondent's  decision  to  deprive  him  of  his
        British citizenship  pursuant  to  section  40(3)  of  the  British
        Nationality Act 1981 or to show that the  discretion  contained  in
        section 40A should have been exercised in any other way.


Decision

    44. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    45. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6 August 2020












