
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00013/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 28 May 2019                                |On 31 July 2019              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    m A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. For the reasons given below I have decided  to  allow  this  appeal.
       Although this is not a protection case and no decision has been made
       to remove the  appellant,  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I make an  order  prohibiting
       the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to  lead  members
       of the public to identify the appellant. Breach of this order can be
       punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this  order  because  the
       appellant has shown that he is a gay man from  Iran  and  publishing
       his name might create a risk to his  safety  in  the  event  of  his
       return. Publicity  could  mean  that  the  appellant  could  not  be
       returned to Iran even if I am wrong to allow this appeal.

    2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Iran against the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  decision  of
       the Secretary of State on 22 March 2018 to deprive the appellant  of
       his British citizenship.

    3. As the First-tier Tribunal Judge explained correctly at the start of
       his decision and reasons:

  "The appellant is a national of Iran, born on [~] 1970, and now 48  years
  old.  It is not in dispute that he has previously used the name 'Hamed T--
  ---' and date of birth of 20 June 1973, and that he used this  name  when
  he applied for, and was granted, British citizenship on 10 January  2007.
  It is the use of this name and date of birth which is the subject of  the
  issues in this appeal."

    4. The name "Hamed" might be thought to be a shortened form of the very
       common Iranian name "Mohamed". The surname  used  by  the  appellant
       when he was given British nationality might be based  on  his  birth
       surname but is two letters shorter.

    5. The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  in  a  lorry  in
       February 2000.  He claimed asylum on arrival.  It was his case  that
       he was gay and he  suffered  persecution  in  Iran  because  of  his
       sexuality.  It is  not  entirely  clear  how  that  application  was
       determined but it is  clear  that  sometime  around  June  2003  the
       appellant,  through  his   representatives,   enquired   about   his
       immigration status and was told that he did not qualify  for  asylum
       but he was then told he had been given exceptional leave  to  remain
       from 30 November 2000 until 30 November 2004 on the  basis  that  he
       was gay and could not return to Iran.

    6. On 13 September 2004 the appellant applied for indefinite  leave  to
       remain which was granted on 29 July 2005 on the basis  that  had  he
       resided in the United Kingdom with exceptional leave for a period of
       four years.  On 7 September 2005 he applied for  a  travel  document
       which was given relying in part on  a  declaration  from  a  retired
       magistrate about the appellant's identity.

    7.  On  11  August  2006  he  applied  for  British  citizenship.   The
       application was supported by two referees who claimed to have  known
       him personally for five years.  At that time he worked as a forklift
       truck driver.  He had passed the "Life in the United  Kingdom"  test
       and criminal record checks had been undertaken.  He became a British
       citizen on 10 January 2007.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal emphasised, correctly, that  throughout  the
       appellant's dealings with the respondent until 24 February 2012 (see
       below), the appellant had provided documentation  in  which  he  was
       identified as H T who was  born  on  20  June  1973.   What  is  now
       understood to be his given name, Mohammad Ali T who was born  on  19
       September 1970, did not feature in the paperwork.

    9. On 24 February 2012 the Coventry Refugee and Migrant Centre wrote to
       the respondent informing him that  the  appellant  had  applied  for
       citizenship in a wrong name and using a  wrong  date  of  birth  and
       asked the respondent to amend the name and  date  of  birth  on  the
       certificate of  naturalisation.   It  was  asserted  then  that  the
       appellant's name had been "wrongly spelt" and  his  "date  of  birth
       incorrectly  recorded".   The  letter   was   supported   with   the
       appellant's Iranian passport giving the name and date of  birth  now
       said to be correct.  The passport was issued  in  April  2007.   The
       passport was accompanied with a date of birth confirming the details
       and an affidavit from the appellant declaring what he said were  his
       correct details.

   10. The Secretary of State was not pleased.   Initially  he  decided  to
       treat the acquisition of citizenship as a nullity but then  withdrew
       the decision to  treat  it  as  a  nullity  and  accepted  that  the
       appellant remained  a  British  citizen.  On  12  January  2018  the
       respondent notified the appellant that he would  consider  depriving
       him of his citizenship under Section 40 of the  British  Nationality
       Act 1981.

   11. Having considered matters raised  in  response  the  respondent  did
       deprive the appellant of his British citizenship on 22 March 2018.

   12. It is instructive to look carefully at the  respondent's  Notice  of
       Decision to Deprive British Citizenship Under Section 40(3)  of  the
       British Nationality Act 1981.  This is dated 22 March 2018.  This is
       where the respondent explains his decision and informs the appellant
       of his rights of appeal. At paragraph 3 the respondent says:

  "Following our investigation, and on the basis of the evidence presented,
  the Secretary of State has decided  that  your  British  citizenship  was
  obtained fraudulently.  The Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that  you
  should therefore be deprived  of  British  citizenship  for  the  reasons
  outlined below."

   13. The "reasons outlined below" are not clear.  There is  reference  to
       the three routes to deprivation under  Section  40  of  the  British
       Nationality Act 1981. They are set out in section 40(3) and comprise
       fraud, false representation or concealment of a material fact but it
       plain from section 40(3) that neither  fraud,  false  representation
       nor concealment of a material fact on their own justify deprivation.
       Deprivation is permissible when the  respondent  is  satisfied  that
       "registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of"  (in  this
       case) fraud. The Notice does not explain why the  alleged  fraud  is
       said to be relevant to the decision to deprive the appellant of  his
       acquired nationality.

   14. There is then a reference to a definition of "false representations"
       and an indication that the appropriate  standard  of  proof  is  the
       balance of probabilities.

   15. There is then a summary of the appellant's  history  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  He claimed asylum in the now known to be false identity of
       Hamed T born on 20 June 1973.  He maintained that false identity  in
       several dealings with the Secretary of State over  the  twelve  year
       period and only explained  the  true  position  after  he  had  been
       naturalised.

   16. The Secretary of State noted medical evidence that the appellant had
       been suffering from anxiety and depression since 2006 and  that  the
       appellant claimed to have been "sectioned" under Section  2  of  the
       Mental Health Act 1983.

   17. In 2007, that is some seven  years  after  arriving  in  the  United
       Kingdom, the appellant obtained a valid Iranian passport.

   18. The Secretary of State noted that it had been the  appellant's  case
       that several interpreters had misinterpreted information given.

   19. Paragraph 14, interestingly, sets out the questions that were  asked
       of the appellant.  The appellant was required to sign a  declaration
       which read:

  "To the best of my knowledge all the answers I have  given  are  truthful
  and complete."

   20. It then refers to his being interviewed in Farsi and  having  signed
       another declaration which read:

  "I have had my name(s), nationality and date of birth read back to me and
  I declare that this information is true."

   21. There was a further declaration stating:

  "I am aware that it is an offence under  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  as
  amended by the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  and  the  Nationality,
  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, to make to a person acting in  execution
  of any of those Acts a statement or representation which  I  know  to  be
  false or do not believe to be true, or seek to obtain leave to remain  in
  the United Kingdom by means which include deception."

   22. The letter then deals with medical evidence  about  the  appellant's
       claim to have been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder.

   23. The letter then rejected  any  contention  that  the  appellant  was
       entitled to leave on human rights grounds.  There  was  no  plan  to
       remove him.  Any interference with his "Article 8" rights  was  said
       to be proportionate.

   24. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the  appellant  had  been
       dishonest and was unimpressed with the medical evidence.

   25. He directed himself at paragraph 62 that he must "determine  if  the
       appellant's false representations were material to the  decision  to
       grant citizenship".

   26. The next two paragraphs are interesting and are  criticised  in  the
       grounds.  The judge said:

  "63.   In doing so, I accept Mr Pipe's submission that the appellant  was
  granted ELR, which led to ILR, on the basis that he  was  accepted  as  a
  homosexual and could not be returned to Iran.  This is made clear in  the
  Home Office minute (page  109  of  the  appellant's  bundle).  I  accept,
  therefore, that the appellant's false representations had no  bearing  on
  the decision to grant ILR, which was the subsequent pathway to enable him
  to seek citizenship.  Had his true identity been known, his homosexuality
  will still have led to him being granted leave.

  64.         However, when it comes to the  application  for  citizenship,
  the respondent asserts that it is the appellant's deliberate conduct,  in
  providing false information with the intention of obtaining  citizenship,
  which was the 'operative' concealment in this matter, and so that it  was
  material to the decision.  In other words,  citizenship  would  not  have
  been granted had he disclosed the true position."

   27. I can find nothing in the Notice  of  Decision  to  Deprive  British
       Citizenship Under Section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981,
       dated 22 March 2018, that sets  out  the  explanation  that  British
       citizenship was obtained by reasons of the  "operative  concealment"
       identified by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

   28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the  appellant  had  been
       dishonest both in regard to his name and in regard to  his  date  of
       birth and further found that the respondent was entitled to  deprive
       the appellant of his citizenship of the United Kingdom.  The  First-
       tier Tribunal found that the appellant had obtained his  citizenship
       by deception.

   29. Ms Rutherford relied substantially on grounds  settled  by  Mr  Adam
       Pipe of counsel who presented the appellant's case in the First-tier
       Tribunal.

   30. These complained that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in various
       ways.

   31. I begin with the contention that he misdirected  himself  about  the
       medical evidence.  That is not made out.  This is not  a  case  that
       ought to succeed on Article 8 grounds.  The appellant  is  not  that
       poorly.

   32. Further there is no evidence that the appellant was not competent to
       make the necessary decisions going to honesty at the relevant time.

   33. This, I find, skirts around the point.  Clearly  the  appellant  has
       made representations that are not correct at least in regard to  his
       date of birth. There is no obvious advantage to him  in  making  the
       false representations that he did. Nothing seems to turn on his name
       and the false date of birth did not, for example, entitle him  to  a
       more generous regime of support.

   34. I am not satisfied that there is any evidence that  the  appellant's
       use of a name other than his given name is dishonest.  There  is  no
       evidence that the was ever asked if he had used any other  name  and
       without that additional information being sought and a false  answer
       given,  or  evidence  of  advantage,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  a
       consistent use of name different from a birth name is capable on its
       own of supporting a finding of dishonesty.

   35. I have no such reservations about the use of a false date of  birth.
       Without more a person who gives as his date of birth a date which he
       knew to be different from his official date of birth appears to have
       been dishonest even  if  there  was  no  obvious  advantage  in  the
       falsehood.

   36. The grounds further complain that there was a misdirection of law by
       not applying properly the test  for  dishonesty  formulated  in  the
       Supreme Court in Ivey v Genting Casinos (UK)  Ltd  (T/A  Crockfords)
       [2017] UKSC 67. Clearly the Supreme Court was looking at the meaning
       of dishonesty and gave a definition that the First-tier Tribunal was
       obliged to apply.

   37. It is conceivable that a person with a genuine  fear  of  return  to
       Iran  would  give  false  information  at  some  stage  and  it   is
       conceivable that, if all the  circumstances  were  made  known,  the
       falsehood would not be  thought  dishonest.  Further,  even  if  the
       conduct was dishonest, it is conceivable that there were reasons for
       it that would make it wrong to  use  the  conduct  as  a  reason  to
       deprive the appellant of British citizenship.

   38. I am not satisfied that there have been proper  findings  about  the
       appellant's honesty in this case. However there is no need to embark
       on such a potentially tortuous analysis as there is nothing  in  the
       Notice to show that the falsehoods were material.

   39. The grounds also contend that it was  perverse  for  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge to accept the false representations had no bearing on
       the decision to grant indefinite leave to remain but  did  apply  in
       the subsequent grant of citizenship.  This contention is  made  out.
       In my judgement the key to this case is the requirement,  recognised
       by the Secretary of State and the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  that
       the registration or naturalisation "was obtained by means of  fraud,
       false representation or concealment of material fact".

   40. There is no evidence for that.  It  was  decided  that  because  the
       appellant was gay he could not be returned safely to Iran.   Neither
       his name nor date of birth had anything to do with  that.  There  is
       nothing to show that the subsequent grant of further leave and  then
       nationality depended on anything but his  residence  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   41. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  all  about  proof.   The
       Secretary of State had the burden and simply failed to  address  the
       points that may well have led to the appeal  being  dismissed.   The
       First-tier Tribunal can only rely on the  evidence  that  is  placed
       before it  and  I  do  not  see  anything  that  would  justify  the
       conclusion  that  any  dishonesty  that  might  be  established  was
       causative of the grant of citizenship.

   42. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rather rowed away from the decision of
       this Tribunal  in  Sleiman  (depravation  of  citizenship;  conduct)
       Lebanon [2017] UKUT 367 (IAC) describing it  as  a  case  "based  on
       facts which were particular to that case".   It  was  not.   It  was
       intended to offer guidance in deprivation  cases  by  reminding  the
       parties, perhaps especially the Secretary of State, that  where  the
       Statute empowered the Secretary of State to  do  something  where  a
       benefit had been obtained "by means of" it was  incumbent  upon  the
       Secretary of State to explain how the benefit was obtained by  means
       of the fraud but the respondent did not discharge that burden.

   43. This is not a particularly happy decision.  Although  the  appellant
       has lived in the United Kingdom for many years  and  apparently  has
       lived responsibility in most respects he did base his application on
       a  name  he  did  not  normally  use,  and,  and  to  my  mind  more
       pertinently,  an  entirely  fictitious  a  date  of  birth.  However
       although the Secretary of State has asserted that this is sufficient
       reason to deprive him of citizenship he has not explained the point.

   44. The First-tier Tribunal came close to recognising this when it found
       that the respondent had not shown that the  falsehoods  impacted  on
       the decision to grant leave. The Tribunal should  have  applied  the
       same finding to the decision to grant citizenship.

   45. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge should not have  dismissed
       the appeal.  The evidence points only in one way which is  to  allow
       the appeal.

Notice of Decision

   46. The First-tier Tribunal  erred.   I  set  aside  this  decision  and
       substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 July 2019                   |







