
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00048/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 July 2021                           |On 05 August 2021                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MUSA ISMALAJ
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr Sellwood instructed by Oliver & Hassani
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The background is set out by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney  (the
        Judge) at paragraphs [1 - 9] which I repeat as  its  sets  out  the
        framework against which this appeal is being considered:

        "1.  The appellant is a citizen of the United Kingdom  born  on  28
             December 1973 in Tropoje, Albania. He appeals the decision made
             on 9 March 2020 to deprive him of his British citizenship.


        2.   The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  23  November
             1998. He claimed asylum two days later giving  his  true  first
             name and date of birth, but stated that he was born in Gjakove,
             Kosovo and gave a different spelling of his surname.


        3.   The appellant's asylum claim was refused on 5 April  2001.  He
             lodged  an  appeal  against  that  decision.  His  appeal   was
             dismissed on 17 September 2001.


        4.   The appellant was asked to complete a questionnaire issued  by
             the Case Resolution Directorate on 17  September  2009.  On  21
             October 2010 the appellant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
             remain outside the Immigration Rules.


        5.   On 27 January 2011 the appellant made  an  application  for  a
             travel document. He maintained that he was born in Kosovo.  His
             application was refused on 19 April 2011 on the basis  that  he
             had failed to approach the Kosovan authorities to apply  for  a
             passport. The appellant was advised that in the  event  he  was
             able to provide evidence from the  Kosovan  embassy  that  they
             would not issue him with a  passport,  consideration  would  be
             given to issuing him with a travel document valid for one year.
             The appellant provided a letter dated  13  May  2011  from  the
             Kosovan embassy stating that he had  been  refused  a  passport
             because  he  did  not  have  the  required  birth  certificate,
             certificate of citizenship or certificate of residence.


        6.   On 23 August 2012 the appellant applied for naturalisation  as
             a British citizen. He maintained that he was  born  in  Kosovo.
             His application was successful, and he was  naturalised  on  18
             February 2013. He was issued with a British passport on  2  May
             2013.


        7.   The respondent carried out checks on the appellant's  identity
             and on  20  September  2019.  The  British  Embassy  in  Tirana
             confirmed the appellant's place of birth was Tropoje, Albania.


        8.   On 28 November 2019 the  respondent  wrote  to  the  appellant
             advising him that she was  considering  depriving  him  of  his
             British citizenship and provided him  with  an  opportunity  to
             give reasons why she should not do so. The appellant  responded
             via his representatives on 19 December 2019.


        9.   Having considered his representations, the respondent  made  a
             decision to deprive the appellant of his British citizenship on
             9 March 2020. It is that decision which is the subject of  this
             appeal."

     2.  Mr  Ismalaj  argued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that   his
        misrepresentation was not material to the  decision  to  grant  his
        application for naturalisation as a British citizen,  and  that  in
        the event the misrepresentation was material, that the Secretary of
        State ought to have exercised discretion differently and  that  the
        decision  to  deprive  him  of  his  British   citizenship   is   a
        disproportionate interference with his article 8 rights.
     3. The Judge sets out findings in relation  to  whether  the  relevant
        condition precedent relating to a deprivation  of  citizenship  was
        made out between [33 - 34] in the following terms:

        "33.      The appellant accepts that he provided an incorrect place
             of birth when he claimed  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He
             claims that it was on the advice of agents who facilitated  his
             entry into the country. He claims that he was  told  to  change
             his date of birth and his surname. The appellant maintained the
             use of the false details throughout  his  stay  in  the  United
             Kingdom using them in applications for a travel document, under
             the legacy scheme, and in his application for naturalisation.


        34.       I find the appellant made a false representation  in  his
             application  for  naturalisation  as  a  British  citizen.  The
             appellant knew the details were not correct throughout his stay
             in the United Kingdom and initially provided them in  order  to
             avoid being returned to Albania. I am satisfied that his  false
             representation was deliberate. However, in  order  for  section
             40(3) to bite, in  addition  to  being  deliberate,  the  false
             representation must also be material to the decision  to  grant
             citizenship."

     4. For the reasons set out between [35 - 42] the Judge concludes  that
        Mr Ismalaj's deception as to his true nationality was not  material
        to the grant of IRL.
     5. For the reasons set out between [43 - 55] the Judge finds that that
        even had the Secretary of State  known  about  Mr  Ismalaj's  false
        representation it was not  accepted  she  would  have  refused  the
        application for naturalisation on character  grounds,  meaning  the
        false representation was not material  to  the  decision  to  grant
        citizenship. The Judge concluded, therefore, that the conditions in
        section 40(3)  were  not  satisfied  and  accordingly  allowed  the
        appeal.
     6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on four grounds.
        Permission to appeal was granted on  a  renewed  application  by  a
        judge of the Upper Tribunal on 1 February 2021, the operative  part
        of the grant being in the following terms:

        "2.  I deal ground  three  first  as  this  is,  in  my  view,  the
             strongest ground. The first question which the Judge had to ask
             herself was whether the deception was material to the grant  of
             ILR without which the application  for  citizenship  could  not
             have been made in the first place. The Judge arguably erred  in
             her reliance on the case of Sleiman at [47] of the Decision, as
             in Sleiman, the Respondent  had  conceded  that  the  appellant
             would have obtained ILR under the legacy programme even  if  he
             had not obtained DLR previously. It is difficult to see why the
             absence of an earlier grant of DLR makes this case stronger  in
             circumstances where, if the Appellant  had  declared  his  true
             nationality prior to consideration of his case by the  Casework
             Resolution Directorate, the deception would have at least  been
             a factor in that consideration and where he  had  no  right  to
             remain during the period of his residence.


        3.   Further, the Judge's reasons for finding  that  the  Appellant
             would have been granted ILR even if the Respondent had known of
             the deception (at [35] to [47] of the  Decision)  are  arguably
             flawed for the reasons set out in ground one.  It  is  arguable
             that the Judge has failed to take into  account  what  is  said
             about the relevance of delay in the consideration  of  "legacy"
             cases and has  failed  to  take  into  account  the  impact  of
             deception had that been known at the time. I note, for example,
             one of the four claimants in Hakimi (to which the Judge  refers
             at [38]  and  [39]  of  the  Decision)  had  a  not  dissimilar
             immigration background and chronology to the present  case  but
             was refused ILR and that refusal was upheld by  the  Court  for
             reasons which appear at [41] of the judgement.


        4.    Having  accepted  at  [52]  of  the   Decision   that   false
             representation is a "weighty consideration" in a naturalisation
             application, the Judge arguably fails to explain why it is  not
             so in this case.  Her  reasons  in  that  regard  are  arguably
             inadequate. In any event, they are  arguably  infected  by  the
             error in ground one which I have found to be arguable.


        5.   Ground four taken alone is weaker,  but  given  the  potential
             overlap with, in particular, ground two, I do not restrict  the
             grant of permission."

     7. A  Rule  24  Notice  filed  on  Mr  Ismalaj's  behalf  asserts  the
        determination contains no errors of law and should be upheld. It is
        said in response to the grounds of appeal that  they  represent  an
        overall disagreement with the outcome of the appeal and do not meet
        the threshold for establishing a material error of law,  such  that
        the First-tier Tribunal decision should be set aside and remade. It
        is argued that the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Sleiman
        (deprivation of citizenship; conduct) [2017] UKUT 00367  (IAC)  and
        relevant policy 'parks' the Secretary of State's challenge.  It  is
        argued on the basis of the same that Mr Ismalaj's deception  as  to
        his nationality was not directly material either to  his  grant  of
        ILR under the legacy scheme or citizenship by naturalisation. It is
        argued, the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  therefore  correct  in  its
        findings.
     8. In Sleiman (deprivation of citizenship; conduct)  [2017]  UKUT  367
        (IAC)  the  tribunal  considered  the  question  of  how   directly
        causative past deception must be of a subsequent grant  of  British
        citizenship  in  order  for  a  person  to  be  deprived  of   that
        citizenship on the basis of deception.


        The official headnote reads:

        "In an  appeal  against  a  decision  to  deprive  a  person  of  a
        citizenship status, in assessing  whether  the  appellant  obtained
        registration  or  naturalisation  "by  means   of"   fraud,   false
        representation, or concealment of a  material  fact,  the  impugned
        behaviour must be  directly  material  to  the  decision  to  grant
        citizenship."

     9. The deception in Sleiman was to mislead the authorities  about  age
        on arrival in the UK. The appellant claimed to be younger  than  he
        was and this caused him a direct benefit because he was  granted  a
        short period of limited leave to remain on this basis  even  though
        his asylum claim was refused. He therefore had lawful leave to stay
        in the UK. As his limited leave came  to  an  end,  he  applied  to
        extend it. This application was in time so, due to the  application
        of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971,  his  lawful  stay  was
        extended while the Home Office processed his application.
    10. The processing took the Home Office over five years.  Mr  Sleiman's
        case became part of what became known as the "Legacy  backlog".  By
        the time the Home Office looked at his case such a  long  time  had
        passed that they decided to grant Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR).
        A year or so later he qualified for, applied for, and  was  granted
        British citizenship.
    11. It came to light later that Mr Sleiman had lied about his  age  and
        so the Home Office decided to deprive him of his citizenship on the
        basis that "but for" his initial deception about his age, he  would
        not have had lawful stay and would therefore  not  eventually  have
        qualified for citizenship.
    12. The statutory power of deprivation on the basis of deception is set
        out in section 40(3) British Nationality Act  1981,  which  permits
        deprivation where the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
        registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

        (a) fraud,


        (b) false representation, or


        (c) concealment of a material fact

    13. The most relevant  part  of  the  Home  Office  policy,  previously
        Chapter 55 of  the  Nationality  Instructions  but  republished  as
        "Nationality Policy Guidance: Deprivation and  nullity  of  British
        citizenship", reads as follows:

        '55.7.3   If the fraud,  false  representation  or  concealment  of
               material fact did not have a direct bearing on the grant  of
               citizenship,  it  will  not   be   appropriate   to   pursue
               deprivation action.


        55.7.4     For  example,  where  a  person  acquires  ILR  under  a
               concession (e.g. the family ILR concession) the fact that we
               could show the person had previously lied about their asylum
               claim may be irrelevant.  Similarly,  a  person  may  use  a
               different name if  they  wish  (see  NAMES  in  the  General
               Information section of Volume 2 of the Staff  Instructions):
               unless  it  conceals  criminality,  or   other   information
               relevant to  an  assessment  of  their  good  character,  or
               immigration history in another identity it is  not  material
               to the acquisition of ILR or  citizenship.  However,  before
               making a decision not  to  deprive,  the  caseworker  should
               ensure that relevant  character  checks  are  undertaken  in
               relation to the subject's true identity to ensure  that  the
               false information provided to the Home Office was  not  used
               to conceal criminality or other information relevant  to  an
               assessment of their character'

    14. On the facts of Sleiman, he was able to show that the  Home  Office
        file notes showed that his age was irrelevant to the grant of  ILR.
        The tribunal therefore held that the deception must have  a  direct
        bearing on the grant of citizenship: the  phrase  "direct  bearing"
        suggests that in cases where the fraud etc. only  has  an  indirect
        bearing on the grant of citizenship, deprivation action  would  not
        be appropriate.
    15. The original deception on  date  of  birth  was  found  to  be  not
        directly  material  to  the  decision  to  grant  citizenship.  The
        tribunal noted that:

        . other reported deception and nullification  cases  showed  a  far
        more direct link between  the  deception  and  the  deprivation  or
        nullification


        . the Home  Office  file  note  in  the  case  stating  age  to  be
        irrelevant to ILR


        . there had been no suggestion that had the  false  date  of  birth
        been disclosed at the time of the  application  for  naturalisation
        that the Appellant  would  have  been  refused  on  good  character
        grounds.

        The appeal was therefore allowed.


    16. Following  the  original  Initial  hearing  of  this  matter  being
        adjourned for reasons outside the control of any party,  directions
        were given for the provision of  submissions  relating  to  matters
        they believe should be further considered in light of the  decision
        of the Supreme Court in R (on the application of Begum) [2021] UKSC
        7.
    17. In [71] of the judgment Lord Reed (with whom the other  members  of
        the Court agreed) writes:

        "71.      Nevertheless, SIAC has a number of important functions to
             perform on an appeal against a decision  under  section  40(2).
             First, it can assess whether the Secretary of State  has  acted
             in a way in which no reasonable Secretary of State  could  have
             acted, or has taken into account some irrelevant matter, or has
             disregarded something to which he should have given weight,  or
             has been guilty of some procedural impropriety.  In  doing  so,
             SIAC has to bear in mind the serious nature of a deprivation of
             citizenship, and the severity of  the  consequences  which  can
             flow from such a decision. Secondly, it  can  consider  whether
             the Secretary of State has erred in law, including  whether  he
             has made findings of fact which are unsupported by any evidence
             or are based upon a  view  of  the  evidence  which  could  not
             reasonably be held.  Thirdly,  it  can  determine  whether  the
             Secretary of State  has  complied  with  section  40(4),  which
             provides that the Secretary of State  may  not  make  an  order
             under section 40(2) "if he is satisfied that  the  order  would
             make a person stateless". Fourthly, it can consider whether the
             Secretary of State has acted  in  breach  of  any  other  legal
             principles applicable to his decision, such as  the  obligation
             arising in appropriate cases  under  section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act. In carrying out those functions, SIAC may well have
             to consider relevant evidence. It has to bear in mind that some
             decisions may involve considerations which are not justiciable,
             and  that  due  weight  has  to  be  given  to  the   findings,
             evaluations and policies of the Secretary  of  State,  as  Lord
             Hoffmann  explained  in  Rehman  and  Lord  Page   26   Bingham
             reiterated in A. In reviewing compliance with the Human  Rights
             Act, it has to make its own independent assessment."

    18. And at [119]:

        "119.     The scope of SIAC's jurisdiction in an appeal  against  a
             decision taken under section 40(2) was summarised  in  para  71
             above: first, to determine whether the Secretary of  State  has
             acted in a way in which no reasonable Secretary of State  could
             have acted, or has taken into account some  irrelevant  matter,
             or has disregarded something to  which  he  should  have  given
             weight, or has been  guilty  of  some  procedural  impropriety;
             secondly, to determine whether he has erred in law, for example
             by making  findings  of  fact  which  are  unsupported  by  any
             evidence or are based upon a view of the evidence  which  could
             not reasonably be held; thirdly, to determine  whether  he  has
             complied with section 40(4); and fourthly, to determine whether
             he has acted in breach of any other legal principles applicable
             to his decision, such as the obligation arising in  appropriate
             cases under section 6 of the Human Rights Act."

    19. In his response dated 13 May 2021 Mr Tan, referring specifically to
        [66 - 71] of Begum and writes:

        "This is relevant to the findings set out by the FTTJ who found  at
        [34] that the appellant made a deliberate false  representation  in
        his application for naturalisation. The SSHD was satisfied for  the
        reasons set out in the decision letter  of  9  March  2020   having
        considered the relevant policies, that the false representation was
        material to the decision to grant citizenship, and second, that had
        the SSHD known about the  false  representation  at  the  time  the
        appellant would have been refused on character grounds. The reasons
        set out in the decision letter are neither irrational, or based  on
        irrelevant matters.


        It is submitted  that  in  light  of  Begum,  the  FTTJ's  decision
        contains material errors in addition to the points  raised  in  the
        grounds lodged in the application for permission to appeal."

    20. On behalf of Mr Ismalaj, Mr Sellwood takes  a  different  approach,
        arguing the Secretary of State's approach to Begum misconstrues the
        principles enunciated in this case for three key reasons being:

        'First, in Begum, the Supreme Court was concerned with a  different
        subject matter to that currently before this Tribunal, i.e. one  of
        national security, rather than fraud. The Court  held,  inter-alia,
        that in a deprivation appeal against a decision under s40(2) of the
        British Nationality to Act  1981,  concerning  issues  of  national
        security,  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals  Commission  is   not
        entitled to re-exercise A's discretion for itself, as to whether an
        individual should be deprived of their citizenship. Rather,  unless
        there is an issue as to  whether  A  is  acted  in  breach  of  her
        obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998, SIAC  is  to  consider
        A's deprivation decision in general  by  applying  essentially  the
        same principles that apply in administrative law (as per Lord  Reed
        at [66]-[71], [118]-[119]). Specifically, did  the  decision  maker
        act in a way that no decision-maker could have acted; did they take
        into account an irrelevant matter or disregard something that ought
        to have been given weight; or did they err on a point  of  law:  an
        issue which encompasses the consideration of factual questions (see
        [68]).


        Second, following on from the  first  point,  the  ratio  in  Begum
        concerns the scope of appeals against decisions under  s  40(2)  of
        the 1981 Act before SIAC, not s 40(3) appeals before the First tier
        or Upper Tribunal (IAC). While the same  wording  applies  to  both
        provisions (i.e. "... the Secretary of State is satisfied..."), the
        context in which the Court in Begum construed s 40(2)  appeals  was
        plainly critical to its assessment. The deference shown to A's view
        of what is conducive to the public good, in the context of national
        security, relates to very specific public interest,  in  which  she
        has particular expertise and knowledge.


        The degree of deference, the Courts and  Tribunals  afford  to  A's
        view varies, depending on the context and public interest in  play,
        especially where fundamental rights are at stake: Pham v. Secretary
        of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 19 (see [106], [114]).
         In an appeal concerning s  40(3)  of  the  1981  Act,  the  public
        interest is different, namely  the  integrity  of  the  citizenship
        application process.  This is a matter Courts  and  Tribunal's  are
        well suited to consider, and well used to considering, for example,
        whether or not deception has taken place, and whether or  not  such
        deception is material. Hence KV (Sri Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 2483 (a
        judgement that was not directly considered in Begum)  remains  good
        law as to the general scope of the tribunal's  jurisdiction  in  an
        appeal of this nature.


        Third, even if Begum means s 40(3) appeals to the  First  tier  and
        Upper Tribunal (IAC) are generally limited  to  administrative  law
        challenges (which R does not concede),  that  would  not  assist  A
        showing Judge Swaney's decision contains material errors of law. As
        is clear from the grounds of appeal, A's contentions lie  with  the
        Judge's interpretation and application of  those  policies,  facts,
        and the applicable legal principles.  All  of  those  subjects  sit
        within the administrative law jurisdiction identified by the  Court
        in Begum (see [68] in particular).'

    21. It is not disputed that similar wording appears in s  40(2)  and  s
        40(3) of the British Nationality Act. Subsection (2)  reading  "The
        Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of  a  citizenship
        status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that  deprivation  is
        conducive to the public good" and subsection (3) "The Secretary  of
        State may by order deprive a person of a citizenship  status  which
        results from his registration or naturalisation if the Secretary of
        State is satisfied that  the  registration  or  naturalisation  was
        obtained by means of-

        (a) fraud,


        (b) false representation, or


        (c) concealment of a material fact.

    22. Nothing has been  identified  within  the  judgement  of  Begum  to
        support Mr Sellwood's submission that notwithstanding the identical
        use of the English language the approach to determining such issues
        must be different in relation  to  the  context  i.e.  whether  the
        context of which the  matter  is  being  considered  is  under  the
        heading of whether deprivation is conducive to the public  good  or
        whether his registration or naturalisation was obtained by  any  of
        the three specified means. The context in which  such  matters  are
        being considered if fact  specific  but  both  sections  provide  a
        discretionary power to the Secretary of State to undertake a course
        of action against which the challenge is now limited to public  law
        grounds as clearly indicated above. Context does not in  this  case
        undermine the same application the identified legal  principles  in
        both section 40(2) and (3) cases.
    23. Mr Sellwood's third argument is that even if this is  found  to  be
        the case it makes no material difference  as  even  on  public  law
        grounds the Secretary of State will fail.
    24. At [56] of the decision under challenge the Judge writes:

        "56.      For these reasons, and in light of my  finding  that  the
             appellant's nationality were  not  material  to  the  grant  of
             indefinite leave. I do not accept that even had the  respondent
             known about the appellant's  false  representation,  she  would
             have refused his application for  naturalisation  on  character
             grounds. I find the appellant's false  representation  was  not
             material to the decision to grant citizenship."

    25. In relation to the reference by Mr Sellwood to KV (Sri Lanka)  this
        was a decision clearly based upon  two  earlier  decisions  of  the
        Upper Tribunal,  being  Deliallisi  (British  Citizen:  deprivation
        appeal; Scope)  [2013]  UKUT  439  (IAC)  and  BA  (deprivation  of
        citizenship: Appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC), which are at odds  with
        the decision of the Supreme Court in Begum as the correct  approach
        and are decisions which now must be read in light of  the  guidance
        provided in Begum as to the correct test that must be applied.
    26.  The  Judge's  finding  at  [56]  clearly  shows  that  the   Judge
        reconsidered the matter fresh which is  an  erroneous  approach  in
        light of Begum.
    27. In relation to the other matters on which permission to appeal  was
        granted, the Secretary of State  asserts  the  Judge  undertook  an
        erroneous approach when considering the grant of ILR in finding  at
        [43] that the deception as to the appellant's true identity,  based
        upon his failing to  disclose  his  correct  nationality,  was  not
        material to the grant of ILR. At [37 - 43] the Judge writes:

        "37.      It was not disputed that the grant of indefinite leave to
             remain was made under the legacy exercise and I  find  that  it
             was based on the questionnaire  he  completed  and  the  letter
             granting  leave.  The  legacy  exercise  was  the  respondent's
             solution to a large backlog of human rights  and  asylum  cases
             identified by the end of 2006. The backlog consisted of initial
             claims that had not been considered as well as a  large  number
             of cases where the claims had been considered and refused,  but
             the applicant had remained in the United Kingdom.


        38.  There was discussion in Hakemi & Ors v SSHD [2012]  EWHC  1967
             (Admin) about the criteria for a grant of leave to remain under
             the legacy exercise. It was not disputed that Chapter 53 of the
             Enforcement Instructions and Guidance (EIG)  provided  guidance
             to caseworkers on how legacy cases were  to  be  considered.  A
             person's nationality had no bearing on consideration of  legacy
             cases.  The  Case  Resolution  Directorate  was   a   team   of
             caseworkers specifically constituted to consider  legacy  cases
             (see paragraph 1 of Hakemi). The letter, granting the appellant
             indefinite leave to remain originated from CRT Legacy South 14,
             which I understand to be a  team  within  the  Case  Resolution
             Directorate.


        39.  As was seen in Hakimi caseworkers  were  instructed  to  place
             weight  on  the  delay  in  cases  where  delay  by  UKBA   has
             contributed to a significant period of residence. Following  an
             individual assessment of the prospect of enforcing removal, and
             where  other  relevant  factors  applied,  4-6  years  may   be
             considered significant, but a more usual  example  would  be  a
             period of residence of 6-8  years.  In  the  appellant's  case,
             there was some delay in the consideration of his asylum  claim.
             He claimed asylum in  November  1998  and  did  not  receive  a
             decision until April 2001, some two and a half years later. His
             appeal took approximately six months to be determined.


        40.  There was  no  evidence  before  me  that  the  appellant  was
             responsible for the time it took for his  asylum  claim  to  be
             considered. At the time  his  case  was  considered  under  the
             legacy exercise. The appellant had been present in  the  United
             Kingdom for just short of twelve years. Although  it  does  not
             appear that he made any application to regularise  his  status,
             there was no evidence before me that the appellant deliberately
             evaded immigration control during this period.


        41.  While  I  accept  that  had  the  respondent  known  that  the
             appellant was from Albania she may  well  have  considered  his
             asylum claim or promptly, and he would have been liable  to  be
             removed, there is no guarantee that the respondent  would  have
             in fact removed him either then or at any point  up  until  she
             granted him indefinite leave to remain. As I have found,  there
             is no evidence she attempted  to  remove  him  to  Kosovo,  the
             country of which she believed he was  a  national  despite  the
             fact that the situation there had changed for the better.


        42.  That there is no guarantee the appellant could or  would  have
             been removed even had his true nationality been known from  the
             outset is supported by the existence of  the  legacy  exercise.
             The need for this arose directly  as  a  result  of  the  large
             number of unresolved cases/large number of people whose initial
             claims had  been  refused,  but  who  remained  in  the  United
             Kingdom.


        43.  These reasons, I do not  accept  the  respondent's  submission
             that the appellant's nationality was material to the  grant  of
             indefinite leave to remain."

    28. Any suggestion or inference by the Judge that the Legacy  programme
        was an amnesty and that anybody who entered the United  Kingdom  at
        the relevant time, even if they  provided  a  false  identity,  was
        entitled to ILR under such a scheme,  is  legally  flawed.  It  was
        specifically found in Hakemi at [4] that the Legacy  programme  was
        not an amnesty and that grants under the Legacy scheme were made by
        reference to paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules, which at that
        time was in force, even though it was deleted on 12 February 2012.
    29. Paragraph 395C set out certain factors the  UK  Border  Agency  was
        required to consider before making a  decision  to  remove  someone
        from the UK. Those factors were:

        ( the person's age


        ( how long he or she has been living in the UK


        ( any ties he or she may have to the  UK  (e.g.  family,  work  and
        other associations)


        ( his or her personal history  (including  character,  conduct  and
        employment record)


        ( his or her domestic circumstances


        ( any criminal record


        ( any compassionate circumstances


        ( any representations made to the UK Border Agency on the  person's
        behalf.

    30. Although Mr Sellwood argued that reference to  the  Rules  was  not
        relevant as  status was granted outside  the  Rules,  whether  such
        status would have been granted had the  truth  been  known  to  the
        decision maker was doubted by the Judge contrary to  the  Secretary
        of States assertion in the  refusal  letter  that  she  would  have
        refused  had  she  known.  As  part  of  the  Legacy  programme  an
        individual's character,  including  conduct  would  be  taken  into
        account. Had the Secretary of State's representative been aware  at
        that point in time that Mr Ismalaj had lied about  his  nationality
        for the purposes of deliberately obtaining an immigration advantage
        it cannot be said that he would have  succeeded with a grant  under
        the Legacy programme of ILR.
    31. There does not appear to be any consideration  by  the  Judge  when
        examining the Legacy grant of ILR that it was likely to have failed
        if the Secretary of State was aware of either the  fraud  contained
        within the Legacy questionnaire or  Mr  Ismalaj's  previous  asylum
        application. The Secretary of State in her grounds refers  to  [36]
        of Hakemi where an extract of Chapter 53  of  the  Policy  Guidance
        confirms that "case owners must also take account of  any  evidence
        of deception practised at any stage of the process..."
    32. It must also be remembered in  this,  as  in  most  similar  cases,
        whilst ILR was granted under the Legacy scheme on the basis of  the
        content of Mr Ismalaj's  Legacy  questionnaire,  knowledge  of  his
        fraud did not come to light until nine years after Mr  Ismalaj  was
        granted ILR, and it cannot be argued on his behalf that  the  grant
        was a holistic assessment of all the relevant facts appertaining to
        Mr Ismalaj when the fraud was not known to the decision  maker  and
        could not be taken into account.
    33. In relation to the delay issue, the Judge fails to provide adequate
        reasons in support of her finding at [40] that the  delay  of  2  �
        years, whilst the appellant was waiting for  his  asylum  decision,
        was  not  his  fault.  There  is  merit  in  the  Secretary  States
        submission  that  had  the  appellant  told  the  truth  about  his
        nationality when he entered the United Kingdom, he would have  been
        unable to make an asylum application upon the basis  of  his  false
        claim to be a national of Kosovo in the first place. It is also the
        case that the Judge's  finding  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
        appellant  deliberately  evaded  immigration  control  during   the
        relevant period in the same paragraph is perverse. Not only did the
        appellant enter the United Kingdom unlawfully without seeking leave
        to do so, but also failed to approach the  Secretary  of  State  to
        disclose his true identity  and  nationality,  continually  seeking
        status and leave to remain on the basis of a false premise  in  his
        deliberate deception.
    34. I find there is merit in the Secretary of State's argument that the
        Judge's finding that Mr Ismalaj's fraud was immaterial to the grant
        of  ILR  is  unsustainable  and  that  the  finding  at  [43]  that
        nationality was not material to the grant of ILR is unsafe as it is
        a finding that conflating fraud with nationality.
    35. The finding at [56] set out above, is  also  infected  by  material
        legal error in relation to the finding fraud was immaterial to  the
        grant of citizenship.
    36. When considering the Judges reliance upon the decision  in  Sleiman
        the particular issues arising from  that  case,  identified  above,
        must be taken into account. It is an important factor that in  that
        case the Secretary of State's representative did  not  submit  that
        deception was relevant to the grant of ILR, whereas in this current
        case she has in the depravation decision letter and in the  appeal.
        It is central to the Secretary of State's case in relation to  both
        the grant of ILR and citizenship. This is clear from  [28]  of  the
        decision letter.  The 'bad character' argument is at the forefront,
        whereas it was not in Sleiman. The chain of causation identified by
        the Upper Tribunal in Sleiman was recognised as being broken  by  a
        concession by the Secretary of State and not  the  grant  of  leave
        under the Legacy Programme. The Judge fails  to  adequately  reason
        within the decision as to how such a proposition is  applicable  on
        the facts of this appeal.
    37. Reference by the Judge to Chapter 55, with  specific  reference  to
        55.7.3 and 55.7.4 at [49] and [50] in  addition  to  chapter  18.at
        [51] and [52] is flawed, as 55.7.4 focuses upon previous  fraud  in
        the context where a grant is given under  a  concessionary  policy,
        not in relation to fraud within an application notice itself, as is
        present within this appeal. The decision is also undermined by  the
        Secretary of State's argument that concessionary policies  are  not
        amnesties, and neither was the Legacy programme, nor the family ILR
        concessionary policy referred to in 55.7.4/deception/character  and
        conduct at the time  and  consideration.  There  is  merit  in  the
        argument that as that key element was missing the reference by  the
        Judge in the application of such material is infected  by  material
        legal error.
    38. Chapter 18 of the Good Character Policy relied on by the  Judge  at
        [51] refers to caseworkers counting heavily  against  an  applicant
        any attempt  to  conceal  the  truth  about  any  matter  in  their
        application for naturalisation. There is merit in the Secretary  of
        States argument  that  had  Judge  appropriate  considered  matters
        properly, the application under the  Legacy  programme  would  have
        been refused on account of the fraud  relied  upon  in  support  of
        Ground 1, and it would not have been open to the Judge to find that
        the deception was immaterial.
    39. Whilst Mr Sellwood argued that the deception was  not  material  to
        the grant of  citizenship  as  the  grant  of  settlement  was  the
        springboard to citizenship, this does not assist where the grant of
        settlement (ILR) is infected by  an  incorrect  interpretation  and
        application of the principles under Legacy  programme  'policy'  in
        light  of  the  fact  the  decision-maker  being  unaware  of   the
        deliberate deception and concealment by Mr Ismalaj.
    40. The Secretary States decision, which was challenged in  the  appeal
        took all these matters into account as they were now known  and  it
        has not  been  made  out  the  conclusion  contained  therein,  the
        decision to  deprive,  is  irrational,  unlawful,  reached  without
        considering all the material with the required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny, perverse, or outside the  range  of  findings  reasonably
        open to the decision-maker.
    41. As in all cases of this nature, there is a  chain  of  events,  the
        chain of causation, and it is clear  that  at  the  material  stage
        within the chain of causation, namely  when  ILR  was  granted,  Mr
        Ismalaj's active deceit was a material factor which, had the  truth
        been known at the time, is likely to have led to a refusal  of  the
        application under the Legacy programme pursuant to  paragraph  353C
        character/conduct element.
    42. Mr Sellwood's submissions do not overcome  the  concerns  regarding
        the findings that delay strengthened the  argument  for  the  grant
        under the Legacy programme when such a  fundamental  aspect  of  Mr
        Ismalaj's true identity was not known to the decision-maker.
    43. It is not disputed the Judge looked at the issues that are recorded
        in the determination but even before Begum  confirmed  the  correct
        approach there is  arguable  merit  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
        grounds that warrants a finding the Judge has erred  in  law  in  a
        manner material to the decision to allow the appeal.  Applying  the
        principles set out in Begum a further error is  identified  in  the
        approach taken by the Judge in remaking the decision for herself. I
        find the Secretary of State  has  established  that  the  deception
        exercised by Mr Ismalaj had a material impact upon the grant of ILR
        and the resultant grant of citizenship.
    44. No exceptional circumstances are made out such as  to  warrant  the
        decision being permitted to stand in any event.
    45. The Secretary of State in the decision  letter  of  9  March  2020,
        considered the deprivation decision, but not  Article  8  ECHR.  In
        relation to Article 8 ECHR the Upper Tribunal found in Hysaj (UT):

        "117.     Significant weight  is  to  be  placed  upon  the  public
        interest in a person who has obtained British  citizenship  through
        fraud, false representation or concealment of a material fact being
        deprived of that status and the Tribunal is to be mindful  that  it
        is the respondent who is primarily responsible for determining  and
        safeguarding the public interest in maintaining  the  integrity  of
        the rights flowing from British citizenship.


        118. The exercise of discretion is to be approached  on  the  basis
        that deprivation of citizenship involves interference with a  right
        and that any  such  interference  should  be  no  greater  than  is
        necessary to achieve the legitimate aim  of  the  interference.  In
        this matter, the issue  is  as  to  deprivation,  and  whether  the
        appellant will be deported or removed  is  not  determined  by  the
        deprivation appeal. Upon the conclusion of the appeal  process,  he
        will remain in this country and continue to reside with his family.
        The appellant will await a further decision as to whether he is  to
        be deported or be permitted to remain in this country, and he  will
        enjoy a further right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  against
        a decision to refuse  a  human  rights  or  protection  claim.  The
        children's best interests are in staying  in  a  family  unit  with
        their parents, which they will continue  to  do  upon  deprivation.
        That the family unit may have to move accommodation or  enjoy  more
        limited financial resources  is  not  such  as  to  come  close  to
        defeating the significant public interest in  the  appellant  being
        deprived of his British citizenship. The Tribunal held in BA that
        consequent to such weight, where statelessness is not in  issue  it
        is likely to be only in a rare case that  the  ECHR  or  some  very
        compelling feature will  require  an  appeal  to  be  allowed.  The
        circumstances in such a  case  would  normally  be  exceptional  in
        nature. We find that the Judge did not apply the  wrong  test  when
        considering  proportionality  and  article  8.  She  was  employing
        exceptionality as a predictive  device,  rather  than  a  threshold
        test."

    46. The issue of statelessness has not been raised in this  appeal  and
        as with the appellant in Hysaj (UT), there is  no  suggestion  that
        the consequence of the deprivation decision will be other than that
        Mr Ismalaj remaining in the United Kingdom with his family awaiting
        a further decision from the Secretary of State.
    47. It is noted that  it  was  also  found  in  Hysaj  (UT)  that  upon
        deprivation of British citizenship there is no automatic revival of
        previously  held  indefinite  leave  to  remain  status  which   is
        determinative of this issue too.
    48. I find in addition to finding  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
        erred in law I find it has not been  established  on  the  evidence
        that there is legal error in  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
        States to deprive Mr Ismalaj of  his  British  citizenship  on  the
        facts as found.  The Article 8 issue will have to be considered  by
        the Secretary of State at the earliest opportunity  which  has  not
        happened to date. On the basis  of  the  matters  relevant  to  the
        challenge at this point in time the only decision  reasonably  open
        to a Tribunal is for the appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
        deprivation of citizenship decision to be dismissed.  The  decision
        is not irrational or outside the range of those reasonably open  to
        the decision maker on the facts or in law or  can  be  impugned  on
        public law grounds or otherwise. I therefore substitute a  decision
        to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

    49. The Judge materially erred in law. I  set  the  decision  aside.  I
        substitute a decision to dismiss the appeal.

   Anonymity.


    50. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 22 July 2021

