
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00007/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2016                          |On 24 January 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ARMAND FERUNI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Jacobs, Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Twydell promulgated on 20th October 2016.  The appellant before  me  is
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  the  respondent  to
    this appeal, is Mr Feruni.  However, for  ease  of  reference,  in  the
    course of this determination I shall adopt the parties'  status  as  it
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I shall in this decision, refer to
    Mr Feruni  as  the  appellant,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.


 2. The underlying decision that was the subject of the appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was the decision of the respondent dated  8th  June
    2016.  That  was  a  decision  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  British
    citizenship.  The respondent set out the background to her decision  at
    paragraphs [2] to [9] of her decision letter.  The respondent's  letter
    sets out the appellant's immigration history  and  paragraph  [10]  the
    letter states:


         "You failed  to  declare  your  previous  identity,  residence  and
         marriage in the UK on your application form for British citizenship
         and therefore this information wasn't available to  the  caseworker
         at the  time  they  granted  you  British  citizenship.   Had  this
         information been  available  to  the  caseworker  they  would  have
         refused you British citizenship as  you  would  not  have  met  the
         requirement for good character."


 3. The appellant had originally entered the UK in 1999 using the identity,
    Besim Jashari, claiming that he was born in Kosovo on 4th May 1973.  He
    was granted 12 months' exceptional leave to  remain  on  3rd  September
    1999.  The appellant then used the identity,  Armand  Feruni,  born  in
    Albania on 10th May 1975 to apply for entry clearance as a spouse.   He
    was granted entry clearance for two years and following  the  grant  of
    indefinite  leave  to  remain,  secured  British  Citizenship  in  that
    identity.


 4. A copy of the appellant's application for naturalisation as  a  British
    Citizen is in the papers  before  me  and  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Annex H of the respondent's bundle.  The  application  form
    asks  at  question  1.1;  -  "Please  give  previous  Immigration   and
    Nationality Directorate  or  Border  and  Immigration  Agency  or  UKBA
    reference numbers".  No such information was provided by the appellant.
     The relevant box was left blank by the appellant.  The form goes on to
    ask at question 1.8; "If you are or have ever been known by any name or
    names apart from those mentioned above,  please  give  details  here.".
    Again, no such information  was  provided  by  the  appellant  and  the
    relevant box was left blank by the appellant.  Further on,  at  section
    1.37 of the application form the appellant was  asked  to  provide  the
    "full name or previous husband or wife or civil partner".   In  answer,
    the appellant noted some information about a previous relationship.


 5. There was plainly an issue  between  the  parties  as  to  whether  the
    disclosure of information as to  the  previous  identity  used  by  the
    appellant  would  have  made  a  difference  to  the  outcome  of   his
    application for naturalisation as a British  citizen.   That  is  clear
    from the terms of paragraph [10] of the respondent's decision letter.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  is  very  brief.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge sets out at paragraphs  [3]  to  [5]  of  her
    decision, the conduct of the proceedings and the  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the parties.  The  decision  itself  is  dealt  with  in  the
    briefest terms and simply says this:


         "In light of the submissions made  by  the  appellant  relating  to
         Annex D, Chapter 18 of the Nationality Instructions as detailed  in
         the appellant's representative's skeleton argument set out above, I
         allow this appeal."


 7.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  before  her  a   detailed   and
    comprehensive skeleton argument submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant
    and  settled  by  the  appellant's  Counsel.   That  referred  to   the
    Nationality and Immigration Directorate's Instructions as they were, in
    2009 when the appellant made his application for  naturalisation  as  a
    British Citizen.  The difficulty is that when one reads the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal, beyond the reference to the 2009 instructions,
    it is difficult establish the basis upon which the Judge  came  to  her
    decision.  There are no findings of fact.  Findings of fact are  likely
    to have been of some importance.  There was a letter before the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  from  Karis  Law  dated  9th  May  2006,   which
    accompanied the application made by the appellant for  entry  clearance
    to join his spouse.  In that covering letter there was full  disclosure
    of the appellant's past immigration  history,  and  unsavoury  as  that
    might have been, the Judge does not appear to engage with that  letter,
    or to consider the matters set out, in light of what was  said  by  the
    respondent at paragraph [10] of the respondent's decision letter.


   8. The respondent's grounds of appeal  are  twofold.   First,  the  Judge
      erred in relying upon the 2009 Nationality Instructions as  the  basis
      for allowing the appellant's appeal against the  decision  to  deprive
      the appellant of his British citizenship.  Second, the Judge failed to
      properly  outline  the  law  and  give  any  reasons  as  to  why  the
      submissions made on behalf of the appellant were accepted without  any
      consideration  of  the  respondent's  case  that  the  disclosure   of
      information as to the previous identity used by  the  appellant  would
      have  made  a  difference  to  the  outcome  of  his  application  for
      naturalisation as a British citizen.  The respondent had  stated  that
      had this information been available to the caseworker they would  have
      refused the appellant British citizenship as he would not have met the
      requirement for good character.


   9. It is now well established that what is required in a decision is that
      the reasons provided must give sufficient detail to show  the  parties
      and the appellate  Tribunal,  the  principles  upon  which  the  lower
      tribunal has acted, and the reasons that led it to  its  decision,  so
      that they are able to understand why  it  reached  its  decision.  The
      reasons need not be elaborate, and need not deal with  every  argument
      presented.


  10. In R (Iran) & Ors -v- SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, the  Court  of  Appeal
      drew together the threads of the approach to be adopted in cases where
      it is claimed that there is an error of law in the Tribunal's approach
      to the evidence.   Lord  Justice  Brooke  confirmed  at  [90]  that  a
      decision should not be set aside for inadequacy of reasons unless  the
      Judge failed to identify and record the matters that were critical  to
      the decision on material issues, in such  a  way  that  the  appellate
      Tribunal was unable to understand why the Judge reached that decision.


  11. There was plainly a duty upon the Judge to give sufficient reasons and
      to explain the findings that she reached so that the parties know  why
      either one of them has succeeded or lost the appeal. The judge has not
      made findings or adequately explained her reasons, so that neither the
      respondent nor this Tribunal can be satisfied that the Judge  had  the
      correct requirements in mind. In those circumstances, in  my  judgment
      there is a material error of law and the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal is set aside.


  12. The decision needs to be  re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
      appropriate to remit this appeal  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      having considered paragraph 7.2 of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement of 25th September 2012.  In  my  view  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 7.2(b) apply, in that the nature and extent of any  judicial
      fact-finding necessary, make it appropriate to remit the  matter.  The
      parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing
      in due course.


Notice of Decision


13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


14. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


I set aside the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have  remitted
the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.  No fee award  is  made  by  the
Upper Tribunal.  This is to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

