
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00051/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |On 21 October 2020                   |
|via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 7 October 2020                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                 SOCKOL DACI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kerr, Karis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 5 December  1982.
    He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 27  September  2018  to  deprive  him  of  the
    British  nationality  pursuant  to  section  40(3)   of   the   British
    Nationality  Act  1981.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 11 July 2019, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing on 7 October 2020, Mr Kerr, who appeared for the
    appellant, told me that he did not seek to make submissions beyond what
    had been pleaded in the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.  His
    reason for telling me this was that, since permission had  been  given,
    the Upper Tribunal had promulgated its decision in  Hysaj  (Deprivation
    of Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT 128  (IAC).  The  headnote  of  Hsaj
    reads as follows:

         1.   The starting point in  any  consideration  undertaken  by  the
         Secretary of State ("the respondent") as to whether  to  deprive  a
         person of British citizenship must be  made  by  reference  to  the
         rules and policy in force at the time the decision is made. Rule of
         law values indicate that the respondent is entitled to take  advice
         and act in light of the state of law and the circumstances known to
         her. The benefit of hindsight, post the Supreme Court judgment in R
         (Hysaj) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  UKSC
         82,  does  not  lessen  the  significant  public  interest  in  the
         deprivation  of  British  citizenship  acquired  through  fraud  or
         deception.

         2.   No legitimate expectation  arises  that  consideration  as  to
         whether or not to deprive citizenship is to be  undertaken  by  the
         application of a historic policy that was in  place  prior  to  the
         judgment of the Supreme Court in Hysaj.

         3.   No historic injustice is capable of arising  in  circumstances
         where the respondent erroneously declared British citizenship to be
         a nullity, rather than seek to deprive under section 40(3)  of  the
         British Nationality Act 1981, as no prejudice arises because it  is
         not possible to establish that a decision to  deprive  should  have
         been taken under a specific policy  within  a  specific  period  of
         time.

         4.   The respondent's  14-year  policy  under  her  deprivation  of
         citizenship policy, which was withdrawn on 20 August 2014,  applied
         a  continuous  residence  requirement  that  was  broken   by   the
         imposition of a custodial sentence.

         5.   A refugee is to meet the requirement of article 1A(2)  of  the
         1951 UN  Refugee  Convention  and  a  person  cannot  have  enjoyed
         Convention status if recognition  was  consequent  to  an  entirely
         false presentation as to a well-founded fear of persecution.

         6.   Upon deprivation of British citizenship, there is no automatic
         revival of previously held indefinite leave to remain status.

         7.   There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the public  interest
         in maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  system  by  which  foreign
         nationals are naturalised and permitted to enjoy  the  benefits  of
         British citizenship. Any effect on day-to-day life that may  result
         from  a  person  being  deprived  of  British  citizenship   is   a
         consequence of the that person's fraud or  deception  and,  without
         more, cannot tip the proportionality balance, so as to  compel  the
         respondent to grant a period of leave, whether short or otherwise.

 3. Mr Kerr acknowledged that facts in Hsaj  were  'extremely  similar'  to
    those in the instant appeal and that the legal issues  which  arose  in
    the instant appeal had been decided in Hsaj such that his client  could
    not succeed. The appellant had resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  14
    years by June 2013 and had sought to rely upon  a  Home  Office  policy
    which had been withdrawn as from 20 August 2014. He sought to  rely  on
    the same arguments concerning that policy which the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Hsaj had specifically  rejected  (see  headnote  (3)  above).  Mr  Kerr
    submitted that the Upper Tribunal had erred in law in Hysaj; he told me
    that the representatives of the appellant in  Hysaj  were  pursuing  an
    appeal to the Court of Appeal.

 4. In the light of Mr Kerr's helpful submissions, I  shall  be  brief.  In
    dismissing the appeal, I record Mr Kerr's submission  that  his  client
    only fails on account of the decision in Hsaj which  he  maintains  was
    decided incorrectly.  I am, however, required to decide this appeal  by
    reference to the law as it stands today. Moreover, I was not  asked  to
    decide this appeal by rejecting the interpretation of the  law  reached
    by the Presidential panel of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Hysaj.  In  the
    circumstances, I dismiss the appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.




    Signed   Date 9 October 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


