
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00037/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2021                            |On 25 June 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Aram Rasol ali
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Patel, Counsel instructed by RZZ Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I have already found an error of  law  in  this  case  and  gave  my
       reasons in a Decision  and  Reasons  dated  24  September  2020.   I
       incorporate those reasons into this Decision and Reasons by  way  of
       an appendix. The decision in September was  given  as  an  extempore
       judgement and I offer that as a weak explanation  for  some  of  its
       syntactical shortcomings. There I explain  that  the  respondent  is
       referred to as "the claimant" and the appellant as the "Secretary of
       State".

    2. I have set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
       directed that the appeal  be  redetermined  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
       before me and that is what I now set out to do.

    3. I have been considerably assisted by skeleton  arguments  from  both
       representatives.

    4. On 16 April 2002 the claimant was given exceptional leave to  remain
       in the United Kingdom.  He  was  later  given  Indefinite  Leave  to
       Remain. On 4 December 2007  he  was  given  British  citizenship  by
       naturalisation. This is an appeal against a decision on 4 April 2019
       to deprive the claimant of his  British  citizenship  under  Section
       40(3) of the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.  Such  decisions  are
       appealable to the First-tier Tribunal and in appropriate cases  with
       leave, to the Upper Tribunal. It is for the Secretary  of  State  to
       show that the claimant's conduct  comes  within  the  scope  of  the
       section.

    5. As was explained in Pirzada  (Deprivation  of  citizenship:  general
       principles) [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC) the restrictions on the rights  of
       appeal imposed by Section 84 of  the  Immigration,  Nationality  and
       Asylum Act 2002 do not apply to appeals  against  a  decision  under
       Section 40 of the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.  Rather,  as  is
       explained in the headnote in Pirzada:

  "The grounds of appeal  are,  however,  limited  by  the  formulation  of
  Section 40 and must be directed  to  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's
  decision was in fact empowered by that Section."

    6. However, the decision in Pirzada was criticised in  BA  (deprivation
       of  citizenship:  appeals)  [2018]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)   which   was
       promulgated on 21 November 2017 and was clearly authoritative when I
       heard this appeal on 8 February 2021. I set out below  the  headnote
       in BA:

  (1) In an appeal under section 40A of the British Nationality  Act  1981,
  the  Tribunal  must  first  establish  whether  the  relevant   condition
  precedent in section  40(2)  or  (3)  exists  for  the  exercise  of  the
  Secretary of State's discretion  to  deprive  a  person  (P)  of  British
  citizenship.

  (2) In a section 40(2) case, the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
  satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public good is to be given
  very significant weight and will almost inevitably  be  determinative  of
  that issue.

  (3) In a section 40(3) case, the Tribunal must establish whether  one  or
  more of the means described in subsection (3)(a), (b) and (c)  were  used
  by P  in  order  to  obtain  British  citizenship.  As  held  in  Pirzada
  (Deprivation of citizenship: general principles) [2017]  UKUT  196  (IAC)
  the deception must have motivated the acquisition of that citizenship.

  (4) In both section 40(2) and (3) cases, the fact that the  Secretary  of
  State has decided in the exercise of  her  discretion  to  deprive  P  of
  British citizenship will in practice mean  the  Tribunal  can  allow  P's
  appeal only if satisfied that the reasonably foreseeable  consequence  of
  deprivation  would  violate  the  obligations  of  the   United   Kingdom
  government under the Human Rights Act 1998  and/or  that  there  is  some
  exceptional feature of  the  case  which  means  the  discretion  in  the
  subsection concerned should be exercised differently.

  (5) As can be seen from AB (British citizenship: deprivation:  Deliallisi
  considered) (Nigeria) [2016]  UKUT  451  (IAC),  the  stronger  P's  case
  appears to the Tribunal to be for resisting any future (post-deprivation)
  removal on ECHR grounds, the less likely it will be that P's removal from
  the United Kingdom  will  be  one  of  the  foreseeable  consequences  of
  deprivation.

  (6) The appeal is to be determined by reference to the  evidence  adduced
  to the Tribunal,  whether  or  not  the  same  evidence  was  before  the
  Secretary of State when she made her decision to deprive.

    7. On 26 February 2021 the Supreme Court handed down its  judgement  in
       Begum (Respondent) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       (Appellant) [2021] UKSC 7.

    8. It is quite plain that, following Begum, the authority of BA is,  at
       the   very   least,   arguably   diminished.   I   have   considered
       reconstituting the Tribunal for further submissions  but  I  see  no
       point as, for reasons that I will explained below, I can see no  way
       in which the approach that I have decided is required by Begum could
       make any difference to the outcome in this case.

    9. Although Begum concerned the deprivation of British citizenship  the
       appeal began in the  Special  Immigration  Appeals  Commission  and,
       although subject  to  the  statute  that  created  it  and  its  own
       procedure rules, proceedings in SIAC are a kind of judicial  review.
       Unlike the instant appeal, which is brought against a decision  made
       under Section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981the  decision
       that in was  challenged  in  Begum  was  made  under  Section  40(2)
       (conducive to the public good). Giving the judgement  of  the  whole
       court, Lord Reed at paragraph 69 said:

  "So, for example, in appeals under section 2B of  the  1997  Act  against
  decisions made under section 40(2) of the 1981 Act, the principles to  be
  applied by SIAC in reviewing the Secretary of  State's  exercise  of  his
  discretion are largely the same as  those  applicable  in  administrative
  law, as I have explained. But if a question  arises  as  to  whether  the
  Secretary of State has acted incompatibly with the appellant's Convention
  rights, contrary to section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act,  SIAC  has  to
  determine that matter objectively on the basis of its own assessment."

   10. In other words, SIAC should not decide for itself if "deprivation is
       conducive to the public good" but if  the  Secretary  of  State  was
       entitled to reach that conclusion on the material before  her.  This
       contrasts with  the  approach  required  by  BA  which  began  as  a
       statutory appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision under
       Section 40(3) of the 1981 Act.

   11. This provides:

  "(3)   The Secretary of  State  may  by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
  citizenship status which results from his registration or  naturalisation
  if  the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the  registration  or
  naturalisation was obtained by means of -
     (a) fraud,
     (b) false representations, or
     (c) concealment of a material fact."

   12. Having reflected on the point, I find that BA is  no  longer  to  be
       followed. At paragraph 45 of Begum Lord Reed said that BA was  based
       on a misapplication of authority. That must undermine  the  decision
       as a whole. Lord Reed then went on to illustrate how  categories  of
       appeals generally require different approaches depending on how  the
       appeal come about. There is nothing inherently troubling  about  the
       Tribunal having different  tasks  in  different  appeals  that  come
       before it.

   13. In  this  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State  must  satisfy  me  that
       claimant's  British  citizenship  was  obtained  by   fraud,   false
       representations or concealment of a material fact but if I do  then,
       unless the subsequent decision to deprive the claimant of his status
       is irrational or otherwise wrong in public law, or contrary  to  the
       United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on  Human
       Rights, I must dismiss the appeal.

   14. When I heard the appeal it was settled law that  when  redetermining
       the appeal I had to decide if the  condition  precedent  to  justify
       deprivation  had  been  established  and,  additionally,   how   the
       discretion whether or not to deprive the claimant if his citizenship
       should be exercised.

   15. It was made clear  in  BA  that  once  the  condition  precedent  is
       established, (ignoring human rights issues)  the  appeal  should  be
       dismissed unless there is "some  exceptional  feature  of  the  case
       which means the discretion in the  subsection  concerned  should  be
       exercised differently" (headnote paragraph 4). In reality I doubt if
       there are many cases that  will  be  decided  differently  if  Begum
       rather than BA is followed. Although I find that BA  should  not  be
       followed I  explain  below  that  I  would  have  reached  the  came
       conclusion if BA was binding.

   16. The Notice of Decision shows  that  the  appellant  arrived  in  the
       United Kingdom clandestinely on 18 February 2002 and claimed asylum.
        He said (falsely) that his name is Aram Rasol Ali and that  he  was
       born in Kirkuk in Iraq on 1 April 1976.  The  claimant  was  refused
       asylum on 16 April 2002 but also on 16 April  2002  he  was  granted
       exceptional leave to remain for four years. After  completing  those
       four years he was given indefinite leave to remain  and  then  on  4
       December 2007  he  was  granted  naturalisation.   He  was  given  a
       passport in his false name on 31 December 2007.

   17. In his witness statement, which is undated but provided through  his
       solicitors, the appellant said that he was born in  Kirkuk  but  his
       Iraqi nationality card gave  his  place  of  birth  wrongly  as  the
       governorate of Sulaymaniyah. I find that it does not matter if  that
       is where he was born. The point is that his identity card show  that
       he comes from Sulaymaniyah. It follows that he  would  not  need  to
       return to Kirkuk.

   18. It is now clear beyond all possible argument that the  appellant  is
       Aram Rasol Ali who was born on 1 April  1976.   He  has  been  frank
       about this use of false identity and there is no argument before  me
       to suggest that the original identity was other than false.

   19. He has clearly used deception. It does not necessarily  follow  that
       the deception led to the grant of leave. Ms Patel submitted that the
       deception was not material to the decision to grant leave.

   20. In his skeleton argument Mr Clarke asserts  that  the  Secretary  of
       State  would  have  refused  the  citizenship  application  if   the
       Secretary of State had known that  the  claimant's  leave  had  been
       obtained in a false identity, the claimant having made false  claims
       about his name and date of birth.

   21. This is supported by a policy instruction identified in the  in  the
       Secretary of State's Skeleton Argument as "Chapter 55".  It states:

  55.7   Material to the Acquisition of Citizenship

  55.7.1 If the relevant facts,  had  they  been  known  at  the  time  the
  application for citizenship  was  considered,  would  have  affected  the
  decision to grant citizenship  via  naturalisation  or  registration  the
  caseworker should consider deprivation.

  55.7.2.2    This will include but is not limited to:

      False  details  given  in  relation  to  an  immigration  or   asylum
  application, which led to that    status being  given  to  a  person  who
  would not otherwise have  qualified,  and  so  would  have    affected  a
  person's ability to meet the residence and/or good character requirements
  for    naturalisation or registration.

   22. The skeleton argument goes on to explain that a person who has  lied
       about his or her identity would not normally be considered a  person
       of good character.

   23. The Notice of Decision to Deprive is quite clear.  At paragraph 9 it
       asserts that if the claimant had not pretended  to  have  come  from
       Kirkuk he would have not obtained exceptional leave to remain and so
       would not have been on a route  that  led  to  indefinite  leave  to
       remain and ultimately naturalisation.  It is explained at  paragraph
       9 that had the claimant been frank about his origins:

  "the likelihood is that you would have been considered for  removal  upon
  the refusal of your asylum claim ... and thus would not have been present
  in the UK to obtain  ILR  and  ultimately  naturalisation  as  a  British
  citizen."

   24. It was also stated later in the same paragraph:

  "However, as it has now been established that you are  from  Bazian,  Al-
  Sulaimania, part of the Kurdish  Autonomous  Zone  (KAZ),  and  not  from
  Kirkuk, part of the Government Controlled  Area  of  Iraq  (GCI),  it  is
  therefore not accepted that your life was in danger as claimed".

   25. Ms Patel did not call evidence.   She  made  submissions.  She  said
       there  were  three  grounds.  First,  the  admitted  deception   was
       immaterial;  second,  that  discretion   should   have   been   used
       differently; and third, the impact of deprivation was too severe. As
       I understood the argument the reference to  "too  severe"  supported
       the  claimant's  contention  that  the  decision  was  an   unlawful
       interference with his "private and family life". Clearly, given  the
       time that he has been in the  United  Kingdom,  he  has  established
       significant "private and family life" but this is not a decision  to
       remove him or refuse him leave to remain. For  the  purpose  of  the
       article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  I  have  to
       consider if the decision to deprive  him  of  his  acquired  British
       citizenship is a disproportionate interference with his private  and
       family life.

   26. Ms Patel said that the appellant claimed asylum in 2002 but  he  was
       unsuccessful.   No  clear  reasons  were  given  for  his  grant  or
       exceptional leave.  The decision refusing his asylum claim said that
       the claimant could  go  to  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Area.  In  the
       circumstances there was no basis for saying that if the claimant had
       told the truth to the Secretary of State that the outcome would have
       been different. If followed, she said, that the  deception  had  not
       been shown to be material.

   27. Mr Clarke, in accordance with Directions, assembled  a  considerable
       number of possibly relevant background papers.  The one that is most
       pertinent here is entitled UK Home Office Border Agency, Iraq Policy
       Bulletin 1/2009, 12 January 2009.  At  the  risk  of  condescending,
       "GCI" is an acronym for "Government Controlled area of  Iraq".    At
       3.6 it says:

  "Although there was  no  country  specific  blanket  ELR  policy  it  was
  accepted practice that all asylum seekers  who  were  accepted  as  being
  Iraqi nationals, but who were found not to be refugees, from  April  1991
  to 20 October 2000, would be granted four years ELR arising from  factors
  such as  the  severe  penalties  imposed  on  those  who  had  left  Iraq
  illegally.  From 20 October 2000, in light of the improved conditions  in
  KAZ, only Claimants who were accepted to have come from GCI were  granted
  four years ELR".

   28. The policy then went on to say how even that concession was  reduced
       further.

   29. It follows that the claimant's leave in 2002 was likely to have been
       given directly as a consequence of  his  claim  to  have  come  from
       Kirkuk, which was part of the GCI, being  believed.  The  fact  that
       this was not spelled out in the grant is not reason to  assume  that
       the claimant had not benefitted from the relevant policy.

   30. In the absence of clear contrary evidence, I am  entirely  satisfied
       that the Secretary of State had no blanket policy of giving  ELR  in
       2002.

   31. If follows that I am satisfied that it is clear beyond argument that
       his grant of leave was on the basis of  his  deception.    There  is
       really no more to be said on that point.

   32. As I have explained above, I do not accept that I have any power  to
       consider the Secretary of State's exercise of discretion  except  on
       judicial review grounds.

   33. However, if I had the power to apply my own discretion on this point
       I would have come to the same conclusion as the Secretary of  State.
       This claimant entered the United Kingdom  and  sought  asylum  on  a
       falsehood about his place of residence in Iraq. The  United  Kingdom
       assigns considerable resources to honouring  its  obligations  under
       the Refugee Convention and  there  is  considerable  public  concern
       about the social consequences of immigration. In  order  to  promote
       confidence in the system of immigration control  and  to  discourage
       abuse, those  who  are  shown  to  have  lied  materially  in  their
       applications for protection should be seen  to  lose  any  advantage
       that they have gained. Further, it is not fair to  those  who  might
       want to establish themselves in the United Kingdom but who  are  not
       willing to lie to achieve that end that those who are known to  have
       lied are seen to prosper.

   34. It is perfectly fair to  point  out  that  the  claimant  has  lived
       responsibly, as far as we know, for seventeen years  or  so  in  the
       United Kingdom and has made a home there.  These are points that are
       relevant in the event of a decision to remove him or in the event of
       him seeking leave to remain on human rights grounds but there is  no
       removal decision in this case.  The decision is to deprive him of  a
       benefit that he would not have got if he had told the truth.

   35. I see no merit in any suggestion that the impact of deprivation  was
       too severe.  It leaves him without status in the United Kingdom  but
       that of itself does not amount to much. I accept that being  without
       status can be a very significant restrain on  a  person's  right  to
       live unhindered by the state  which  is  precisely  what  article  8
       exists to protect. However the right is qualified and there  was  no
       evidence that being without status would  be  unduly  burdensome  in
       this case. He can apply for leave to remain if he  wishes  and  then
       his human rights, or those of his family members,  if  any,  can  be
       considered fully. Similarly  any  decision  to  remove  him  can  be
       challenged on human rights grounds. The fact that  the  claimant  is
       obliged to leave the United Kingdom, or risk  living  there  without
       permission or set about making a claim for permission to remain  is,
       I find, no more than the just consequence  of  his  deception  being
       discovered. It is not in any sense, too severe.

   36. There is nothing in the "limbo position" created by depriving him of
       the citizenship he should never have had, which makes  the  decision
       wrong.

   37. I have a considerable bundle of  policy  documents  which  may  have
       proved extremely useful in different ways but the important one  has
       been identified and that satisfies me that this is a case where  the
       admitted deception was material, the subsequent decision to  deprive
       him of citizenship was clearly within the range of lawful  responses
       open to the Secretary of State (and, in  my  independent  judgement,
       appropriate in every way) and the consequences of the  decision  are
       wholly proportionate.

   38. I dismiss this appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 June 2021                   |
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00037/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 September 2020                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Aram Rasol Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Patel, Counsel instructed by RZZ Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of State to deprive him of
his British nationality.

2. This is a case where it is very easy to become confused and, if I may be
permitted the colloquialism, to lose the wood in the trees.  In an effort
to keep it simple I will summarise the case.  I hope what I say is
factually right.  It is accepted that the claimant has been given British
nationality, it is accepted that he originates from Iraq and it is accepted
that he has in his dealings with the British authorities provided a name,
date and place of birth that he knew to be false.  He has at least had the
courage to make that plain in a witness statement.

3. When the case got to the First-tier Tribunal both parties were
confronted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, having given thought to the
case, indicated that had the solution.  She referred to a case of the High
Court decided by Forbes J. and reported as Rashid [2008] EWHC 232 (Admin),
in which Forbes J., with the help of Counsel, summarised the appropriate
policy provisions relating to Iraqi asylum seekers at the material time.
According to that decision, the present claimant would have been given
everything that he was given regardless of his true date of birth,
nationality, place of origin or anything apart from being Iraqi and if that
was right then it something that may very well impact significantly on the
subsequent decision to deprive him of his nationality.  This was a new
point.  It had not occurred to either of the parties; it was not the way
the claimant's case was going to be argued and it was not the way the
Presenting Officer had come prepared to deal with it.

4. The Presenting Officer asked for an adjournment.  The Presenting Officer
had difficulty, either directly or through another, seeing a copy of the
High Court decision.  That is unfortunate but it happens sometimes in these
days with electronic communications, we have not yet reached total success
but more realistically the Presenting Officer wanted an opportunity to
consider the position carefully and no doubt take specific instructions.  I
do not think it is controversial when I say this, it is certainly my
experience, that working out what policies are in force at a particular
time can prove extraordinarily tedious and difficult and it is easy to make
mistakes.  It is not something to be done in a hurry "on the hoof".

5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge refused to grant an adjournment.  I am
satisfied, with respect, that that was clearly wrong.  When a point of this
kind is taken, and one wonders quite why a judge wants to take points of
this kind rather than leaving it for the parties, it is imperative that
both parties have every opportunity to address it and answer it if
possible.  There is an important rider to add to that.  It is that on the
face of it, it does seem that the decision in Rashid is extremely helpful
to the claimant but I am not satisfied that it is a decision that should be
relied upon for determining what policy was in force at the time.

6. In saying this I am not being disrespectful of a decision which is not
strictly binding on me but rather I recognise Forbes J was determining the
case before him, not ruling on what policies were in force at a particular
time.

7. In this appeal, which has very important consequences for the claimant,
the precise terms of the policy may well be highly material and a blanket
description that was no doubt, if I may say so respectfully, wholly
sufficient for the decision that Forbes J had to make should not
necessarily be seamlessly transferred into another decision.  It is not
what he was purporting to do and it should not be relied on for that
purpose.

8. The short point is that Mr Clarke has produced an internal document in
draft form suggesting very strongly that there was no blanket policy up to
the critical date in 2000.  Mr Clarke says that the policy changed in
October 2000 so that any cases considered after that would not benefit from
the blanket policy.  This is clearly not reconcilable immediately with the
view taken by Mr Justice Forbes.

9. Ms Patel has considered her position.  Clearly, she wants to take
advantage of the decision that has been made in her client's favour and
clearly wants to rely on the decision of the High Court which is wholly
helpful to her.  However, I am satisfied that it was wrong of the judge to
spring this on the parties and then not give an opportunity to adjourn and
I am also satisfied that it would be wrong to hold Mr Clarke to the
information he has been able to produce today without giving a further
opportunity.  I say this because the document he was able to produce was
produced at the last minute in response to something produced by the
appellant's representative the night before.  This is not criticising
anybody, it is just explaining why I am content not to insist that the case
goes ahead on the information I have got, I do not think that would be fair
to the Secretary of State and the Secretary of State is entitled to
fairness as much as anybody else.

10. It follows that I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
I direct the case be redetermined in the Upper Tribunal.  I am not going to
make tight directions because I do not find that they generally help
anybody but I am going to insist that both parties identify all documents
relied upon and produce copies in support of the policy they say that was
in force at the relevant time no later than 21 days after today (23
September 2020), not after this order is sent out and I encourage the
parties to make written submissions. I do not require them but I think it
would be helpful and hope that that can be done.

11. If it is the claimant's case that he wishes to rely on evidence that
has not been served on the Tribunal previously then he is reminded that an
appropriate application must be made.  As I said in the hearing room, I am
not closing down the possibility of further evidence from the claimant, I
am simply saying that the procedures must be followed.  I hope that is
clear.  The case will be heard by me unless exceptional circumstances
prevent that.

Notice of Decision

12. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its decision and I
direct that the appeal be redetermined in the Upper Tribunal before me.

13. I further direct that the parties identify all documents relied upon in
support of their contention that a particular policy was in force at a
particular time and serve copies on each other and on the Tribunal no later
than 5:00 pm on 14 October 2020.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 September 2020              |





