
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00036/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 May 2019                        |On 29 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                 LUAN KAZIU
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Lindsey, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Naik QC, of counsel, instructed by Appleby
Shaw

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent was born in Albania but, when he arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom in July 1997 and applied for asylum, he stated that he had been
    born in Kosovo  in  the  Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia  and  feared
    persecution on this basis. He was only 16 years old at that time and in
    March 1998 he was granted asylum.

2.   He  was  subsequently  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  was
    naturalised as a British citizen on 16 February 2005. In November 2007,
    the Respondent's wife applied for entry clearance and  submitted  their
    marriage certificate and  his  birth  certificate  in  support  of  her
    application.  This revealed that he had been born in Albania. On 13 May
    2009 the Secretary of State wrote to the Respondent indicating that she
    was considering depriving him of his nationality.  His  representatives
    made submissions on his behalf on 15 June 2009. They also sent  further
    representations in 2011 and 2012 asking about whether the Secretary  of
    State  had  yet  made  a  decision  to  deprive  him  of  his   British
    citizenship.

3.   In 2013 the Respondent visited his wife in Albania and on  13  February
    2013, the Secretary of State decided that his British citizenship was a
    nullity. This decision was issued on 21 March 2013 and  in  April  2013
    the Secretary of State refused the Respondent's wife's application  for
    entry clearance. The Respondent was refused entry and detained  on  his
    return to the United Kingdom on 14 May 2013 but released two days later
    and has remained in the United Kingdom ever since.

4.   In June  2013,  the  Respondent  filed  a  claim  for  judicial  review
    challenging the decision that his British citizenship  was  a  nullity,
    but Mr. Justice Ousley refused his application in March  2014  and  the
    Court of Appeal dismissed his subsequent appeal in November  2015.  Two
    of his fellow claimants appealed to the Supreme  Court  and  the  Court
    gave judgment in their favour in Hysaj & Others [2017] UKSC  82  on  21
    December 2017. In paragraph 2 of that judgment, the Supreme Court noted
    that the Secretary of State had now accepted the principles adopted  in
    its decision should also apply to  the  Respondent.  Therefore,  on  15
    January 2018 the Secretary of State withdrew the nullity decision taken
    in relation to the Respondent.

5.   However, the Secretary of State then made a  further  nullity  decision
    on 11 July 2018 pursuant to section 40(3) of  the  British  Nationality
    Act 1981. The Respondent appealed against this decision and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on 31
    December 2018. The Secretary of State appealed  against  this  decision
    and Upper Tribunal Judge Warr granted him permission  to  appeal  on  5
    March 2019. The Respondent lodged a Rule 24 Response on 10  April  2019
    and then filed an amended Rule 24 Response and a skeleton  argument  on
    26 April 2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on his skeleton argument  and
    the grounds of appeal. He emphasised that great weight must be given to
    the public interest in preventing crime in any case involving fraud and
    submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman had failed to do so.  He
    also submitted that at all stages up until the decision by the  Supreme
    Court the Secretary of State had been obliged to  apply  the  judgments
    given by the High Court and the Court of Appeal in the  line  of  cases
    addressing the question of when a grant of British citizenship had been
    a nullity. Counsel for the Respondent made  detailed  and  cogent  oral
    submissions in reply.  I have referred to  both  parties'  submissions,
    where relevant, in my findings below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

7.   Section 6(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981 states:


         "If, on an application for naturalisation as a British citizen made
         by a person of full age and capacity, the Secretary of State is
         satisfied that the applicant fulfils the requirements of Schedule 1
         for naturalisation, he may, if he thinks fit, grant him a
         certificate of naturalisation as such a citizen".


8.   Section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981 states that:


         "The Secretary of State may be order deprive a person of a
         citizenship status which results from his registration or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of
             (a)  fraud;
             (b)  false representation;
             (c)  concealment of the facts".


9.   Section 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981 states:


         "(1) A person who is given notice under section 40(5) of a decision
             to make an order in respect of him under section 40 may appeal
             against the decision to the First-tier Tribunal".


10.  On 21 December 2017 in R (on the application of Hysaj) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 82 the Supreme Court found
    that a grant of British citizenship was only a nullity if it arose from
    a situation of impersonation.  In particular, it noted in paragraph 16,
    that it was the Secretary of States' position that:


         "... the law took a wrong turning after [R v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department ex p Sultan Mahmood [1981] QB 58]. The Mahmood
         case involved two real people, X and Y. X impersonates Y for the
         purpose of applying for citizenship. Y has the characteristics
         required for citizenship. Y is considered by the Secretary of State
         and is granted citizenship. But Y has never applied for it, may not
         want it, or may even be dead. Thus, is cannot be said that
         citizenship has been granted either to Y or to X. Accordingly there
         was no grant of citizenship. Mahmood, in the Secretary of State's
         view, remains good law.


11.  Paragraph 17 of Hysai, states:


         "By contrast, in the later cases, X uses a false identity created
         by him (or someone on his behalf) and in that identity he acquires
         the characteristics needed to obtain citizenship. X applies for the
         citizenship using the false identity Y. But X meets the
         requirements for citizenship albeit having acquired them by using
         the false identity Y. X is considered for citizenship by the
         Secretary of State in identity Y and is granted citizenship in that
         identity. In such a case, in the Secretary of State's view, the
         grant of citizenship is valid, albeit that the person may later be
         deprived of it under section 40. [R v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department ex parte Ejaz [1994] QB 496] was rightly decided
         but [R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p Parvez
         Akhtar [1981] QB 46 and [Bibi v Entry Clearance Officer, Dhaka
         [2001] EWCA Civ 740 were wrongly decided"


12.  In paragraph 2 of the judgment the Supreme Court also stated:


         "Although there are only two appeals before this court, these cases
         were heard in the Court of Appeal along with a third case, that of
         Mr. Kaziu, which was decided on the same basis: R (Kaziu) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1195,
         [2016] 1 WLR 673. The Secretary of State therefore accepts that
         this judgment should also apply to him".


13.  The order made by the Supreme Court relating to the Respondent and one
    other also stated:


         "AND UPON the [Secretary of State] accepting that her decisions,
         dated 13 February 2013 and 27 June 2013, that the Appellants'
         British citizenships were 'nullities' (i.e. that the Appellants
         were not, and had never been, British citizens) were wrong in law".


14.  This was based on the fact that, although the Respondent had previous
    asserted that he was from Kosovo, he had given his correct name and
    date of birth and had not adopted the identity of another person who
    was entitled to British citizenship.

15.  In the order, which was dated 20 December 2017, the Secretary of State
    also accepted that the Respondent was and continued to be a British
    citizen by naturalisation under section 6(1) of the British Nationality
    Act 1981 and that this citizenship would continue unless or until a
    formal deprivation order was made pursuant to section 40(3) of the
    British Nationality Act 1981.

16.  The Secretary of State made such an order on 11 July 2018 and it is
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman's decision to uphold the Respondent's
    appeal against this decision which is the subject of the current error
    of law hearing.

17.  When considering this appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman
    correctly reminded herself, in paragraph 45 of her decision, that
    section 40(3) contained a discretionary power and that, therefore, she
    had to consider whether the decision to make a deprivation order was
    reasonable and proportionate in all the circumstances.  This accords
    with Deliallisi (British citizen: deprivation appeal: Scope) [2013]
    UKUT 000439 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal found that:


         "An appeal under section 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981
         against a decision to deprive a person of British citizenship
         requires the Tribunal to consider whether the Secretary of State's
         discretionary decision to deprive should be exercised differently.
         This will involve (but not be limited to) ECHR Article 8 issues..."


18.  In paragraph 37 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman
    noted:


         "The [Respondent] married his wife in 2007 and now has two
         children, both British citizens born in 2010 and 2013. Despite the
         fact that the fraud was known in 2009, the [Respondent] could still
         travel and see his family in Albania. However, since he was
         arrested on return in 2013, he has been unable to enjoy any family
         life for the past five years. As his youngest child was only born
         in 2013, this means the [Respondent] has only seen him on one
         occasion, which has had a huge impact both on the children and the
         [Respondent]".


19.  The Secretary of State accepts that up until 2013 the Respondent was
    able to travel to Albania to continue his family life with his wife and
    children. In his skeleton argument the Appellant submitted that the
    Respondent would have been able to travel to Albania since 2013 if he
    wished to do so. This ignores the fact that his British passport had
    been taken from him and that since that time he has been challenging
    the nullity decision and then pursuing his section 40A appeal rights,
    which required him to remain in the United Kingdom.

20.  It is clear from the chronology of this case that the Respondent's
    wife was refused entry clearance as a spouse in 2013 and that since
    that time the Respondent has not had the necessary status to sponsor
    her entry clearance in any capacity, including that of a visitor. The
    Respondent also submitted that the Respondent's children could have
    travelled to the United Kingdom, if the Respondent had applied for
    British passports for them. Clearly this opportunity would have passed
    once a nullity decision had been made on 13 February 2013. Prior to
    that date the Appellant's older child would have been at most two years
    old and his youngest child would not yet have been born.   They were
    clearly not of an age to travel without their mother and she was
    refused entry clearance in April 2013.   The inability of the
    children's mother to obtain entry clearance continued to impact even
    after the Supreme Court decision even though the Respondent has now
    applied for British passports on their behalf.

21.  Therefore, the decision made by the Secretary of State in 2013, which
    has now been found to be unlawful by the Supreme Court, prevented the
    Respondent and his wife and children enjoying a family life together
    from 2013 and amounted to a breach of Article 8(1) of the European
    Convention on Human Rights.

22.  The Secretary of State submitted that this breach was proportionate.
    In particular, he submitted that from the date of the decision in 2013
    until the date of the Supreme Court decision in Hysaj, he was obliged
    to follow the decisions reached by the Higher Courts in relation to the
    issue of nullity. However, when a decision is made by the Supreme Court
    it is declaratory of the law as it has always been. The decision does
    not just apply to similar cases which come up for consideration after
    the date of its decision.

23.   For example, in National Westminster Bank plc v Spectrum Plus Limited
    & others & others [2005] UKHL 41, Lord Nichols noted at paragraph 12
    that:


         "Prospective overruling has not yet been adopted as a practice in
         this country. The traditional approach was stated crisply by Lord
         Reid in West Midland Baptist (Trust) Association Inc v Birmingham
         Corporation [1970] AC 874, 898-899, a case concerning compulsory
         acquisition:


             'We cannot say that the law was one thing yesterday but is to
             be something different tomorrow. If we decide that [the
             existing rule] is wrong we must decide that it always has been
             wrong, and that would mean that in many completed transactions
             owners have received too little compensation. But that often
             happens when an existing decision is reversed.'"


24.  He also noted at paragraph 13:


         "In Launchbury v Morgans [1973] AC 127, 137, Lord Wilberforce noted
         'We cannot, without yet further innovation, change the law
         prospectively only'. More recently, in Kleinwort Benson Ltd v
         Lincoln City Council [1999] 2 AC 349, 379, Lord Goff of Chieveley
         said the system of prospective overruling 'has no place in our
         legal system'."


25.  There was discussion about whether a prospective approach would be
    more appropriate but after careful consideration, the House of Lords
    decided that the declaratory approach should be maintained.as there was
    sufficient flexibility in the Court's powers to address individual
    cases where this may not be appropriate.

26.  In the case of Hysaj the Supreme Court clearly followed the
    declaratory approach as it made an order that the Appellants' children
    were British citizens already due to the fact that their father's
    British citizenship had not been a nullity They also found that the
    fathers were and would continue to be British citizens pending any
    section 40(3) decision and any subsequent appeal.

27.  This is comparable to the decision in R v Governor of Brockhill Prison
    ex parte Evans [2001] 2 AC 19, in which a prisoner's release date,
    calculated on the basis of the law as it had been at the time, was held
    to be wrong in law. As such a decision was declaratory of the law as it
    had always been, the prisoner was able to claim damages for false
    imprisonment.

28.  As a consequence, I find that the Secretary of State cannot rely on
    the case law as it was whilst he maintained that the Respondent's
    British Citizenship had been nullified. He had to begin from the basis
    that the Supreme Court had found as a matter of law that there was no
    power to nullify the Respondent's citizenship and, therefore, he had
    continued to have British citizenship.

29.  The on-going existence of the Respondent's British citizenship and
    that of his children was, therefore, a factor to be taken into account
    when considering the proportionality of now making a decision to
    deprive the Respondent of his citizenship.  Furthermore, such a
    decision would leave the Respondent in an uncertain situation as, if he
    was deprived of his citizenship, he would become a foreign national
    with no right to remain; his previous indefinite leave to remain having
    been terminated when he became a British citizen. His two children
    remain British citizens but on the facts of the case, it was reasonably
    foreseeable that this would not automatically entitle him to leave to
    remain under the Immigration Rules. Furthermore, any application
    outside the Immigration Rules would be complicated by his children's
    ages and his and his wife's Albanian nationality and the final outcome
    of any application would be unpredictable.

30.  It was also reasonable foreseeable that at best the Respondent would
    be granted limited leave to remain for 30 months and that, therefore,
    he would not be able to sponsor his wife to join him and that this
    would mean that, even though his children are British citizens, the
    family would continue to be separated. This was not a case, as in BA
    (deprivation of citizenship: appeals) [2018] UKUT 00085 (IAC) in which
    the strength of the family life being enjoyed in the United Kingdom
    would prevent his removal in any event.

31.  It was also the case that the best interests of the Respondents'
    children to enjoy a family life with both of their parents, the delay
    and the historic injustice which had occurred distinguished the case
    from the generality of similar cases, as found by Firsts-tier Tribunal
    Judge Wyman in paragraph 54 of her decision.

32.  Before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman, the Home Office Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Secretary of State would have to make a
    decision within eight weeks and therefore there would be no period of
    limbo. Given the complexities which are likely to arise, in my opinion,
    it was not unlawful or irrational for First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman
    to note that it is known that the Secretary of State does not always
    keep to stated timescales.

33.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman also relied on the long period of
    delay which had occurred since 2007 when it first came to light that
    the Respondent was an Albanian and not a Kosovan national. Even if the
    period from 2007 to 2009 are discounted, there was then a long period
    of delay from 13 May 2009, when the Secretary of State first informed
    the Respondent that he intended to deprive him of his British
    citizenship, and the decision on 11 July 2018 to actually deprive him
    of his British citizenship.

34.  For the reasons given above, it is my view that the Secretary of State
    cannot rely on previous case law relating to the issue of nullity as a
    reason for the delay from 2013 to 2018, as this law has been declared
    to be incorrect.

35.  The Secretary of State also submitted that he was entitled to delay
    his decision from 2009 to 2013 as he was seeking to clarify the law in
    a number of other cases. However, the effect of this delay was to
    deprive the Respondent of having his appeal against deprivation heard
    during that time.

36.  If a deprivation decision had been made during that period, the
    Respondent may have benefitted from a policy then being operated by the
    Secretary of State. This policy was to be found at paragraph 55.7.2.5
    of Chapter 55 of the Nationality Instructions and stated:


         "In general, the Secretary of State will not deprive of British
         citizenship in the following circumstances:
         ...
         If a person has been resident in the United Kingdom for more than
         14years we will normally not deprive of citizenship".


37.  The Respondent entered the United Kingdom in July 1997 and, therefore,
    by July 2011 he would have been here for 14 years.

38.  In paragraph 22 of the case of Deliallisi, which was heard by the
    Upper Tribunal on 9 July 2013, the Home Office Presenting Officer;


         "confirmed what he had said in his e-mail of 27 June 2013, namely,
         that given that the two other appellants had been resident in the
         United Kingdom for fourteen years, the respondent had decided,
         pursuant to her policy in chapter 55 (Deprivation and Nullity of
         British Citizenship) of the Nationality Instructions, that it was
         not appropriate to pursue deprivation..."


39.  Counsel for the Respondent submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Wyman had been correct to find that this was an historic injustice
    which was comparable to that addressed in R (Gurung) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2013] [2013] EWCA Civ 8. At the hearing
    before me the Home Office Presenting Officer was correct to note that
    the facts of Gurung were not the same as those relied upon by the
    current Respondent. However, the principle is the same.

40.  The historic injustice in Gurung was described by the Master of the
    Rolls in paragraph 2 of his judgment as:


         "For many years, Gurkha veterans were treated less favourably than
         other comparable non-British Commonwealth soldiers serving in the
         British army. Although Commonwealth citizens were subject to
         immigration control, the SSHD had a concessionary policy outside
         the Rules which allowed such citizens who were serving and former
         members of the British armed forces to obtain on their discharge
         indefinite leave to enter and remain in the UK. Gurkhas were not
         included in this policy. They were therefore not entitled to settle
         in the UK".


41.  In my view, a similar historic injustice occurred in this case. The
    Secretary of State did not apply the policy contained in paragraph
    5.7.1.5. to the Respondent, even though he was applying his policy to
    others in the same situation as him, as can be seen from the facts of
    Mr Deilalisi's case. He also made a nullity decision in the
    Respondent's case on 13 February 2013 whilst his representative was
    still relying on a policy relating to deprivation in court in the case
    of Deilalissi on 9 July 2013.

42.  In paragraph 43 of Gurung the Master of the Rolls also noted that "the
    requirement to take the injustice into account in striking a fair
    balance between the article 8(1) right and the public interest in
    maintaining a firm immigration policy is inherent in article 8(2)
    itself, and it is ultimately for the court to strike that balance"..

43.  Therefore, in my view, First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman was entitled to
    take the "historic injustice" suffered by the Respondent into account
    when reaching her decision.

44.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman had also relied on the decision in EB
    (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41
    where Lord Bingham held in paragraph 14 that:


         "It does not, however, follow that delay in the decision-making
         process is necessarily irrelevant to the decision. It may,
         depending on the facts, be relevant in any one of three ways..."


45.  As accepted by the Secretary of State, the first two ways were not
    relevant but in paragraph 48 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Wyman relied on paragraph 16 of EB (Kosovo) where Lord Bingham held:


         "Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight otherwise
         to be accorded to the requirements of firm and fair immigration
         control, if the delay is shown to be the result of a dysfunctional
         system which yields unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair
         outcomes..."


46.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman had noted in paragraph 47 of her
    decision that it had been eleven years since the Secretary of State had
    discovered that the Respondent had fraudulently claimed to be a
    national of Albania and twenty-one years since he gave this
    information.

47.  The facts of the case, as found by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman,
    also included the fact that the actions by the Secretary of State had
    deprived the Respondent of the opportunity to rely on having been in
    the United Kingdom for more than fourteen years when other individuals
    who had also practiced a similar deception were not deprived of their
    British citizenship. She also noted that the Secretary of State had
    initially intended to deprive the Respondent of his British citizenship
    but then decided that his citizenship was a nullity and finally decided
    that his citizenship was not a nullity and once again decided to
    deprive him of his citizenship. On this factual basis it was clearly
    possible to characterise the process adopted by the Secretary of State
    in the Respondent's case as "unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair".

48.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on paragraph 10 of EB
    (Kosovo) in which Lord Bingham noted that:


         "In a complex and overloaded system perfect equality of treatment
         between applicants similarly placed will be impossible to achieve,
         but startling differences of treatment between such applicants, or
         anything suggestive of randomness or caprice in decision-making,
         must necessarily give grounds for concern".


49.  As noted above, in the Respondent's case there was a startling
    difference between the manner in which his case was dealt with and
    others with the same facts which were accorded the benefit of paragraph
    55.7.2.5 of Chapter 5 of the Nationality Instructions. It is the case
    that the Secretary of State is entitled to change his policy over time
    but there is a clear and legitimate expectation that whilst a specific
    policy is in force like cases will be treated under the policy in a
    similar manner.

50.  Finally, the Home Office Presenting Officer sought to distinguish EB
    (Kosovo) on the basis that no public interest issues arose. However, in
    the current case the delay in reaching a decision on the Respondent's
    case was one of a number of factors to weighed in the balance and EB
    (Kosovo) was relied upon for what it said about the effect of delay not
    about the weight to be apportioned between the public interest and
    factors weighing in the Respondent's favour.

51.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also submitted that First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman had failed to give sufficient weight to the fact
    that the Respondent had used fraud in order to obtain British
    citizenship. He relied on the fact that First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman
    found in paragraph 54 of her decision that:


         "Taking all these points into consideration, notwithstanding the
         appellant's historic fraud and any claimed public interest in
         deprivation as a result of the fraud, I find that the delay by the
         [Secretary of State] and the significant impact of the decision by
         the [Secretary of State] on the [Respondent] distinguishes the
         [Respondent's] case from many others and I therefore find that
         deprivation of citizenship is not appropriate, despite the previous
         false representations by the [Respondent]"


52.  Read in its entirety, this balancing exercise clearly took into
    account the fact that the Respondent had made false representations. In
    addition, in my view the phrase "any claimed public interest" reflected
    that fact that up until the date on which he was deprived of British
    citizenship the Respondent continued to have British citizenship and
    the weight to be given to his fraud was still being weighed in the
    balance.

53.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also submitted that First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made an error of fact in paragraph 52 of her decision,
    when she found that "apart from the matter of the initial
    misrepresentation, the [Secretary of State] has not suggested that the
    {Respondent] has any other criminal or forensic history". However, it
    was accurate to note that the Respondent had not committed any criminal
    offences or been involved in any other court proceedings.  It is also
    clear from paragraph 4 and 5 of her decision that she was aware that
    the Respondent had also applied for indefinite leave to remain and also
    British citizenship using the same false nationality.

 54. For all these reasons, I find that there were no errors of law in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman's decision.

Decision

(1)  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman is maintained.


Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 23 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

