
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00100/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Microsoft Teams                   |                                     |
|On 6 July 2021                       |On 12 August 2021                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                              A S R (aka B Z M)
                                   (Iraq)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Steven Park of Counsel, instructed by Walters &
                    Plaskitt Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Toby Lindsey, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of A S R  aka  B  Z  M  who  is  the  subject  of  these
proceedings or publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to
lead to the identification of  him  or  of  any  member  of  his  family  in
connection with these proceedings.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 18 September 2019 to deprive him of British citizenship pursuant  to
    section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981. The appellant  is  a
    citizen of Iraq.

 2. Between the grant of permission and the present error of  law  hearing,
    the Supreme Court considered the question of deprivation of citizenship
    in Begum, R. (on the application  of)  v  Special  Immigration  Appeals
    Commission & Anor [2021] UKSC 7 (26 February  2021)  (Begum)  and  gave
    guidance  on  the  correct  approach,  which  is  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent in these proceedings.

 3. Mode of hearing.  The hearing today took place  remotely  by  Microsoft
    Teams.   There  were  no  significant  technical  difficulties.   I  am
    satisfied that all parties were in a quiet and private place  and  that
    the  hearing  was  completed  fairly,  with  the  cooperation  of  both
    representatives.

Background

 4. The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2002 and  claimed
    asylum on 23 July 2002 in the BZM identity, giving a date of birth of 1
    January 1975.  A week later, he  made  an  asylum  claim  in  the  same
    identity with the same date of birth, identifying  his  spouse  as  NMA
    born in 1980 in Iraq.  The appellant identified his father  as  ZM  and
    his mother as FA, both born in Iraq in 1939.   The risk he asserted  he
    faced was in a town in Kirkuk.  The appellant maintained his fictitious
    identity at the asylum interview on 16 October 2002.

 5. On 22 November 2002, the respondent  refused  international  protection
    but granted the appellant exceptional leave to remain until 22 November
    2006, based on  his  origin  in  Kirkuk.   On  23  November  2002,  the
    appellant applied for a travel document in the BZM identity, signing  a
    declaration that the information given was true  to  the  best  of  his
    knowledge.

 6. On 25 October 2006, the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the BZM identity.  The form included a declaration that:

         "I am aware that it is an offence under the Immigration  Act  1971,
         as  amended  by  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  and  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended), to  make
         to a person acting in execution of any of those Acts a statement or
         representation which I know to be false or do  not  believe  to  be
         true, or to obtain or to seek to obtain  leave  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom by means which include deception."

    Indefinite leave to remain was granted in the BZM identity.

 7. On 29 May 2008, the appellant applied for  British  citizen  status  by
    naturalisation, still in the BZM identity.  He signed the following two
    declarations in that application:

         "To give false information on this form, knowingly  or  recklessly,
         is a criminal offence punishable with up to 3 months'  imprisonment
         or by a fine not exceeding �5000 or  both  (section  46(1)  of  the
         British Nationality Act 1981, as amended). ...

         I understand that a certificate of citizenship may be withdrawn  if
         it is found to have been obtained by fraud,  false  representation,
         or concealment of any material fact, or  if  on  the  basis  of  my
         conduct the Home Secretary considers it  to  be  conducive  to  the
         public good."

 8. The appellant's wife successfully applied to join  him  in  the  United
    Kingdom for settlement.  Two children were born to  them  in  2009  and
    2010, and registered as British citizens, the father's name being given
    in the BZM identity.  The appellant's wife obtained indefinite leave to
    remain on the basis of her marriage to the appellant.

 9. In 2012, the appellant's mother-in-law in Iraq was seriously ill.   The
    appellant, his wife and two children, returned to live  in  Erbil  with
    his wife's family.  In 2015, the appellant's wife gave birth  to  their
    youngest child, a son. In 2016, the appellant returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom for just under two months, then returned to  Iraq  until  2018.
    In Iraq, the appellant resumed his birth identity of AYR.

10. In 2016, the appellant applied for his Iraqi identity card, in the  AYR
    identity.  His own family moved back to Erbil in 2016.   In  2016,  the
    appellant returned to the United Kingdom for  just  under  two  months,
    using the British passport in the BZM identity.

11. The appellant and his two older children returned to the United Kingdom
    for good in September 2018, for the beginning of the school year.   The
    children began to attend school here.  The appellant's wife remained in
    Erbil with their youngest son, who was 3 years old.

12. During 2018, the appellant saw a  solicitor  and  executed  a  Deed  of
    change of name, reciting that he had  been  a  British  citizen   since
    birth, and changing  his  name  from  the  BZM  to  the  AYR  identity,
    described in the  Deed  as  an  assumed  name.   It  appears  that  the
    appellant did not disclose to his then solicitor that he had been  born
    in Erbil, Iraq, not the United Kingdom, nor  that  AYR  was  his  birth
    name, rather than an assumed name.

13. The appellant's deception came to light  in  2019,  when  he  submitted
    counterfeit passport documents to HM Passport Office in connection with
    a passport application for his youngest child.  His Iraqi passport gave
    his identity as AYR born in Erbil, not Kirkuk.

14. The respondent interviewed the appellant, who admitted  that  his  true
    identity was that of AYR with a date of birth of 5 January 1975.  On  3
    June 2019, the respondent wrote to the appellant saying  that  she  had
    reason to believe that he had obtained his British citizen status as  a
    result of fraud.



Deprivation decision

15. On 3 June 2019, the respondent asked the appellant to  show  cause  why
    his British citizen status should not be removed.   She said this:

         "The Secretary of State has  received  information  that  indicates
         that when you claimed  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom,  that  you
         presented a false identity consisting of [BZM] 5 January 1975, born
         Kirkuk, Iraq.  When you applied for your son's British passport, it
         is noted that you presented documents to the passport office  which
         show that your name, date of birth and place of birth have all been
         changed.  In addition, it is noted that you have provided an  Iraqi
         passport, [reference no provided] which  confirms  that  your  true
         identity is [AYR] date of birth 5 January 1975, born Erbil, Iraq.

         This amended identity means that when your application  for  asylum
         was considered, you were granted exceptional leave to remain in the
         United Kingdom on account of  your  perceived  place  of  birth  of
         Kirkuk, which at the time of your application was part of what  was
         termed Government-controlled Iraq and as  such  you  could  not  be
         returned to there and you had  intimated  that  you  could  not  be
         returned to the Kurdish Autonomous Zone (KAZ) at that time  due  to
         what you claimed was your father's membership of the Ba'ath  Party.
         It is therefore believed that the fraud that you  have  perpetrated
         was material and that had your true identity have been known at the
         time your application  was  considered,  it  is  likely  that  your
         application would have been refused, and attempts would  have  been
         made to remove you to  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Zone  as  you  had
         originated from there."

16. The appellant was given an opportunity to make  representations,  which
    he did. The appellant responded in a manuscript  letter  dated  7  June
    2019.  He said that he was frightened of the Saddam Hussein  government
    in Iraq: many Kurds had been forcibly Arabised.  He had been too afraid
    to give his correct name when he arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002.



17. His wife was being badly treated by her family, who considered that the
    appellant had abandoned her.  He was afraid for her and she was at risk
    of honour killing.  The appellant considered that since  admitting  his
    true identity in September 2018, he had been sufficiently punished:  he
    had a full-time job working for FEDEX, and  asserted  that  he  had  no
    criminal record and was of good character.

18. On 18 September 2019, the respondent gave notice  of  her  decision  to
    deprive the appellant of his acquired  British  citizen  status.    His
    children were then 10, 9  and  4  years  old:   their  British  citizen
    status, and the indefinite leave to  remain  for  his  wife,  were  not
    affected.  The respondent acknowledged that she  had  a  discretion  to
    exercise in such cases, and gave her reasons for exercising it  against
    the  appellant,  which  she  considered  to  be  both  reasonable   and
    proportionate.

19. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.





First-tier Tribunal decision

20. On 6 December 2019, First-tier Judge Jones dismissed the  appeal.   The
    judge  found  the  appellant's  core   account   totally   lacking   in
    credibility.  She considered that the appellant had not given the  true
    reasons for using and  maintaining  the  BZM  identity  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She considered the appellant's evidence to be  a  fabrication
    to explain a deliberate falsehood, maintained over many years.

21. The First-tier Judge reminded herself that the decision should  not  be
    challenged by proleptic analysis.  Should a decision to remove later be
    made, Article 8 ECHR proportionality would be considered then  and  the
    appellant would have an in-country right of appeal:

         "43. Deprivation of the appellant's citizenship [status]  will  not
         affect the  citizenship  rights  of  his  children  in  the  United
         Kingdom, nor the rights of his child in  Iraq,  who  is  a  British
         citizen  by descent.  It will not affect his family life  with  his
         wife or children.  there is no evidence that it will impact on  the
         rights of his children in the United Kingdom to education, housing,
         financial or other support.  It will not impact  on  their  contact
         with the appellant.  The respondent acknowledged that the  decision
         may have an emotional impact on them, given the seriousness of what
         the appellant has done, but considers the decision is a  reasonable
         step to take.  The best interests of the appellant's children are a
         primary, but not the paramount consideration.  I am  satisfied  the
         respondent has properly taken them into account.

         44.  Having regard to all the  circumstances,  including  the  best
         interests of the appellant's  children,  I  find  the  respondent's
         decision to  deprive  the  appellant  of  his  British  citizenship
         [status] is  a  proportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's
         rights to a family and private life under Article 8 ECHR."

22. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal and the appellant appealed to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

23. First-tier Judge Pooler in  May  2020,  at  the  height  of  the  Covid
    pandemic, granted leave to remain on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the  First-tier  Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  reasonably
    foreseeable  consequences  of  deprivation  (the  'proleptic  analysis'
    issue) and/or that there was no real prospect of  the  appellant  being
    deported; that the false name and place of birth  which  the  appellant
    gave was an irrelevant matter which the judge  should  not  have  taken
    into account;  and  that  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    respondent's policy.

24. The decision continued:

         "4.   The   grounds   are   arguable.    The   appellant's   family
         circumstances are complex: his wife had been living in  Iraq  (from
         where her ability to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  returning
         resident and bring her youngest child might be compromised) and the
         two older children were living  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
         appellant.  All of the children were  British  citizens.   Arguably
         the  judge  failed  to  make  findings   as   to   the   reasonable
         foreseeability or otherwise of the  appellant's  removal  from  the
         United Kingdom."

Rule 24 Reply

25. Following triage directions from Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam,  Mr
    Tony Melvin of the respondent's Specialist Appeals Team filed a Rule 24
    Reply.  He contended that the proleptic analysis as to  future  removal
    was a speculative assessment as to future actions and contrary  to  the
    proper ex nunc assessment of risk on  return  which  the  international
    protection Conventions require.

26. As  a  matter  of  law,  the  appellant  would  not  lose  his  British
    citizenship until the conclusion of the  present  appeal.   Should  any
    removal decision then be made, he would have a further right of  appeal
    against  that.    No  evidence  showed  that  his  wife  had  made  any
    application to come back to the United Kingdom and rejoin the appellant
    since they returned to Erbil in 2012.

27. The First-tier Judge had not erred in taking account of the appellant's
    use of, and reliance upon, a false name and date of birth.  As  regards
    the  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Judge's   consideration   of   the
    respondent's Chapter 55 policy guidance, that was unparticularised  and
    the respondent had given clear reasons for her decision thereunder.

28. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

29. For the appellant, Mr Park reminded me that the elder two children were
    British citizens and could not be required to leave the United Kingdom,
    and contended that their continuing separation from  their  mother  was
    self-evidently contrary to the children's best interests.  No  evidence
    was required to prove that.  The appellant would rely on Begum at [120]-
    [121], which was applicable to the children and their relationship with
    their mother.   The First-tier Judge had failed to  carry  out  a  full
    proportionality assessment and the appeal should be allowed.

30. For the respondent, Mr Lindsay  relied  upon  and  adopted  Ms  Cunha's
    written submissions, in  particular  as  to  the  effect  of  Begum  in
    jurisdictional terms: as a decision of the  Supreme  Court,  it  was  a
    comprehensive and binding review of the law.  The section 40 discretion
    was for the Secretary of State, not the Tribunal, to exercise  and  the
    question for the Tribunal was not whether the respondent's decision was
    proportionate, but whether it was arbitrary (see Begum,  at  [64]).   A
    proleptic analysis was not appropriate: it was not relevant to  examine
    the reasonably foreseeable  consequences  of  deprivation.   Procedural
    safeguards existed: see K2 [2017].

31. Begum now represented a comprehensive  and  single  course  of  correct
    procedure in this area.  The  respondent  relied  particularly  on  the
    section headed Jurisdiction and  powers  of  SIAC,  which  was  equally
    applicable to the Upper Tribunal, and Jurisdiction and role  of  court,
    which dealt with the roles of the Court of Appeal and Divisional Court.



32. Mr Lindsay reminded the Tribunal that the First-tier Judge had not been
    satisfied to any standard that the wife was at risk of  honour  killing
    in Iraq, nor that her circumstances were  as  claimed.   The  appellant
    would struggle to show that the status quo following  deprivation,  but
    without any deportation order, would interfere with his Article 8  ECHR
    rights.  His wife had not made any attempt to rejoin him in the  United
    Kingdom since 2012. The First-tier Judge had  omitted  nothing  in  his
    careful  decision,  which   was   neither   perverse   nor   Wednesbury
    unreasonable.

33. The meaning of the statutory language in subsections 40(2) and 40(3) of
    the British Nationality Act 1981 was plain, the purpose being to  deter
    others and promote public confidence in  the  immigration  system.  The
    Secretary of State's assessment was to be accorded respect,  by  reason
    of her institutional capacity and democratic accountability, which  was
    equally applicable in the present case.

34. The  grounds  in  the  present  appeal  were  really  no  more  than  a
    disagreement  with  a  legitimately  reached   decision,   within   the
    respondent's discretion.  There was no evidence on which  a  conclusion
    could be reached  that  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  two
    children in the United Kingdom would be prejudiced by returning to live
    in Iraq, where their mother and younger  brother  were  living.   Their
    British citizen status would be unaffected by the appellant's  loss  of
    his citizenship.

35. There was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the appeal should be dismissed.

36. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Section 40 and 40A British Nationality Act 1981

37. The right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal  from
    decisions under section 40 of the British Nationality Act  1981  arises
    from section 40A(1) of the Act.  Section 40(5) requires that  before  a
    deprivation order can be made, notice  must  be  given  to  the  person
    against whom a decision to deprive has been  taken,  stating  that  the
    respondent has decided to make a deprivation order, giving reasons  and
    notifying the person of their right of appeal under section  40A(1)  or
    section 2B of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997.   It
    is not disputed that the respondent has done that in this appeal.

38. The relevant provisions for our  purposes  are  to  be  found  in  sub-
    sections 40(2) and 40(3) of the 1981 Act:

         "40. ...(2)   The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person
         of a citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
         deprivation is conducive to the public good.

         (3)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
         citizenship  status  which  results  from   his   registration   or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-
             (a)  fraud,
             (b)  false representation, or
             (c)       concealment      of      a      material      fact."
             [Emphasis added]

39. As Mr Lindsay contended, section 40 gives the respondent  a  discretion
    to deprive a person of citizenship status, where she  is  satisfied  of
    the matters set out in each subsection cited above.   In  this  appeal,
    the respondent relies on subsection 40(3), not subsection 40(2): it  is
    not her case that deprivation of citizenship status is conducive to the
    public good, but that the appellant's naturalisation  was  obtained  by
    fraud, false representation, and/or concealment of a material fact.

Begum, R. (on the application of) v Special Immigration  Appeals  Commission
& Anor [2021] UKSC 7 (26 February 2021)

40. Neither the First-tier Judge who decided  the  appeal,  nor  First-tier
    Judge Pooler, who granted permission to appeal, had the benefit of  the
    later consideration of section 40 by the Supreme  Court  in  the  Begum
    case.  The opinion of the Supreme Court in Begum was given by Lord Reed
    PSC, with whom Lord Hodge JSC, Lady Black JSC, Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC and
    Lord Sales JSC agreed, and binds the Upper Tribunal.

41. Begum's case combined a statutory appeal against a decision to  deprive
    Ms Begum of United Kingdom citizenship status, and judicial  review  of
    the respondent's refusal to grant her entry clearance to return to  the
    United  Kingdom  and  pursue  her  appeal  in-country.  At  [62],  when
    considering the extent of SIAC's powers on  a  statutory  appeal,  Lord
    Reed cited with approval the analysis of Lord Hoffman in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Rehman [2001] UKHL 47, wherein he  held
    that the discretion exercised by the Home Secretary  was based on:

         "...the advantage of a wide range of advice from people with day-to-
         day involvement in  security  matters  which  [SIAC],  despite  its
         specialist membership,  cannot  match.  ...In  such  questions,  an
         appellate body traditionally allows a considerable  margin  to  the
         primary decision maker.  Even  if  the  appellate  body  prefers  a
         different view, it should not ordinarily interfere with a  case  in
         which it considers that the view of the Home Secretary is one which
         could reasonably be entertained."

42. At [62] in Begum, Lord Reed said this:

         "62.     Finally, Lord Hoffmann explained at para 62 that a further
         reason for SIAC to respect the assessment of the Secretary of State
         was the importance of democratic accountability  for  decisions  on
         matters of national security:

             "It is not only that  the  executive  has  access  to  special
             information and expertise in these matters. It  is  also  that
             such  decisions,  with  serious  potential  results  for   the
             community, require a legitimacy which can be conferred only by
             entrusting  them  to  persons  responsible  to  the  community
             through the democratic process. If the people  are  to  accept
             the consequences of such  decisions,  they  must  be  made  by
             persons whom  the  people  have  elected  and  whom  they  can
             remove."

         These points have been reiterated in later  cases,  including  A  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 56; [2005] 2
         AC 68 ("A") and R (Lord Carlile of Berriew) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2014] UKSC 60; [2015] AC 945."

43. At [64], Lord Reed acknowledged that:

         "64. ...many appeals will  raise  issues  under  the  Human  Rights
         Act...in particular, that the appellant must be able  to  challenge
         the legality of the measure taken against  him,  its  compatibility
         with absolute rights such as those arising under Articles 2  and  3
         of the ECHR, and  the  proportionality  of  any  interference  with
         qualified rights such as those arising under Article 8. ...

         A more limited approach has been adopted in  cases  concerned  with
         deprivation of citizenship.

         The European Court of Human Rights has accepted that  an  arbitrary
         denial or deprivation of citizenship may, in certain circumstances,
         raise an issue under article 8. In determining whether there  is  a
         breach of  that  article,  the  Court  has  addressed  whether  the
         revocation was arbitrary (not whether it  was  proportionate),  and
         what the consequences of revocation were for the applicant.

         In determining  arbitrariness,  the  Court  considers  whether  the
         deprivation was in accordance with the law, whether the authorities
         acted diligently and swiftly, and whether the  person  deprived  of
         citizenship was afforded  the  procedural  safeguards  required  by
         article 8: see, for example, K2 v United  Kingdom  (2017)  64  EHRR
         SE18, paras 49-50 and 54-61."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

44. And at [68]:

         "68. ... appellate courts and tribunals cannot generally decide how
         a statutory discretion conferred upon  the  primary  decision-maker
         ought  to  have  been  exercised,  or   exercise   the   discretion
         themselves, in the absence of any statutory  provision  authorising
         them to do so (such  as  existed,  in  relation  to  appeals  under
         section 2 of the 1997 Act, under section 4(1) of the  1997  Act  as
         originally enacted, and under sections 84-86 of the 2002 Act  prior
         to their amendment in 2014: see paras 34 and 36 above). They are in
         general restricted to considering whether  the  decision-maker  has
         acted in a way in which no  reasonable  decision-maker  could  have
         acted, or whether he has taken into account some irrelevant  matter
         or has disregarded something to which he should have given  weight,
         or has erred on a point of law:  an  issue  which  encompasses  the
         consideration of factual questions, as appears, in the  context  of
         statutory appeals, from Edwards (Inspector  of  Taxes)  v  Bairstow
         [1956]  AC  14.  They  must  also  determine  for  themselves   the
         compatibility of the decision with the obligations of the decision-
         maker under the Human Rights Act, where such  a  question  arises."
                  [Emphasis added]

45. The procedural safeguards mentioned in K2 v United Kingdom  [2017]  are
    set out at [52ff] and relate principally to the difficulty of  pursuing
    an appeal while  excluded  from  the  jurisdiction,  and  the  problems
    arising out of the Special Advocate procedure in SIAC, neither of which
    applies in this appeal.

46. The Supreme Court in Begum held that it had not been open to the  Court
    of Appeal to make its own assessment of the  requirements  of  national
    security, but rather to respect  the  respondent's  assessment,  'given
    that it is the Home Secretary who has been charged by  Parliament  with
    responsibility for making such assessments, and who  is  democratically
    accountable to Parliament for the discharge of that responsibility'.

Analysis

47. The First-tier Tribunal  correctly  declined  to  conduct  a  proleptic
    analysis of whether an appellant would be  likely  to  be  deported  or
    removed to Iran in the future (see Aziz and others v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1884 (08 August  2018),  [2019]
    WLR 266).    If such a decision were to be made, a full right of appeal
    including Article 8 ECHR  proportionality  would  arise.  At  [41]  the
    Tribunal correctly held that the principle  of  no  proleptic  analysis
    applied equally to deprivation of citizenship status on  section  40(3)
    grounds.

48. The First-tier Judge held that the decision to deprive the appellant of
    citizenship status did not necessarily entail removal or deportation of
    the person the subject of that decision and accordingly, was likely  to
    have minimal effect  on  the  person's  family  life  and/or  the  best
    interests of his children.  It was also open to the judge to  conclude,
    as she  did,  that  mere  deprivation  would  have  no  effect  on  the
    appellant's family life with his two older children, or his more remote
    family life with his wife and child in Iraq.

49.  The  grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  'reasonably   foreseeable
    consequences of deprivation of citizenship' which the First-tier  Judge
    should  have  considered  include  that  he  would  be  prevented  from
    sponsoring his wife's application for entry clearance  as  a  returning
    resident, to rejoin him and their two older  children  along  with  the
    youngest son.  However, she has not applied for entry  clearance  since
    2012 and her indefinite leave to remain will have  lapsed  because  she
    has been so long outside the United Kingdom.

50. Finally, the appellant has  contended  that  his  actions  in  using  a
    different name and place of birth were immaterial to  the  decision  to
    grant  him  citizenship,  or  exceptional  leave  to   remain   leading
    eventually to naturalisation, and that the First-tier  Judge  erred  in
    law in finding that they were relevant.  That argument cannot  succeed,
    for the reasons set out in the decision letter: if  the  appellant  had
    disclosed that he was born in Erbil, rather than Kirkuk, he  would  not
    have been granted discretionary leave and  the  process  which  led  to
    citizenship would not have begun.  The appellant maintained  his  false
    identity for many years, when he was already in a place of  safety  and
    there was no reason to do so.  The First-tier  Judge  was  entitled  to
    have regard to that.

51. Overall, I concur with Mr Lindsay that these the grounds of appeal  are
    really no more than a disagreement with  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.
    They do not challenge the comprehensive negative credibility finding as
    to the core account and the matters they do raise are unarguable.

52. The grounds of appeal disclose no arguable error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Judge, which is upheld.

DECISION

53. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law
    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      5 August
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


