
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00041/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th April 2019                         |On 11th April 2019               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                MIRANDA LENA
                            (aka ERMIRA SALLAKU)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K McCarthy, instructed by Zelin and Zelin
solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. On 20th August 2018 the SSHD made a decision,  in  accordance  with
         s40(5) British Nationality Act 1981, to make an  order  to  deprive
         Miranda Lena of her British Citizenship. Making the assumption that
         Ms Lena would  not  be  successful  in  her  appeal,  the  detailed
         decision letter stated ([34]):

                . A deprivation order will be made within four weeks of your
                  appeal rights  being  exhausted,  or  receipt  of  written
                  confirmation from you or your representative that you will
                  not appeal this decision, whichever is the sooner.

                . Within eight weeks from the deprivation order being  made,
                  subject to any representations you  may  make,  a  further
                  decision will be made either to remove you from the United
                  Kingdom, commence deportation action  (only  if  you  have
                  less than 18 months of a custodial sentence to  serve  for
                  has already been released from prison), all issue leave.

      2. Ms Lena's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
         in a decision promulgated on 15th January 2019. The SSHD sought and
         was granted permission to appeal.

      3. I heard submissions from Ms McCarthy and Mr Tan.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal judge, in [34] stated

             "Having weighed everything up as best I can, I have  concluded
             both that: (1) here the reasonably foreseeable consequence  of
             depriving the appellant of British citizenship  would  violate
             the U.K.'s obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998/article
             8 the European Convention on Human Rights  ("ECHR");  and  (2)
             cumulatively, there are exceptional features here  which  mean
             that the respondent's discretion pursuant to subsection  40(3)
             should have been exercised differently."

      5. Although  Ms  McCarthy  initially  submitted  that  the  judge  had
         considered the evidence, applied the correct test and placed proper
         weight upon the public interest, she subsequently acknowledged that
         it was clear from [34] of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision
         that he  had  made  an  error  of  law  in  his  consideration  and
         application of the law such that the decision had to be  set  aside
         to be re-made.

      6. I am satisfied the judge erred in law and I set aside the  decision
         to be remade.

    Re-making the decision

      7. Ms McCarthy  submitted  that  Ms  Lena  fully  accepted  that  "her
         behaviour lies against  her".  She  accepted  that  she  could  not
         succeed in her appeal, noting that in accordance  with  the  SSHD's
         decision letter,  Ms  Lena  would  have  the  opportunity  to  make
         representations within what appeared to be a reasonable timescale.

      8. The appeal against the decision of the SSHD is dismissed.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
    dismissing Ms Lena's appeal against the decision of the SSHD.


     Date 9th April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
