
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00021/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision Promulgated                 |
|conference on 01 June 2021           |On 22nd September 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 JETMIR CANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J. Greer, instructed by MyUKVisas
For the respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  08  March  2019
    to deprive him of  British  citizenship  under  section  40(3)  of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981 ('BNA 1981').

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge T. Jones allowed the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 03 September 2019 for  the  reasons  summarised  by  the
    Upper Tribunal at [3] in the error of law decision  promulgated  on  15
    March 2021 (annexed).  The  respondent  applied  for  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the grounds summarised at
    [4] of the error of law decision.

3.   The appellant applied to delay the error of law decision to  await  the
    outcome of an application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal against the Upper Tribunal's decision in Hysaj  (Deprivation  of
    Citizenship: Delay)  [2020]  UKUT  000128  (IAC).  The  Upper  Tribunal
    refused the application for a stay for the reasons given in  the  error
    of law decision at [7]. In any event, the Court of Appeal  subsequently
    refused permission to appeal in the case of Hysaj (2020).

4.   The Supreme Court handed down the judgment in R (on the application  of
    Begum) v Special Immigration Appeals Commission and Others [2021]  UKSC
    7, [2021] 2 WLR 556 on 26 February  2021.  Although  the  judgment  was
    published before the Upper Tribunal hearing on 09 March 2021, less than
    two weeks later, neither party referred to the decision at the hearing.
    At the time, neither the parties nor the Upper Tribunal appreciated the
    potential impact it might have  on  appeals  involving  deprivation  of
    citizenship outside the context  of  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
    Commission (SIAC).

5.   The Upper Tribunal set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision  for  the
    reasons given at [13] of the error of law decision. The case was listed
    for a resumed hearing on 01 June 2021  to  remake  the  decision.  Both
    parties were now aware of the decision  in  Begum,  but  there  was  no
    application for any of the error of law  findings  made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal to be set aside.

6.   I have considered  of  my  own  motion  whether  any  of  the  findings
    relating to error of law might need to be set  aside  following  Begum.
    The Upper Tribunal summarised the main findings in  Hysaj  (2020).  The
    errors of law identified by the Upper Tribunal  related  to  a  factual
    error in the First-tier Tribunal judge's assessment of the respondent's
    14-year policy [13(ii)], which appeared to be given weight by the judge
    in assessing proportionality. The Upper Tribunal also  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal findings were not sufficiently clear to  understand
    whether the judge conducted a proportionality assessment with reference
    to the Article  8  balance  sheet  approach  normally  undertaken  when
    considering  the  potential  impact  of   removal,   as   opposed   the
    proportionality  of  deprivation,  and   without   sufficiently   clear
    reference to the approach outlined in BA (Deprivation  of  citizenship:
    appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC). Having read the Court of Appeal decision
    in Aziz & Ors v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1884 again, the  Upper  Tribunal's
    reference to BA needs be modified in light  of  the  guidance  to  fact
    finding tribunals not to conduct too much of a  'proleptic  assessment'
    beyond the initial decision to deprive a person of citizenship.  Having
    modified that reference, I conclude that the findings in the  last  two
    sentences of [13(v)] in the error of law decision are  consistent  with
    the approach urged in Aziz. I am still of the view that the  First-tier
    Tribunal findings were not sufficiently clear to identify  whether  the
    judge was considering the proportionality of the  deprivation  decision
    itself or was conducting a wider ranging and 'proleptic assessment'  of
    the kind cautioned against in Aziz.

7.   The parties agreed that the consequence of the  decision  in  Begum  is
    that the Tribunal is unable to consider the exercise of  discretion  to
    deprive a person of citizenship itself and should normally consider the
    exercise of discretion with reference to general public law principles.
    Given that the Upper Tribunal concluded that the reasoning in the First-
    tier decision was not  sufficiently  clear  to  establish  whether  the
    assessment was made  with  reference  to  the  proportionality  of  the
    deprivation  decision  itself  or  was   an   impermissibly   proleptic
    assessment, I find that the  decision  in  Begum  would  have  made  no
    material difference to  my  findings  relating  to  errors  of  law.  I
    conclude that it is  still  appropriate  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision to have been set aside with reference to  section  12  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA 2007'). However, both
    parties agree that the principles outlined in Begum are  applicable  to
    remaking.

8.   Due to the continued need to take precautions to prevent the spread  of
    Covid 19 the hearing took place in a court room at Field House with the
    legal representatives  appearing  by  video  conference  and  with  the
    facility for others to attend remotely. I was satisfied that  this  was
    consistent with the open justice principle, that the parties could make
    their submissions clearly, and that the case could be heard  fairly  by
    this mode of hearing.

Legal framework

9.   Section 40(3) BNA 1981 sets out the respondent's  power  to  deprive  a
    person of citizenship status if the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied
    that the registration or naturalisation was obtained by (a) fraud;  (b)
    false representation; or (c) concealment of a material fact and  it  is
    appropriate to exercise discretion to deprive the person of citizenship
    in all the circumstances of the case.  The  provision  has  a  rational
    objective, which is to instil  public  confidence  in  the  nationality
    system by ensuring any abuse is tackled and dealt with accordingly. The
    objective  is  sufficiently  important   to   justify   limitation   of
    fundamental rights in appropriate cases.

10.  A decision to deprive a person of British citizenship has  a  right  of
    appeal under section 40A(1) BNA  1981.  Unlike  appeals  against  other
    types of immigration decision, which are governed  by  Part  5  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ('NIAA  2002'),  the  BNA
    1981 does not specify the grounds upon which the appeal can be brought.



11.  In the common law sphere the exercise of discretion  by  the  Secretary
    of State has traditionally been subject to review on a  limited  number
    of administrative law grounds, and is  most  commonly  challenged  with
    reference to the rationality of the decision. The Human Rights Act 1998
    ('HRA 1998') sparked debate over  the  intensity  of  review  in  cases
    involving fundamental rights.  The  development  of  the  principle  of
    proportionality in common law as an element  of  rationality,  and  the
    differing emphasis in cases involving fundamental rights engaged by the
    HRA 1998, as well as consideration of the principle of  proportionality
    under European law, were discussed in detail by the  Supreme  Court  in
    cases such as Bank Mellat v Her Majesty's Treasury (No.2)  [2013]  UKSC
    39, [2013] HRLR 30 and Pham v SSHD [2015] UKSC 19, [2015] Imm AR 950.

12.  Other cases have  discussed  the  scope  of  an  appeal  brought  under
    section 40A(1) BNA  1981,  notably  the  Upper  Tribunal  decisions  in
    Deliallisi (British Citizen: deprivation  appeal:  Scope)  [2013]  UKUT
    00439 (IAC), BA (Deprivation of citizenship: appeals)  [2018]  UKUT  85
    (IAC), and Hysaj (2020). In these cases, it was  suggested  that  there
    was a role for a fact-finding tribunal to make its  own  assessment  of
    whether discretion ought to have been exercised to deprive  the  person
    of citizenship, and that the assessment might to  some  extent  involve
    consideration of human rights issues.

13.  The Court of Appeal in R (KV)(Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ  2483
    approved the approach taken in BA. It noted that deprivation may result
    in interference with Article 8 rights, but the right to  a  nationality
    is not itself a right protected by the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights. The Court went on to find that where deception was used  in  an
    application for naturalisation it would be an unusual case in which  an
    appellant could legitimately  complain  of  the  withdrawal  of  rights
    arising from naturalisation when the decision would only put him in the
    position he would have been in had he not been fraudulent and had acted
    honestly in making the application. The Court of Appeal recognised that
    there might be some cases where the applicant will be placed in a worse
    position, for example, if he lost a previous  nationality  having  been
    granted British citizenship. In such cases the decision-maker will need
    to consider whether deprivation  of  citizenship  is  justified  having
    regard to the consequences of deprivation. A  balancing  exercise  will
    need to be carried out to  assess  whether  in  all  the  circumstances
    deprivation of citizenship is proportionate.

14.  I have already touched on the decision in Aziz  &  Ors  v  SSHD  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1884, in which the Court of Appeal emphasised that  the  scope
    of an appeal under section 40A(1) BNA 1981 must focus on the fact  that
    deprivation is only a first step in the process.  The  assessment  must
    consider the proportionality of the  deprivation  decision  itself  and
    should avoid straying into a 'proleptic assessment' of separate  issues
    relating to the possibility of future removal from the UK.

15.  The Supreme Court  in  R  (on  the  application  of  Begum)  v  Special
    Immigration Appeals Commission and Others [2021] UKSC 7, [2021]  2  WLR
    556 conducted a detailed review of  the  case  law  and  made  findings
    relating to the scope of an appeal  brought  in  a  slightly  different
    context against a decision made under section 40(2) BNA 1981 (conducive
    to the public good). The decision was certified  under  section  40A(2)
    BNA 1981  (national  security).  The  consequence  of  the  certificate
    diverted the case to the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC),
    where the appeal was then brought  under  section  2B  of  the  Special
    Immigration Appeals Commission Act  1997  ('SIACA  1997')  rather  than
    section 40A(1) BNA 1981. However,  the  underlying  decisions  appealed
    under BNA 1971 or SIACA 1997 are still rooted in section 40  BNA  1981,
    albeit different procedures and considerations apply in cases involving
    national security issues.

16.  The Supreme Court found  that  the  wording  of  section  40  BNA  1981
    plainly brought the decision within the realms of the discretion of the
    Secretary of State. The Court found that appellate courts and tribunals
    cannot generally decide how a statutory discretion conferred  upon  the
    primary decision-maker ought to have been exercised,  or  exercise  the
    discretion themselves,  in  the  absence  of  any  statutory  provision
    authorising  them  to  do  so.  In  general,  they  are  restricted  to
    considering whether the decision-maker has acted in a way in  which  no
    reasonable decision-maker could have acted, or whether they have  taken
    into account some irrelevant matter or  has  disregarded  something  to
    which should have been given weight or has erred  on  a  point  of  law
    [68]. The Supreme Court went on to make the following findings:

         '69. For the reasons I have explained, that appears to me to be  an
             apt description of the role of SIAC in  an  appeal  against  a
             decision taken under section 40(2). That is not  to  say  that
             SIAC's jurisdiction is supervisory rather than appellate.  Its
             jurisdiction is appellate, and  references  to  a  supervisory
             jurisdiction in this context are capable of being a source  of
             confusion.   Nevertheless,   the   characterisation    of    a
             jurisdiction as appellate does not determine the principles of
             law which  the  appellate  body  is  to  apply.  As  has  been
             explained, they depend upon the nature of the  decision  under
             appeal  and  the  relevant  statutory  provisions.   Different
             principles may even apply to the same decision, where it has a
             number of aspects giving rise to different considerations,  or
             where different statutory provisions are applicable.  So,  for
             example, in appeals under section 2B of the 1997  Act  against
             decisions made under  section  40(2)  of  the  1981  Act,  the
             principles to be applied by SIAC in reviewing the Secretary of
             State's exercise of his discretion are  largely  the  same  as
             those applicable in administrative law, as I  have  explained.
             But if a question arises as to whether the Secretary of  State
             has acted incompatibly with the appellant's Convention rights,
             contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights  Act,  SIAC  has  to
             determine that matter objectively on  the  basis  of  its  own
             assessment.

         70.  In considering whether the Secretary of State has acted  in  a
             way in which no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State  could  have
             acted, or has taken into account some  irrelevant  matter,  or
             has disregarded  something  to  which  he  should  have  given
             weight,  SIAC  must  have  regard  to  the   nature   of   the
             discretionary power in question, and the Secretary of  State's
             statutory responsibility for deciding whether the  deprivation
             of citizenship is conducive to the public good.  The  exercise
             of the power conferred by section 40(2)  must  depend  heavily
             upon  a  consideration  of  relevant  aspects  of  the  public
             interest,  which  may  include  considerations   of   national
             security and public safety,  as  in  the  present  case.  Some
             aspects of the Secretary of  State's  assessment  may  not  be
             justiciable, as Lord Hoffmann explained in Rehman. Others will
             depend, in many if not most cases, on an  evaluative  judgment
             of matters, such as the level and nature of the risk posed  by
             the appellant, the effectiveness of  the  means  available  to
             address  it,  and  the  acceptability  or  otherwise  of   the
             consequent  danger,  which  are   incapable   of   objectively
             verifiable assessment, as Lord Hoffmann pointed out in  Rehman
             and Lord Bingham of Cornhill reiterated in A,  para  29.  SIAC
             has to bear in mind, in relation to matters of this kind, that
             the  Secretary  of  State's  assessment  should  be   accorded
             appropriate  respect,  for  reasons  both   of   institutional
             capacity (notwithstanding the experience of members  of  SIAC)
             and democratic accountability, as Lord Hoffmann  explained  in
             Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated in A, para 29.'

17.  Having recognised that there was a  distinction  between  an  appellate
    jurisdiction and a supervisory jurisdiction the Supreme Court  outlined
    the following scope of decision-making in an appeal brought  against  a
    decision made under section 40 BNA 1981:

             '71. Nevertheless, SIAC has a number of important functions to
         perform on an appeal against a decision under section 40(2). First,
         it can assess whether the Secretary of State has acted in a way  in
         which no reasonable Secretary of State could  have  acted,  or  has
         taken into account  some  irrelevant  matter,  or  has  disregarded
         something to which he should have given weight, or has been  guilty
         of some procedural impropriety. In doing so, SIAC has  to  bear  in
         mind the serious nature of a deprivation of  citizenship,  and  the
         severity of the consequences which can flow from such  a  decision.
         Secondly, it can consider whether the Secretary of State has  erred
         in law, including whether he has made findings of  fact  which  are
         unsupported by any evidence  or  are  based  upon  a  view  of  the
         evidence which could  not  reasonably  be  held.  Thirdly,  it  can
         determine whether the Secretary of State has complied with  section
         40(4), which provides that the Secretary of State may not  make  an
         order under section 40(2) "if he is satisfied that the order  would
         make a person stateless". Fourthly, it  can  consider  whether  the
         Secretary  of  State  has  acted  in  breach  of  any  other  legal
         principles applicable to  his  decision,  such  as  the  obligation
         arising in appropriate cases under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
         Act. In carrying  out  those  functions,  SIAC  may  well  have  to
         consider relevant evidence. It  has  to  bear  in  mind  that  some
         decisions may involve considerations which are not justiciable, and
         that due weight has to be given to the  findings,  evaluations  and
         policies of the Secretary of State, as Lord Hoffmann  explained  in
         Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated in A.  In  reviewing  compliance
         with the Human Rights Act, it  has  to  make  its  own  independent
         assessment.'

18.  I can see no reason  why  these  general  principles  are  not  equally
    applicable to an appeal brought under section 40A(1) BNA 1981 against a
    decision made under section 40(3) in the  context  of  the  immigration
    tribunals  rather  than  SIAC.  The  same  considerations  are  equally
    applicable to the different precedent  facts  involved  in  a  decision
    taken  under  section  40(3).  The  weight  to  the   public   interest
    considerations might vary between  appeals  brought  in  SIAC  and  the
    immigration  tribunals  but  will  still  form  part  of  the   overall
    assessment.

19.  In my assessment Begum simply takes  a  further  step  along  the  path
    trodden in Aziz. In making clear that  it  is  not  for  the  court  or
    tribunal to make its own decision on  whether  discretion  should  have
    been exercised (to this extent overtaking aspects of previous decisions
    of the Upper Tribunal) in an appeal brought under  section  40A(1)  the
    Supreme Court continues to focus the scope of an appeal on the  effects
    of the deprivation decision itself and narrows the potential for  wider
    arguments relating to the prospects of removal.

20.  The court retains a role in evaluating the legality of the exercise  of
    discretion with broad reference to common law principles, which in most
    cases are likely to  be  the  same  as  the  principles  applicable  in
    administrative law [69]. To this extent proportionality as a public law
    principle is still likely to play a role in  so  far  as  it  might  be
    relevant to the assessment of rationality. I do not read what  is  said
    by the Supreme Court as altering the more intense consideration of  any
    issues that might engage the operation of the HRA 1998. Indeed, it made
    clear that if a question arises as to whether the decision is  unlawful
    with reference to the HRA 1998, that is still a matter for the court to
    make its own assessment [69].

21.  However, the Supreme Court emphasised that the extent  to  which  human
    rights issues might be engaged will vary depending on  the  context  of
    the case in question [64]. So, in a case where the deprivation decision
    itself, as a first step, does not engage clear human rights issues, the
    assessment is more likely to be within the realms of traditional public
    law principles. In a case where the deprivation decision more  strongly
    engages issues relating to fundamental rights, the assessment  is  more
    likely to fall into the realm of an objective assessment by the  court.
    In this way there is likely to be a 'sliding scale' in the approach  to
    decision making in an appeal brought under section 40A(1) BNA  1981  of
    the kind discussed in Pham ([105]-[106] and  [113])  and  Begum  ([69]-
    [71]), whilst bearing in mind that the Supreme  Court  authorities  are
    consistent in stating that in most cases the test  of  'reasonableness'
    and 'proportionality' are likely to yield the same outcome.

22.  In the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in  Laci  v  SSHD  [2021]
    EWCA Civ 769 the Court considered the line of decisions from Deliallisi
    to Hysaj (2020) set out above. It concluded that the six-point approach
    in BA, which was approved in KV (Sri Lanka)  should  be  taken  as  the
    starting point [35]. It made clear that point (5) in BA was now subject
    to what was said in Aziz and observed that the tribunal 'ought not,  at
    least normally, undertake any "proleptic assessment" of the  likelihood
    of removal. Loss of British citizenship and loss of leave to remain are
    different things, appealable by different processes.'

23.  The Court went on to find that the reasoning in KV (Sri Lanka) did  not
    extend to other adverse consequences of  a  deprivation  decision  e.g.
    statelessness or consideration of a 'limbo period' [38] and went on  to
    make the following observations about the First-tier Tribunal  decision
    in that case:

             '46. It will be noted that the Judge  conducted  his  analysis
         entirely by reference to  the  Appellant's  article  8  rights.  It
         follows from what I have  said  above  that  the  appeal  primarily
         involves the exercise  of  a  common  law  discretion,  even  where
         article 8 may  be  engaged;  but  as  I  have  also  observed,  the
         essential questions may not be very different whether the issue  is
         address as one of proportionality or as the exercise  of  a  common
         law discretion. In either case a balance was required  between  the
         obvious strong public interest in  depriving  the  Appellant  of  a
         benefit that he should never have received and  the  countervailing
         factors on which he relied.'

24.   Having  reviewed  relevant  factors  considered  by   the   First-tier
    Tribunal, and noted  some  shortcomings  in  the  decision,  the  Court
    concluded that the findings were open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    make in 'the exercise of judicial discretion' [81]. The Court went on:

             '83. I should emphasise  that  this  decision  should  not  be
         interpreted as meaning that an indulgent view can be taken  towards
         migrants who obtain British citizenship on the basis of a  lie.  On
         the contrary, in all ordinary circumstances they can expect to have
         it withdrawn. It is only because to the exceptional combination  of
         circumstances in the present case that the FTT was entitled to come
         to the decision that it did.'

25.  After it had reserved its decision, but  before  it  was  handed  down,
    attention was drawn to the decision in Begum. A post-script  was  added
    in the following terms:

             '40. Postscript. When this judgment was circulated to  counsel
         in draft, Mr Malik drew  our  attention  to  the  decision  of  the
         Supreme Court in R (Begum) v Special Immigration Appeals Commission
         [2021] UKSC 7, [2021] 2 WLR 556, which was handed  down  subsequent
         to the argument before us. Begum concerns a decision taken  by  the
         Secretary of State to deprive  the  appellant  of  her  nationality
         under section 40 (2) of the  1981  Act.  At  paras.  32-81  of  his
         judgment, with which the other Justices agreed, Lord Reed discusses
         the nature of an appeal to SIAC under section  2B  of  the  Special
         Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997, which is the equivalent of
         section 40A; and in that connection he  discusses  both  Deliallisi
         and BA (though not KV, to which the Court does not appear  to  have
         referred). His conclusion is that while section 2B provides for  an
         appeal rather than a review SIAC should approach its  task  on  (to
         paraphrase) essentially Wednesbury principles,  save  that  it  was
         obliged to determine for itself whether the decision was compatible
         with the obligations of the decision-maker under the  Human  Rights
         Act 1998 (see para. 68). It may  be  that  that  reasoning  is  not
         confined to section 2B or to cases falling under section 40 (2), in
         which case some of the statements quoted above  about  the  correct
         approach to appeals under section 40A  in  the  case  of  decisions
         under section 40 (3) will require qualification. But I do not think
         that that is something on which I should express a view here. Begum
         does not bear directly on the actual grounds of appeal  before  us,
         and Mr Malik made it plain that he did  not  wish  to  advance  any
         fresh ground based on it. Rather, he was rightly concerned that  we
         should be aware of it in the context of the more general review  of
         the law in the preceding paragraphs. I  confine  myself  to  saying
         that anything said in the  authorities  reviewed  above  about  the
         scope of an appeal under section 40A should be read subject to  the
         decision in Begum.'

26.  The Court of Appeal considered the  decision  in  Begum  and  concluded
    that it did not impact on the grounds in that case. However, it did not
    invite  further  submissions  from  the  parties  as  to  whether   the
    principles were equally applicable to an appeal brought  under  section
    40A(1) BNA 1981 as they were to an  appeal  brought  under  section  2B
    SIACA 1997.

27.  For the reasons given above, I conclude that the guidance in  Begum  is
    equally applicable because the underlying decisions in  both  types  of
    appeal emanate from section 40 BNA 1981. While  it  is  true  that  the
    Supreme Court did not specifically consider whether the same principles
    applied to an appeal brought under section  40A(1),  its  reasoning  is
    rooted in common law principles,  refers  to  cases  involving  appeals
    under section 40A(1), and does not appear to rely  on  any  distinction
    relating to cases involving national  security  issues.  The  Court  of
    Appeal in Laci proceeded on the basis that the approach  taken  in  BA,
    endorsed in KV (Sri Lanka), should  be  the  starting  point.  KV  (Sri
    Lanka) proceeded on the basis  that  an  appeal  under  section  40A(1)
    involved a 'full reconsideration of the decision  whether  the  deprive
    the appellant of British citizenship', and if the  condition  precedent
    is established,  also  involved  consideration  of  whether  discretion
    should have been exercised  differently  [6].  The  Supreme  Court  has
    expressly departed from that approach. I acknowledge that the Court  in
    Laci qualified its findings by reference  to  the  post-script,  but  I
    conclude that I am bound to follow the Supreme Court decision in  Begum
    as higher court authority.

28.  At this point I must add my own post-script. After having drafted  this
    decision, but just before promulgation, the  Upper  Tribunal  published
    the decision in Ciceri (deprivation of citizenship appeals: principles)
    [2021]  UKUT  238  (IAC)  which  gives  guidance  on  the  approach  to
    deprivation appeals following the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  Begum.
    Although some of my analysis has  a  slightly  different  emphasis,  we
    reach broadly the  same  conclusions  as  to  the  proper  approach  to
    determining  an  appeal  under  section  40A(1)  BNA  1981.  The  cases
    considered in Ciceri were the same as those argued by  the  parties  at
    the hearing in this case.  For  this  reason,  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to invite any further submissions.

29.  A senior panel of the Upper Tribunal including the  President  and  the
    Vice-President reviewed the same authorities and concluded that a court
    or tribunal should:

      i) establish whether the relevant condition precedent in section 40(2)
         or (3) exists for the exercise of discretion, and if it does then;

     ii) should consider whether human rights are engaged by the deprivation
         decision, and if they are,  the  tribunal  can  decide  for  itself
         whether the decision is unlawful under section 6 HRA 1998; and

    iii)  in  considering  human  rights  the  tribunal  may  determine  the
         reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation but  should  not
         conduct a proleptic assessment of the likelihood of removal; and

     iv) in considering human rights the assessment  of  proportionality  is
         for the tribunal to decide on the evidence before it  (which  might
         not be the same as the evidence  considered  by  the  Secretary  of
         State); and

      v) in considering human rights the tribunal must pay due regard to the
         inherent weight that must  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining the integrity of the system of nationality law; and

     vi) in considering human rights delay  may  be  relevant  although  any
         period during  which  the  Secretary  of  State  was  adopting  the
         mistaken stance that citizenship was a nullity will not normally be
         given weight; and

    vii) if the decision is not  unlawful  under  section  6  HRA  1998  the
         tribunal may only allow the appeal on administrative law principles
         and must have regard to the nature of the discretionary power under
         section 40(2) or (3) BNA 1981.

Decision and reasons

30.  The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 04 June 1983. He  entered
    the UK on 30 November 1999. On 01 December 1999 he applied  for  asylum
    using his real name but falsely claimed to be a  Kosovan  national  and
    gave a false date of birth of 04 June 1984 i.e. claiming to be 15 years
    old on arrival. He put forward what he knew to  be  an  entirely  false
    claim for asylum. The most likely motivation for  the  first  deception
    was to exploit the fact that many  genuine  Kosovar  Albanians  fleeing
    conflict were recognised as refugees or were granted Exceptional  Leave
    to Remain (ELR) at the time. The most likely motivation for the  second
    deception was either to obscure checks on his real identity  and/or  to
    take advantage of  more  generous  care  provisions  for  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking children who are under 16  years  old.  Nevertheless,  I
    recognise that he was a minor aged 16 years old on arrival in the UK.

31.  In March 2000 (the exact date is unclear), the respondent  refused  the
    asylum application but granted four years ELR according to  the  policy
    at the time. At the end of the period of ELR the appellant applied  for
    Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) in the same  false  identity.  By  the
    time he applied for ILR he was an adult of at least 19-20 years old. On
    an unknown date he applied to naturalise as a British Citizen.  He  did
    so in the same false identity because  the  naturalisation  certificate
    dated 13 July 2006 gives the false details relating to place  and  date
    of birth. By the time  the  appellant  was  naturalised  as  a  British
    citizen he was 22 years old.

32.  The appellant accepts that  he  lied  about  his  nationality  (and  by
    implication the whole of his asylum claim) and age on  arrival  in  the
    UK. If the situation in Albania at the  time  was  as  serious  as  the
    appellant suggests, he should have made an asylum  claim  in  his  real
    identity. While acknowledging that a minor may have  been  more  easily
    swayed by the advice of others on arrival in the UK,  by  the  time  he
    came to apply for ILR, and then naturalisation, the  appellant  was  an
    adult who was prepared to maintain the deception in both  applications.
    But for this repeated deception the appellant would not  be  a  British
    citizen. Had the respondent been aware of such a serious  deception  it
    is highly unlikely that he would have been granted leave to remain  for
    four years (although he may have been granted a short period  of  leave
    until he reached his majority, which would not have attracted  a  right
    to apply for settlement on expiry) and the respondent would  have  been
    entitled to consider whether such conduct justified refusal of  ILR  or
    naturalisation on 'character' grounds.

33.  Having obtained British citizenship by fraud  the  appellant  continued
    his life in the UK. Despite suggesting that he left Albania in fear  of
    violence, the appellant accepts that he  returned  there  regularly  to
    visit family members. It was  only  after  the  false  details  on  his
    British passport caused problems in arranging for his wife to  come  to
    the UK that he was  advised  to  apply  to  have  the  details  on  his
    naturalisation certificate changed. It is  unclear  from  the  evidence
    whether the problems occurred in registering the marriage in Albania or
    during the course of an application for entry clearance for  his  wife.
    In February 2013 the appellant  disclosed  his  true  identity  to  the
    respondent with a request to amend the details. The appellant  included
    a copy of his Albanian ID card and birth certificate.

34.  In the same month the appellant's wife applied for entry  clearance  to
    join him in the UK. The detail  of  the  subsequent  course  of  events
    relating  to  that  application  is  unclear  from  the  evidence.  The
    application was refused, but it is unclear  whether  the  decision  was
    made  before  or  after  the  respondent's  decision  to  nullify   the
    appellant's  nationality  (see  below).  The  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision is also unclear. There is  insufficient  evidence  to
    ascertain whether the Tribunal was made aware  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's British nationality was treated as a nullity.  No  copy  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision has been provided to  understand  what
    information was before the Tribunal at the time. I  am  told  that  the
    appeal was allowed.

35.  On 09 September 2013 the respondent  notified  the  appellant  that  he
    obtained  British  nationality  by  fraud  and  that  nationality   was
    nullified. The appellant sought to challenge the  decision  to  nullify
    nationality by way of judicial review. It is said that  his  claim  was
    stayed behind, what turned out to be  long  running  litigation,  which
    culminated in the Supreme Court decision in R  (Hysaj)  v  SSHD  [2018]
    INLR 279. The Supreme Court clarified that the correct procedure should
    be to decide to deprive a person of citizenship under section 40 of the
    British Nationality Act 1981 rather  than  treat  naturalisation  as  a
    nullity.

36.  The appellant's wife entered the UK in November 2014 at a time when  he
    would have been under no illusion that his status was under review  and
    his position in the UK was uncertain. I am told that his  wife  applied
    for further leave to remain  in  March  2015.  There  was  a  delay  in
    deciding the application. The chronology indicates that this was likely
    to be because of the ongoing litigation in Hysaj. The Supreme Court did
    not give judgment until 21 December 2017,  at  which  point  it  became
    clear that the respondent's previous policy would  need  to  change  to
    making  decisions  to   deprive   citizenship   instead   of   treating
    naturalisation as a nullity.

37.  Having stayed many cases to await the  outcome  of  the  Supreme  Court
    decision in Hysaj (2017) the respondent had to make fresh decisions. On
    03 February  2018  the  respondent  notified  the  appellant  that  the
    decision dated 09 February 2013 to treat naturalisation  as  a  nullity
    was withdrawn. The effect was that  the  appellant  continued  to  have
    British citizenship. The decision letter that is the  subject  of  this
    appeal states that a further letter was sent to  the  appellant  a  few
    days later, on the 10 February 2018, in which he was invited to respond
    to the proposed intention to deprive him of  British  citizenship.  The
    appellant's legal representatives made further  representations  on  22
    February 2018.

38.  In December 2018 a decision was made to grant the appellant's  wife  30
    months leave to remain. The law having been clarified, at the time  the
    appellant  continued  to  have  British  citizenship.  No   doubt   the
    respondent was conscious of the fact that the application  for  further
    leave had been delayed pending the outcome of  the  decision  in  Hysaj
    (2017) and it may not have been clear when the respondent would make  a
    decision relating to deprivation. In the event, the decision to deprive
    the appellant of British citizenship was made a few months later, on 08
    March 2019.

39.  Having  given  a  false  identity  in  his  initial  asylum  claim  and
    maintained the deception in the subsequent  applications  for  ILR  and
    naturalisation, the appellant can have been under no illusion that  any
    status was gained on a false premise. It was only when it  was  in  his
    interest to admit the lies that the deception came to light. Since 2013
    he was aware that his status was under review. The  delay  between  the
    decision to nullify in 2013 and the decision  to  deprive  in  2019  is
    adequately explained by the course of the Hysaj litigation whereby  the
    correct legal approach was clarified.  The  respondent  acted  promptly
    following the Supreme Court decision and notified the appellant  within
    a couple of months of her intention to deprive him of  citizenship  and
    invited submissions.  In  the  meantime,  it  seems  that  a  pragmatic
    decision was made to grant his wife limited leave to remain  pending  a
    decision on whether it was appropriate to deprive him of citizenship or
    not.

40.  The Upper Tribunal  in  Hysaj  (2020)  considered  the  course  of  the
    Supreme Court litigation and concluded that  it  was  unsustainable  to
    rely on the delay between decisions as a matter that might  reduce  the
    public interest in deprivation [61]. The Court of Appeal in Laci  noted
    this but concluded that the facts relating to delay in that  case  were
    exceptional  because  following  an  initial  notification   from   the
    Secretary  of  State  that  she  was  considering  whether  to  deprive
    citizenship, he heard nothing further for a period of  nine  years  and
    reasonably assumed that no further action was being taken. The facts in
    this case fall squarely within the kind of delay  considered  in  Hysaj
    (2020). The appellant was served with a decision to nullify nationality
    and his  case  was  stayed  pending  the  outcome  of  judicial  review
    proceedings and the ongoing litigation which culminated in the  Supreme
    Court decision in Hysaj (2017).

41.  The decision that is the subject of  this  appeal  is  dated  08  March
    2019. The respondent explained why the decision to treat naturalisation
    as a nullity was withdrawn, and instead, a decision had been  taken  to
    deprive him of citizenship with reference to section  40(3)  BNA  1981.
    The respondent set out the  relevant  sections  of  the  BNA  1981  and
    Chapter 55 of the Nationality Instructions. The decision summarised the
    appellant's immigration history and the false  details  given  at  each
    stage of the process. It acknowledged that he was a minor on arrival in
    the UK but noted that he was an adult by the time he  applied  for  ILR
    and naturalisation. The respondent concluded that the appellant  should
    take full responsibility for his actions by the time he was  an  adult.
    The respondent concluded that he only succeeded in  those  applications
    because  false  representations  continued  to  be   made   about   his
    nationality and date of birth.

42.  The decision letter went on to consider the course  of  events  leading
    up to the letter dated 10 February 2018, which notified  the  intention
    to deprive him of citizenship. She took into account the content of the
    representations made by the appellant's  representatives  in  a  letter
    dated  22  February  2018.  Those  representations  accepted  that  the
    appellant used deception by falsely claiming to be  from  Kosovo.  They
    sought to explain that there was significant upheaval in Albania at the
    time. The appellant left his country in fear of  violence  and  at  the
    time  was  scared  that  he  would  be  'returned  to  his  country  of
    nationality  without   consideration   of   his   circumstances'.   The
    representations said that the appellant had  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
    period of 19 years and now lived here with his spouse. It was asserted,
    without reference to any evidence, that in that time he had developed a
    substantial private and family life in the UK. The representations went
    on to argue that 'any decision to remove him from the  United  Kingdom,
    subsequent to deprivation of a (sic) citizenship' [my  emphasis]  would
    breach his rights under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention.  He
    apologised for his past actions. It was said that he was  otherwise  of
    good character. The representations asked for  this  to  be  considered
    'when determining whether he should be  allowed  to  keep  his  British
    citizenship'.

43.  Having consider these representations the respondent found that  if  he
    was genuinely in fear for his safety he  should  have  told  the  truth
    about  his  nationality  so  that  his  true  circumstances  could   be
    considered. The respondent considered  that  this  was  an  attempt  to
    'deflect blame for  the  fraud  and  avoid  the  consequences  of  your
    actions'.  The  respondent   said   that   she   had   considered   the
    representations made by the appellant, acknowledged that  the  decision
    to deprive on grounds of fraud was discretionary,  but  concluded  that
    deprivation would be both 'reasonable and proportionate' in this  case.
    The respondent accepted that the appellant and his wife  had  lived  in
    the UK for a considerable time. Full consideration would  be  given  to
    the right to family or private life should he choose not to appeal  the
    decision or if the appeal was dismissed.

44.  Under a separate heading of 'Article 8 ECHR' the decision  went  on  to
    explain that any settled status he had prior to naturalisation would be
    lost. However, a deprivation decision  'does  not  itself  preclude  an
    individual from remaining in the UK'. The  decision  went  on  to  make
    clear that although deprivation may culminate in a decision to  remove,
    it was not necessary to take into account the impact that removal would
    have on the appellant and his family members. Whilst acknowledging that
    deprivation would involve the loss of benefits and entitlements, it was
    noted that the appellant was not entitled to them in the  first  place.
    The decision considered the  issues  of  statelessness,  which  is  not
    applicable on the facts of this case and advised the appellant  of  his
    appeal rights.

45.  To provide clarity to the appellant the decision  letter  undertook  to
    make a deprivation  order  within  four  weeks  of  his  appeal  rights
    becoming exhausted, or receipt of confirmation that he will not  appeal
    the decision,  whichever  was  sooner.  Within  eight  weeks  from  the
    deprivation order being made, and subject  to  any  representations,  a
    decision would be made on whether to remove or grant leave to remain.

46.  The appellant accepts that he lied about his nationality  and  date  of
    birth when he first  applied  for  asylum  in  the  UK.  But  for  that
    deception he would not have been granted ELR for four  years  and  been
    eligible to apply for ILR at the end of that period. But for  the  fact
    that, as an adult, he repeated the deception it is highly unlikely that
    he would have been granted ILR. But for the fact that he  repeated  the
    deception in the application for naturalisation, it is highly  unlikely
    that he would be a  British  citizen.  There  is  a  direct  connection
    between  the  serious  and  repeated  deception  and  the  decision  to
    naturalise him as a British citizen.

47.  In most cases where a person has obtained British citizenship by  fraud
    or false representations, the starting point is that  deprivation  will
    be  a  reasonable  and  proportionate   response.   Save   in   unusual
    circumstances, deprivation will place the person in the  same  position
    that they were before the deception. They were never  entitled  to  the
    benefits arising from citizenship in the first place.

48.  In  this  case  the  respondent  considered  the  appellant's  history,
    including his age on arrival in the UK. It was open  to  her  to  place
    more weight on the fact that the appellant repeated the deception as an
    adult in the applications for ILR and naturalisation.  The  appellant's
    representatives accepted that he used deception.  There  was  a  direct
    link between the serious and repeated deception and the eventual  grant
    of naturalisation. It was within a range of reasonable responses to the
    evidence  for  the  respondent  to  be  satisfied  that  the  condition
    precedent for the exercise of her power under section  40(3)  BNA  1981
    was made out.

49.  The serious and repeated nature of the appellant's lies in the  initial
    application  for  asylum,  but  more  culpably,   in   the   subsequent
    applications he made as an adult, demonstrate that it was open  to  the
    respondent to place weight on the public interest in  preventing  fraud
    in the nationality system.

50.  It is not argued that the appellant would  be  made  stateless  by  the
    decision. There is no evidence to suggest that  he  lost  his  Albanian
    citizenship by the act of naturalising him as a British citizen.

51.   The   representations   put   forward   by   the   appellant's   legal
    representative only highlighted private life issues that were  relevant
    to the effect of removal from the UK and did not touch on the effect of
    deprivation of citizenship as a first step.  The  appellant's  skeleton
    argument asserts that  there  is  'no  reasoned  consideration  of  the
    matters that might weigh against a decision to deprive the Appellant of
    his British Citizenship' and argues that the decision  is  unlawful  on
    public law grounds for this reason.  Several  factors  are  identified,
    which I will deal with in turn.

52.  It is argued that the appellant would be without leave to remain  while
    waiting for a decision on whether to grant him  leave  although  it  is
    accepted that he is likely to meet the 20-year private life requirement
    of the immigration rules. It is said that this  would  also  place  his
    wife's immigration status under some uncertainty at a  time  when  they
    are expecting their first child.

53.  I find that little weight can be placed on this issue.  The  respondent
    considered the appellant's length of residence and made  clear  that  a
    decision would be made relating to leave to remain or removal within  a
    reasonable timescale of three  months  from  the  completion  of  these
    proceedings. The timescale could be shortened if the appellant notifies
    the respondent that he does not seek to appeal this decision.

54.  The respondent made clear that full consideration  would  be  given  to
    the appellant's right to private and family life following deprivation.
    The appellant is likely to have a strong case to be  granted  leave  to
    remain on grounds of long residence. He  meets  the  20-year  residence
    requirement of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules. Aside
    from the deception in previous applications that has  resulted  in  the
    decision to deprive him of citizenship, there is  no  evidence  of  any
    other serious behaviour that might  preclude  him  from  being  granted
    leave to remain. There is no evidence to indicate  that  the  appellant
    has been convicted of any criminal  offences.  The  evidence  indicates
    that he is likely to have  worked  hard  to  support  himself  and  his
    family. He and his wife started their own  restaurant  last  year.  His
    wife was granted 30 months leave to remain  in  December  2018.  It  is
    reasonable to infer that she has made an  application  to  extend  that
    leave, and she will remain in the UK lawfully while the application  is
    being considered. If a decision has not been made on  her  application,
    the position of the appellant, his wife, and their child (which was due
    to be born shortly after the hearing) can be considered as part of  the
    second stage process of considering  whether  they  should  be  granted
    leave to remain on human rights grounds. In  doing  so  the  respondent
    would be bound to take into account the best interests of the child and
    the fact that the appellant's wife and child are innocent bystanders.

55.  The suggestion that the  decision  engages  human  rights  because  the
    appellant might face hardship  because  of  the  'hostile  environment'
    policy within the relatively  short  period  of  three  months  is  not
    persuasive on the facts of this case. Although the appellant  told  me,
    in general terms, that it has been difficult  in  the  last  few  years
    without evidence of his nationality since his passport was retained, it
    seems that the couple have been able to  continue  working  to  support
    themselves. His wife has had leave  to  remain  and  is  able  to  work
    lawfully pending the outcome of any application  to  extend  her  leave
    that is likely to have been made. The  appellant  has  been  unable  to
    point to any actual hardship that might occur let alone one that  might
    be sufficient to outweigh, either alone or taken  with  other  factors,
    the public interest in tackling fraud in the nationality system.

56.  The delay between the nullity decision in  2013  and  the  decision  to
    inviting submissions on  the  proposed  intention  to  deprive  him  of
    citizenship in March February 2018 is not relied  upon.  In  any  event
    that delay is adequately explained by  the  course  of  the  litigation
    culminating in Hysaj (2017). In contrast to  Laci,  the  appellant  was
    fully aware of  the  respondent's  intention  to  nullify  nationality.
    Instead, the appellant's skeleton argument  relies  on  the  relatively
    brief period between  February  2018,  when  he  was  invited  to  make
    submissions  on  the  respondent's  intention   to   deprive   him   of
    nationality, and March 2019, when the decision that is the  subject  of
    this appeal was taken.

57.  It is difficult to see  how  this  could  be  considered  a  compelling
    factor that might outweigh the  public  interest  in  deprivation.  The
    chronology set out above makes clear that the respondent acted promptly
    following the hand down of the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  Hysaj  in
    December 2017. The appellant was on notice during that period that  the
    respondent now intended to deprive him of citizenship.  The  delay  was
    not unduly long given that his case was among many that the  respondent
    had to review following Hysaj (2017). I cannot see how  the  fact  that
    the respondent made a pragmatic decision to grant his  wife  30  months
    leave to remain, having placed her  application  on  hold  pending  the
    decision in Hysaj,  makes  any  material  difference  to  the  separate
    decision to deprive the appellant of citizenship. Whether the appellant
    and his wife should both be granted leave to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds will be considered as a second step following the issuing of  a
    deprivation order.

58.  The final points made in the skeleton argument  are  particularly  weak
    and are relevant to a more proleptic assessment of the  proportionality
    of removal rather than the deprivation decision itself. The  fact  that
    the appellant has lived in the UK for more than 20 years is  immaterial
    to the deprivation decision and material to whether he  should  now  be
    granted leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii).  The  rule
    reflects the strength of a person's private life during that time.  The
    respondent would consider the fact that the couple were expecting their
    first child in July 2021. The assertion that  the  appellant's  belated
    admission of his true identity is a mitigating circumstance is  without
    substance. The fact  that  the  appellant  told  the  truth  about  his
    identity only when it was in his interest to do so when  he  wanted  to
    apply for his wife to join him in the UK is hardly a matter that  might
    reduce the weight to be given to the public interest in  depriving  him
    of citizenship. It only puts him back in the  position  he  would  have
    been had he not told such a serious and repeated lie to  obtain  status
    to which he was never entitled.

59.  The last point made in the skeleton argument is  that  the  deprivation
    decision 'would be a disproportionate breach of his convention  rights'
    but is unparticularised beyond that bare assertion.

60.  I conclude that most of the points made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    engage issues that are primarily relevant to the  question  of  whether
    removal from the UK would amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the appellant's right to private and family life given his  length
    of residence. Apart from the continued uncertainty for a few more weeks
    while the respondent considers that issue,  nothing  in  the  arguments
    engage human rights issues relating to the effect  of  the  deprivation
    decision itself. There is nothing to suggest that the appellant and his
    wife could not continue running their business during  this  period  of
    uncertainty, and even if the appellant is technically not permitted  to
    do so, it is likely that his wife is if she has made an application  to
    extend her leave to remain. It is understandable that the appellant  is
    concerned about this  period  of  uncertainty.  However,  there  is  an
    absence of  evidence  to  show  that  there  would  be  any  meaningful
    consequences, at the stage of  deprivation,  that  might  engage  human
    rights issues.

61.   I  conclude  that  this  case  is  at  the  end  of  the  scale  where
    administrative  law  principles  apply  rather  than  biting   in   any
    significant way of issues relating to fundamental rights. It was within
    a range of reasonable responses to the evidence for the  respondent  to
    conclude that the  condition  precedent  for  section  40(3)  BNA  1981
    applied given the appellant accepted that he made false representations
    in previous applications for leave to remain. The respondent made clear
    that the decision was an exercise of  discretion,  considered  relevant
    matters, and did not consider  irrelevant  matters,  before  concluding
    that the public interest in preventing fraud in the nationality  system
    justified deprivation. She was fully aware of the appellant's length of
    residence and family circumstances but was entitled  to  conclude  that
    those were matters that were relevant to  a  subsequent  assessment  of
    whether it will be appropriate to grant him leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.

62.  Until now, the appellant has faced no meaningful consequences  for  the
    lies that he told. But for those lies he would not  have  been  granted
    ELR, ILR or have been naturalised as a British  citizen.  The  evidence
    indicates that, aside from this serious deception, which  is  addressed
    by the decision to deprive him of citizenship, he is  likely  to  be  a
    hard-working  and  otherwise  law-abiding   person   who   has   strong
    connections to the UK because of his long  residence  since  he  was  a
    child. He and his wife are now well settled and are starting a family.

63.  Whether the power to deprive him  of  citizenship  is  exercised  in  a
    rational and proportionate way will depend on the context and the facts
    in each case. A decision maker should consider whether,  having  regard
    to the severity of the consequences, a fair  balance  has  been  struck
    between  the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the  interests  of  the
    community. Having weighed the circumstances in  this  case  I  conclude
    that it was reasonable for the respondent to place  significant  weight
    on the  public  interest  in  deprivation,  which  will  be  the  usual
    consequence in a case of this kind. No  meaningful  factors  have  been
    identified that might weigh in the appellant's favour. The human rights
    arguments put forward on behalf of the appellant throughout the process
    are more  relevant  to  the  proportionality  of  removal  rather  than
    deprivation.

64.   For  these  reasons  it  was  reasonable  and  proportionate  for  the
    respondent to conclude that the appellant obtained citizenship by fraud
    or false representations and that it  is  in  the  public  interest  to
    deprive him of  a  status  to  which  he  was  never  entitled.  It  is
    proportionate to deprive the appellant of citizenship  because  of  the
    public interest in tackling abuse of the nationality system.

65.  Whether it is proportionate to remove the appellant from the UK is  the
    next step for the respondent to consider given that he would appear  to
    meet the private life requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the
    immigration rules. The immigration rules are said to reflect where  the
    respondent considers a fair balance should be struck for the purpose of
    assessing private and family life  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention. The situation of the whole family, including a young child,
    will need to be given careful consideration within  the  timeframe  set
    out in the decision letter.



DECISION

The appeal brought under section 40A(1) BNA 1981 is DISMISSED


Signed   M. Canavan    Date 21 September 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email


ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00021/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by              |Decision Promulgated                 |
|video conference on 09 March 2021 (V)|                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JETMIR CANI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr J. Greer, instructed by MyUKVisas


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of continuity I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant (Mr Cani) appealed the respondent's (Secretary of  State)
    decision dated 08 March 2019 to  deprive  him  of  British  citizenship
    under section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981 ('BNA 1981').

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge T. Jones ('the judge') allowed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 03 September  2019.  The  appellant  accepted
    that there had been deception. When he arrived in the United Kingdom on
    30 November 1999 he falsely claimed that he was Kosovan when he  is  in
    fact Albanian. He was 16 years old on arrival  in  the  UK.  The  judge
    noted the submissions made on behalf of the appellant about his age  on
    arrival and whether the deception was material to the eventual grant of
    citizenship. He concluded that the appellant  continued  the  deception
    when he applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain, by which point  he  was
    an adult, and when he later applied to naturalise as a British citizen.
    Had the respondent known about the deception  the  decisions  may  well
    have been different [51]. The judge  went  on  to  make  the  following
    findings:

             "53. The Appellant has come forward, albeit for reasons of his
         own, in 2013. The respondent thereafter pursues a course of action,
         which as Mrs Fell said was under the  wrong  provisions.  This  was
         only recognised latterly  in  February  2019  when  the  Respondent
         withdrew the [earlier] decision to treat the  Appellant's  decision
         as a nullity and issued the present notice of decision  to  deprive
         him of British citizenship on 8th March 2019.

             54.  In that time whilst it could be said  the  Appellant  has
         benefited from the same - he has also been somewhat uncertain as to
         his position and perhaps imperilled by it.

             55.  The Respondent has further compounded that by delaying  a
         decision concerning his wife's application  for  further  leave  to
         remain.

             56.  In the meanwhile, the Appellant has on the  face  of  it,
         blamelessly, having taken the advice of  his  lawyers  pursued  his
         life in the United Kingdom working, integrating in British society,
         paying taxes and committing no offences.

             57.  It is plain to me in the circumstances; and as argued  by
         Mr Greer, that following research into the matters irrespective  of
         the position that the Appellant was in once he had accrued fourteen
         years' residence in the United Kingdom - the provisions of  chapter
         55 then in force in September 2013 were indubitably in his favour.

             58.  Certainly, from all that I can see, there is  nothing  to
         suggest  that  there  was  any  criminality  or  other  blameworthy
         behaviour on the part of the Appellant, that should  have  led  the
         Secretary  of  state  to  make  an  adverse  decision  against  the
         Appellant at that time.

             59.  There is no doubt that the Appellant and his wife enjoy a
         private and  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  This  is  not
         disputed. They have set out several difficulties  with  that  being
         maintained in their home country which has  some  resonance.  Delay
         has been a significant factor  in  this  matter  in  terms  of  the
         Secretary of State's handling of the  Appellant's  claim;  and,  to
         some extent that of his wife. The Appellant has been in the  United
         Kingdom for nearly twenty years, his wife not far  off  approaching
         five.

             60.  In my proportionality assessment I  have  borne  in  mind
         fully that the Appellant's removal is not  reasonably  foreseeable;
         but there will be an interference with his family and private  life
         as identified. I would also note over and above that  at  paragraph
         28 of Mr Greer's skeleton argument that the Appellant may be unable
         to work and that there is a significant impact  for  the  Appellant
         and his wife as a result.

             61.  I must bear in mind  in  this  balance  that  significant
         weight is to be attached to the public interest. I bear in mind  as
         Mrs Fell submitted at the  hearing  that  there  are  impacts  that
         follow from such deceit  in  terms  of  the  effects  of  decisions
         makers, policy and public  opinion  -  but  it  is  also  of  vital
         importance that the public interest is served - in that  applicants
         do not benefit from  their  fraud.  The  Appellant  has  secured  a
         benefit which is undisputed; but I must  also  bear  in  mind  that
         Parliament has charged the Secretary of State and not the judiciary
         with  the  responsibility  of  making   decisions,   with   regards
         deprivation of citizenship.

             62.  Case law explains that it can only be in rare cases  that
         appeals would be allowed (BA). However, in  this  appeal,  for  the
         reasons I have stated the Appellant has been under the shadow of  a
         long delay and I have considered EB (Kosovo).  Delay  is  a  factor
         that I can consider in assessing proportionality. The  Respondent's
         own policy was on the face of it with the Appellant  in  2013  (see
         above, at paragraph 46 of this decision); but seemingly,  this  has
         not been  taken  account  of  by  the  respondent  in  the  current
         decision.

             63.  In these circumstances looking at the public interest, it
         could be said that these interests are reduced  by  the  length  of
         delay and the development of the  Appellant's  family  life  during
         that period of delay.  In  all  the  circumstances  in  seeking  to
         achieve a balance sheet approach whilst finely balanced I find  for
         the Appellant.  The  decision  to  deprive  the  Appellant  of  his
         citizenship does have consequences that flow  from  it;  and  these
         have been fairly described by Mr Greer in his skeleton argument  at
         paragraph 28 thereof.

             64.  I find in all of the circumstances that  such  a  course,
         though there is no suggestion the Appellant will  be  compelled  to
         leave the United Kingdom now;  but  it  is  the  effect  that  this
         decision  would  then  have  a  disproportionate  effect  upon  the
         Appellant and his wife. It is all  these  particular  circumstances
         and for  these  reasons  I  find  that  the  respondent's  decision
         interfering with their private and family life is disproportionate.
         I find for the Appellant."

4.   The Secretary of State appealed the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

      i) The judge erred in finding that the appellant would have  benefited
         from 14 year policy, which was withdrawn. First, the appellant  had
         not accrued 14 years residence at the date the  decision  to  treat
         the grant of citizenship as a nullity was served  on  09  September
         2013. Second, nothing required the Secretary of State  to  serve  a
         decision within a particular time frame. Third, the judge failed to
         give any reasons as to why the Secretary of State should have taken
         into account a policy that was withdrawn in 2014 at  the  date  she
         made the decision to deprive the appellant of citizenship in 2019.

     ii) The judge erred in his assessment of the weight to be given to  the
         delay in decision making with  reference  to  EB  (Kosovo)  v  SSHD
         [2008] UKHL 41.

5.   A previous hearing listed on 11 November  2020  was  adjourned  due  to
    lack of court time because the relevant Senior Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer was unavailable due to the  overrunning  of  another  case.  Mr
    Greer indicated that he wanted to make an application  for  a  stay  on
    proceedings pending the outcome of an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal made to the Court of Appeal against the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Hysaj  (Deprivation  of  Citizenship:  Delay)  [2020]  UKUT
    000128 (IAC). In the absence of  the  respondent's  representative  the
    application was 'parked'.

6.   Mr Greer renewed the application at the hearing on 09 March  2021.  The
    most he could say was that an application for permission had been  made
    to the Court of Appeal in Hysaj, and that the solicitors  dealing  with
    the case were granted funding to file skeleton arguments. I noted  that
    the Court of Appeal  case  tracker  stated  that  the  application  for
    permission had only just been allocated to a judge. At the date of  the
    hearing, there was still no decision on permission.

7.   I refused the application to stay the proceedings  because  (i)  it  is
    not an effective use of court time to stay cases pending  decisions  of
    the Court of Appeal unless there  is  an  indication  that  a  relevant
    decision might be imminent; (ii) there has already been  a  significant
    delay in deciding the permission application since Hysaj was decided in
    the Upper Tribunal; (iii) it is still  not  clear  when  the  Court  of
    Appeal might decide  the  permission  application;  and  (iv)  even  if
    permission were granted it may take some time to determine the  appeal.
    In the circumstances, I concluded that a stay in these proceedings  was
    not justified.

Decision and reasons

8.   Since the First-tier Tribunal promulgated the decision  in  this  case,
    the Upper Tribunal published the decision in Hysaj. Mr  Greer  was  not
    instructed to concede the point but accepted that the decision made the
    case difficult for the appellant. He accepted that a reported  decision
    of a Presidential panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  persuasive.  He
    acknowledged that there was some force in my observation that the First-
    tier Tribunal may have conflated the proportionality  assessment  in  a
    deprivation case with the usual balance sheet approach taken in Article
    8 removal cases, but argued that the  judge's  reasons  were  tolerably
    clear for the parties to understand the decision.

9.   In  Hysaj  the  Upper  Tribunal  reviewed  the  case  law  relating  to
    deprivation of citizenship. The Court of Appeal in R (KV)(Sri Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  2483    noted  that  deprivation  may  result  in
    interference with Article 8 rights, but the right to a  nationality  is
    not itself a right protected by the European Convention of Human Rights
    [17]. The Court of Appeal went on to find that where deception was used
    in an application for naturalisation it would be  an  unusual  case  in
    which the appellant could legitimately complain of  the  withdrawal  of
    rights arising from naturalisation when the decision would only put him
    in the position he would have been had he not been fraudulent  and  had
    acted honestly in making the application  [19].  The  Court  of  Appeal
    recognised that there might be some cases where the applicant  will  be
    placed in a  worse  position,  for  example,  if  he  lost  a  previous
    nationality having been granted British citizenship [19]. In such cases
    the  decision-maker  will  need  to  consider  whether  deprivation  of
    citizenship  is  justified  having  regard  to  the   consequences   of
    deprivation. A balancing exercise will need to be carried out to assess
    whether  in  all  the  circumstances  deprivation  of  citizenship   is
    proportionate [20].

10.  The Upper Tribunal in Hysaj went on  to  make  the  following  findings
    relating to the scope of an appeal under section 40A BNA 1981:

         "35. The focus  of  a  section  40A  appeal  is  to  ascertain  the
             reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation, which  may
             involve removal. The  Tribunal  confirmed  in  Deliallisi,  at
             [56], that  even  if  removal  is  too  uncertain  to  feature
             directly as a consequence, the possibility of removal and  any
             period of uncertainty following deprivation may be required to
             be taken into account in assessing the effect that deprivation
             would have, not only on the appellant but also on  members  of
             his family. While it is necessary for  the  Tribunal  to  have
             regard  to  the   reasonably   foreseeable   consequences   of
             deprivation  when  determining  whether  the  making  of   the
             deprivation order itself is lawful, it is not necessary for it
             to go  further  and  conduct  a  proleptic,  or  anticipatory,
             analysis of whether  the  appellant  would  be  likely  to  be
             deported at a later stage: Aziz, at [21]-[32].

         36.  Sales LJ (as he then was) held in Aziz, at [26],  that  whilst
             regard is to be had to the reasonably foreseeable consequences
             of deprivation, an examination of such  consequences  is  only
             required in so far as it is necessary to make an assessment in
             relation to them in order to rule upon whether the  making  of
             the deprivation order itself will  be  lawful  and  compatible
             with Convention rights, in particular article 8 and section 55
             of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ('section
             55'). This is a fact specific assessment."

11.  The Upper Tribunal concluded that the Secretary of State  was  entitled
    to rely on the legal position as it stood when, as  in  this  case,  an
    initial decision was made to treat the  decision  to  naturalise  as  a
    British citizen as a nullity rather  than  to  deprive  the  person  of
    citizenship. During the course of various cases it became apparent that
    a category of cases were suitable for deprivation  rather  than  to  be
    treated as a nullity. There were delays in cases where the Secretary of
    State had previously treated decisions as a nullity, but following  the
    Supreme Court decision in R  (Hysaj)  v  SSHD  [2018]  INLR  279,  made
    decisions to deprive the person of nationality  under  section  40  BNA
    1981 instead. The  Upper  Tribunal  in  Hysaj  concluded  that  it  was
    unsustainable to rely on the delay  between  decisions  to  reduce  the
    public interest in deprivation [61].

12.   The  Upper  Tribunal  went  on  to  reject  the  contention  that  the
    respondent's  policy  contained  in  Chapter  55  of  the   Nationality
    Instructions involved the exercise of discretion and did not  establish
    a clear and unambiguous promise that a person will not be  deprived  of
    citizenship if they have lived in the United Kingdom for 14 years [67].
    The policy  was  withdrawn  on  20  August  2014.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that there was no historic  injustice  because  of  the  lost
    opportunity to engage the policy arising from the delay. It was open to
    the Secretary of State to apply the relevant law and policy at the date
    of the decision [74]. On the facts of  the  case,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    rejected the argument that the period of  'limbo'  that  the  appellant
    would  face  following  deprivation  would  lead  to   disproportionate
    consequences for him and his family. The Upper Tribunal concluded  that
    he would be placed in the same position that he would have been had  he
    not lied about is personal history and identity as an Albanian national
    [105]. The period of uncertainty was a  consequence  of  the  appellant
    losing rights and entitlements from his  British  citizenship  that  he
    should never have enjoyed [107]. Significant weight must be  placed  on
    the public interest in maintaining the integrity of the system by which
    foreign nationals are naturalised as British citizens.  The  fact  that
    deprivation would cause  disruption  to  the  appellant's  life  was  a
    consequence of his own actions and  without  more  could  not  tip  the
    proportionality balance in favour of  him  retaining  the  benefits  of
    citizenship, which were fraudulently obtained [110].

13.  The facts of this case are similar to those in  Hysaj.  The  judge  did
    not have the benefit of the Upper Tribunal decision, but  in  light  of
    what is said in Hysaj, it becomes clear that the First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings involved the making of errors of law.

      i) The Secretary of State was entitled to rely on the  legal  position
         as it stood on 24 July 2013 when  she  made  a  decision  to  treat
         naturalisation as a nullity.

     ii) Even if the Secretary of State  had  made  a  decision  to  deprive
         instead, the judge erroneously concluded the appellant  would  have
         met the requirements of Chapter 55 for 14 years residence, when  in
         fact he would have only lived in the UK for a period  of  13  years
         and 8 months at the date of the decision or 13 years and 10  months
         at the date of service.

    iii)  The  judge  failed  to  give   adequate   consideration   to   the
         discretionary nature of the policy, which did not establish a clear
         and unambiguous promise that citizenship would not be deprived if a
         person had lived in the UK for more than 14 years.

     iv)  The  delay  between  the  nullity  decision  and  the   subsequent
         deprivation decision  was  given  undue  weight  by  the  judge  in
         circumstances where the Secretary of State was entitled to rely  on
         the legal position as it stood in 2013 and to  apply  the  relevant
         law and policy relating to deprivation as it stood  in  2019  (well
         after the 14 year policy had been withdrawn).

      v) Although the judge's findings between [59-64]  seek  to  conduct  a
         balancing exercise, at times, the focus appeared to be more on  the
         prospect of removal and whether family life could be  continued  in
         Albania [59] rather than the proportionality of  depriving  him  of
         citizenship, which is a different emphasis  to  the  balance  sheet
         approach usually taken in a human rights appeal. Having found  that
         removal was not reasonably foreseeable, it  is  arguable  that  the
         judge misapplied the principles outlined by the Upper  Tribunal  in
         BA (Deprivation of citizenship: appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC).  The
         stronger a person's case for resisting removal the less  likely  it
         will be that removal is one  of  the  foreseeable  consequences  of
         deprivation  and  that  deprivation  would  therefore  engage   the
         operation of Article 8. The judge placed weight  on  the  practical
         consequences that deprivation would have on the family in terms  of
         the loss of rights arising from citizenship, but failed to consider
         whether a period  of  uncertainty  nevertheless  was  proportionate
         given that the appellant would be returned to the position he would
         have been in had he not committed the fraud. This  is  not  a  case
         where any additional factors were raised such as a loss of previous
         legitimate status or nationality as highlighted in KV (Sri  Lanka).
         Any status the appellant obtained prior to naturalisation was based
         on the same fraud.

14.  For these reasons I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of errors  of  law  and  must  be  set  aside.  The
    findings relating to fraud for the purpose of section 40(3)(a) BNA 1981
    were not challenged and are preserved.

15.  It is appropriate for the decision to be made in  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The appellant did not attend the hearing for the decision to be  remade
    thereby forcing an adjournment.  I  was  informed  that  there  may  be
    developments in his personal circumstances that will also  need  to  be
    evidenced. The decision will be remade at  a  resumed  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. The outstanding issues for determination  will  include
    (i) the exercise of discretion; (ii) whether Article 8 is engaged;  and
    if so (iii) proportionality.



DIRECTIONS

16.  The parties agreed with the Upper Tribunal's provisional view that  the
    decision could be remade fairly by way of a remote video  hearing,  but
    Mr Greer indicated that further instructions might need to be taken  in
    relation to what witnesses might be  called  at  the  resumed  hearing.
    Subject to any further representations that might be made  in  relation
    to mode of hearing, the appeal will be listed for a remote hearing.

17.  The appellant must notify the Upper Tribunal within 7 days of the  date
    of the error of law hearing (i) what witnesses will be called; (ii)  if
    they need the  assistance  of  an  interpreter,  and  if  so,  in  what
    language; and (iii) any representations on mode of hearing  bearing  in
    mind that if it is thought necessary to have a face to face hearing the
    case may need to be transferred to the Bradford hearing centre.

18.  The parties shall file and serve any up to date  evidence  relied  upon
    at least 14 days before the next hearing.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal at a resumed hearing


Signed   M. Canavan        Date 11 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

