
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
DC/00014/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 March 2018                           |On 27 April 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     GZB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, GZB, is a citizen of Eritrea who was born  in  1974.   A
    brief background to his appeal is set out in my error of  law  decision
    which was promulgated on 6 June 2017 and which I set out below:

         1.   The appellant, GZB, was born in Eritrea in 1974.  He became  a
         British citizen by naturalisation on 15 December 2012.  On 26  June
         2015, he was convicted  at  Leeds  Crown  Court  for  a  number  of
         offences including a  sexual  assault  upon  a  13-year-old  female
         child.  He was sentenced to three years imprisonment and was served
         with a sex offenders' register notice.  On 12  November  2015,  the
         respondent served a deprivation investigation letter (DIL)  on  the
         appellant advising him that the Secretary of State was  considering
         removing his British citizenship in the light of the offences which
         he had committed.   The  appellant  replied  on  24  December  2015
         denying that he had been guilty of the offences for  which  he  had
         been convicted.  By a decision dated 8 August 2016, the  respondent
         removed the  appellant's  British  citizenship  and  the  appellant
         appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Robson)  which,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 19 January 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
         licence which had been granted to him on 4 November 2016.  However,
         he attended without a professional representative.  He applied  for
         an adjournment explaining that he had been in prison  and  had  not
         had the opportunity to  find  a  solicitor.   The  application  was
         opposed by the Presenting Officer who submitted that the  appellant
         had been released on 4 November 2016 and had  had,  therefore,  5-6
         weeks within which to find a legal  representative.   Judge  Robson
         then determined the application for the adjournment:

         Having heard the appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer,
         I told the appellant I saw no reason why he should be prejudiced by
         the lack of representation and equally no reason why he  could  not
         explain his case himself and therefore there was no reason to grant
         an adjournment.

         3.   Despite not being represented at the  hearing,  the  appellant
         now has a solicitor and he was represented by Counsel (Mr  Hussain)
         before the Upper Tribunal.   The  grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
         submit that the judge was wrong not to adjourn  the  hearing.   The
         grounds further submit that the case involved a number  of  complex
         and indeed novel  legal  issues.   I  am  told  that  the  Eritrean
         Nationality Proclamation (No.21/1992)  at  Section  8  states  that
         anyone who voluntarily acquires a  foreign  nationality  after  the
         publication  of  the  proclamation  "may   be   deprived   of   his
         nationality".   The  question  arises,   therefore,   whether   the
         naturalisation of the appellant as a British citizen had led to the
         appellant losing his Eritrean Nationality.  Further, Section  40(4)
         the British Nationality Act 2002 provides  that  the  Secretary  of
         State may not make an order under subSection (2) if he is satisfied
         that the order would make a person stateless.  Section 40(2)(c)  of
         the 2002 Act provides that, "The Secretary of  State  may  make  an
         order depriving a person of citizenship ...  if  the  Secretary  of
         State has reasonable grounds for believing that the person is able,
         under the law of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom,
         to become a national of such a country or territory".

         4.   These legal issues were not considered at all by Judge Robson.
          Indeed, contrary to Judge  Robson's  belief  that  there  was  "no
         reason why [the appellant] could not explain his case  himself"  he
         was plainly unable, as a lay litigant, from bringing the provisions
         of Section 40 of the 2002 Act to the judge's  attention.   I  have,
         however, considerable sympathy for the judge especially when he was
         told that the appellant had made numerous (the  grounds  of  appeal
         indicate as many as fifteen) attempts to obtain a lawyer  prior  to
         the hearing.  It is not surprising that the judge thought there was
         very little prospect of the appellant ever finding a representative
         should the case be adjourned.  Equally, however, the  judge  should
         have  been  aware  that  deprivation  of  citizenship  is  area  of
         immigration  law  to  detailed  statutory  provisions  and,  having
         decided to proceed in the absence of a professional representative,
         he should have made himself aware of the relevant provisions before
         hearing and then determining the appeal.   The  judge  should  have
         been aware that this was not simply a case in which a lay  litigant
         could put forward his account of past events, in  which  the  legal
         issues could be explained easily to the appellant and in which  the
         difference   which   might   have   been   made   by   professional
         representation was perhaps marginal.  As it is, the judge  has  not
         engaged at all with the statelessness issues arising in the appeal.



         5.   I find that the judge has erred in law by failing  to  adjourn
         the hearing or, at the least, failing to consider the relevant  law
         with a view to explaining this to the lay  appellant  and  inviting
         his comments before determining the appeal.  I am aware that  there
         is not, at the present time, any removal  decision  but  I  do  not
         consider that that fact excuses the Upper Tribunal from seeking  to
         remake the decision on the deprivation matter  in  accordance  with
         the law.

         Notice of Decision

         6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 19 January 2017 is set aside.  None  of  the  findings  of  fact
         shall stand.  The decision will be remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
         before a  panel  including  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive  Lane  at
         Bradford on a date to be fixed.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings."

 2. This case was listed for a resumed  hearing  on  12  March  2018.   The
    reason for the delay in listing the  resumed  hearing  is  unclear.   I
    heard the oral submissions of both representatives before reserving  my
    decision.  Although I was given a number of case  reports,  I  was  not
    provided by either party's representative with a skeleton argument.   I
    also note that, before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant  appeared
    in person and also  that  his  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (which are now the focus of the Upper Tribunal in remaking the
    decision) were prepared by the appellant or someone assisting  him  and
    appear in manuscript on the appeal form.

 3. The grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concerning  the
    decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  revoke   the   appellant's
    citizenship are as follows:

         "I have lived, worked and paid tax in the UK since  2006.   I  have
         integrated well into the British society and obey the laws  of  the
         country.  I  was  very  proud  to  have  been  granted  my  British
         citizenship in 2012.  I have always loved an offence-free life  and
         to be convicted of a crime I did not commit is very frightening.  I
         am maintaining my innocence for the  offences  I  have  been  found
         guilty of and my appeal is due in due process.  Whilst in prison  I
         am making good use of my time by doing courses  to  improve  skills
         such as literacy, numeracy, ICT etc.  My prison record of behaviour
         is one to be proud of.  I look forward  to  clearing  my  name  and
         returning to live an offence-free life in this country I have  come
         to know as home."

 4. The Upper Tribunal must now remake the decision on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal.  Those grounds of appeal have  not  been
    amended and nor has permission been sought to amend them.  Instead,  at
    the resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Hussain made a number
    of oral submissions.  Many of those submissions lay outside  the  scope
    of the grounds of appeal which I have set out  in  extenso  above.   Mr
    Hussain told  me  that  the  appellant,  if  deprived  of  his  British
    citizenship, would be stateless, having been already  deprived  of  his
    Eritrean nationality.   Further,  he  had  been  granted  international
    protection in the United Kingdom prior to being naturalised because  he
    had left Eritrea illegally and is a Pentecostal Christian.  Mr  Hussain
    queried whether, if the appellant remained at Article 3 ECHR risk  upon
    return to Eritrea, the removal of his citizenship was lawful.

 5. Having been delivered in an evidential vacuum, these  submissions  were
    not particularly helpful.  It was  open  to  the  appellant  to  adduce
    evidence before the Upper Tribunal remaking the decision at the resumed
    hearing.  He  and  his  representatives  have  chosen  not  to  do  so.
    Likewise, he has not chosen to amend the grounds of  appeal.   Further,
    whilst I am aware that  the  initial  burden  of  proof  rests  on  the
    Secretary of State to be satisfied that an order would not  render  the
    appellant stateless, the respondent has, in a detailed decision letter,
    set out clearly the reasons for depriving the appellant of his  British
    nationality.  In Hashi  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1136  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the question of burden of proof at [23-24]:

         "No doubt the SS [Secretary of State] has  the  burden  of  showing
         that she was satisfied that her  order  would  not  make  Mr  Hashi
         stateless. That is a comparatively easy burden to discharge and  Mr
         Hashi does not challenge that she was so satisfied.

         But Mr Hashi is entitled to and does assert that she was  wrong  to
         be so satisfied and on that question  he  must  have  the  relevant
         burden of proof. If at the end of the day  the  court  is  left  in
         genuine doubt whether a person who is to  be  deprived  by  his  UK
         citizenship would be stateless, his claim  to  challenge  the  SS's
         decision will fail. Such cases will inevitably be  rare  since,  if
         the challenge is a serious matter, there will have to  be  evidence
         of the relevant law as there was in this case. The court will  then
         make up its mind on that evidence as SIAC did. In Al-Jedda  v  SSHD
         [2012] EWCA Civ 358 Richards LJ recorded (paras 122-3)  that  there
         was no dispute in that case that the burden of  proof  was  on  the
         appellant on the balance of probabilities. He expressed no surprise
         at that absence of dispute. Neither do I."

 6. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State has discharged the burden of
    showing that she is satisfied that her  order  would  not  render  this
    appellant stateless.  The burden of  proof  thereafter  passes  to  the
    appellant to show that the Secretary of State's is incorrect.  Even  at
    this  very  late  stage,  the  appellant  (who,  I  stress,  has  legal
    representation) has taken no steps  whatever  to  adduce  any  evidence
    before the Tribunal.  It is asserted that the appellant  will  lose  or
    has lost his Eritrean nationality but there is absolutely  no  evidence
    to show that that is the case.  It is  possible  that  the  appellant's
    apparent state of denial arises out of his continued refusal to  accept
    that he committed those offences against his daughter for which he  has
    been convicted.  The appellant has spoken throughout these  proceedings
    of his intention to  appeal  against  that  conviction;  there  was  no
    evidence whatever before the Upper Tribunal that  he  has  successfully
    appealed conviction or sentence.   I find that I cannot proceed on  the
    basis of assumptions; it is for the appellant (as shown  in  Hashi)  to
    discharge the burden on him.  He has wholly failed to do so.

 7. As regards Article 3 ECHR, there is no decision to remove the appellant
    from the United Kingdom following the deprivation of  his  citizenship.
    Section 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981 does  not  involve  any
    statutory hypothesis that the appellant will be removed from the United
    Kingdom in consequence of the deprivation decision (Deliallisi (British
    citizen: deprivation appeal: scope) [2013] UKUT 00439 (IAC)).  Further,
    whilst the Tribunal may be required to determine  the  consequences  of
    deprivation including removal, I again  cannot  see  why  the  Tribunal
    should do so in the absence of any evidence.  Mr Hussain asserted  that
    the appellant would  be  required  to  undertake  military  service  in
    Eritrea and that he would face Article 3 ill-treatment  on  account  of
    his religion.  Tellingly, those factors do not appear anywhere  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  In the  light  of  those
    unamended grounds of appeal, in the absence of any  evidence  from  the
    appellant and given the fact that the appellant is not facing a removal
    decision, I find there exists no proper basis upon which I may  address
    Mr Hussain's submissions.  Put more bluntly, I find that  there  is  no
    reason for the Tribunal  simply  to  assume,  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence, that the appellant would face Article 3 ill-treatment  if  he
    were to be returned  to  Eritrea.   Such  a  conclusion  would  require
    evidence and there is none.

 8. Finally, returning to the grounds of appeal, I am  not  persuaded  that
    the appellant has made any challenge to the legality of the decision to
    deprive the  appellant  of  his  citizenship.   I  am  aware  that  the
    Secretary of State's policies confer a wide margin of  appreciation  on
    the decision-maker (Ahmed (deprivation of citizen)  [2017]  UKUT  00118
    (IAC)).  Moreover, the reasons for the deprivation are clearly set  out
    in the refusal letter, in particular the consideration by the Secretary
    of State the  appellant  had  dishonestly  obtained  naturalisation  by
    failing to disclose that, at  the  time  of  his  application,  he  was
    abusing his daughter.  That and the other reasons given in  the  letter
    have never been properly addressed  by  the  appellant  it  would  seem
    because he refuses to accept  that  he  was  justly  convicted  of  the
    offence against his daughter.  However, I am reminded that  the  burden
    of proof rests on the appellant.  He has  wholly  failed  to  discharge
    that burden.  In the circumstances, his appeal against the  deprivation
    decision is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

 9. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 8 August 2016 is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
