
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00019/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6 March 2018                        |On 02 May 2018                        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Abdul Majid Nassour
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Gordon Dadds
LLP.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pooler, who in a Decision and  Reasons  promulgated
    on 2 November 2017 following a hearing at Taylor House  on  12  October
    2017 allowed Mr Nassour's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to revoke his UK citizenship.   For  ease  of  convenience  we
    shall throughout this decision refer to the Secretary of State, who was
    the original respondent, as "the Secretary of State" and to Mr Nassour,
    who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is, or certainly was, at all material times a national  of
    Lebanon who was born on 9 April 1963.  In March  2004  he  applied  for
    registration as a British citizen.  Within that application  he  stated
    correctly that he was a British overseas citizen (his  application  for
    that having been granted in 1995) but in response to the question "have
    you  ever  held,  or  do  you  now  hold,  any  other  citizenship   or
    nationality?" he had answered no.  It is and  has  always  been  agreed
    between the parties that that statement is not factually  correct.   In
    2015 the claimant applied to renew his  British  passport  and  in  the
    course of  that  application  he  disclosed  a  copy  of  his  Lebanese
    passport, which had been issued on 6 March 1995.

 3.  The  Secretary  of  State  made  a  decision  to  revoke  his  British
    citizenship on the basis that  this  had  been  acquired  fraudulently,
    relying on Section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981, the relevant
    passages of which are as follows:

         "40. Deprivation of citizenship

             (1)  In this Section a reference to  a  person's  'citizenship
                  status' is a reference to his status as -

                  (a)  a British citizen,

                      ...

             (3)  The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
                  citizenship status which results from his registration  or
                  naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
                  the registration or naturalisation was obtained  by  means
                  of -

                  (a)  fraud,

                  (b)  false representation, or

                  (c)  concealment of a material fact".

 4. The background to this decision was that in  1995  when  obtaining  his
    British overseas citizen passport the claimant had submitted with  that
    application a copy of his Lebanese passport  whereas  in  2004  he  had
    claimed that he had never had any other nationality.  In support of his
    2004 application the claimant had supplied a letter from  the  Lebanese
    Embassy in Kinshasa which stated as follows (in the version within  the
    file translated from the French):

         "To whom it may concern

         In view of the absence in its files of any file in the name  of  Mr
         Nassour Abdul Majid [which we note does not seem in any event to be
         his name but probably nothing turns on that], the  Embassy  of  the
         Lebanese Republic in the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  (Consular
         Department) hereby certifies that it has not issued  or  renewed  a
         Lebanese passport in his name.

         This certificate has been granted to Mr Nassour Abdul  Majid,  born
         in Haris, Lebanon, on 9/4/63, the  holder  of  a  British  passport
         number 790014994, issued in Brussels on  12/2/02,  for  any  lawful
         purpose ...".

 5. We note in passing that the letter itself probably does not comply with
    the requirements set out in section 4 of the guidance to applicants for
    British nationality, which states that  an  applicant  is  required  to
    provide documentary evidence that such an applicant does  not  hold  or
    has not after 4 July 2002 renounced, voluntarily given up  or  lost  by
    any action or inaction any  other  citizenship  or  nationality,  which
    evidence must be "a letter from the authorities of the country in which
    you were  born  saying  whether  you  have  ever  held  that  country's
    citizenship or nationality".  This goes on to state that: "If you  have
    at any time held that  country's  citizenship  or  nationality  but  no
    longer hold it, the letter should also state  the  date  on  which  you
    ceased to hold it and why".

 6. As already noted, all that is said in this letter is that the  Lebanese
    Embassy in the DRC had not issued or renewed a Lebanese  passport.   It
    is clear that in 2004 the claimant accordingly must have addressed  his
    mind to the issue of whether  or  not  he  had  ever  held  a  Lebanese
    nationality.  This is not a case where his answer in the form  that  he
    had not can merely be explained as an oversight.  We note that  in  his
    witness statement he attempted to explain the mistake as an error  made
    by his solicitors, but the relevance of the letter  from  the  Kinshasa
    Embassy was not whether or  not  technically  it  was  correct  that  a
    passport had not been issued by  that  embassy  but  that  it  went  to
    establish his awareness of the need to provide documentation to support
    his claim that he had not had any other  nationality  previously  which
    had he addressed his mind properly to it he must have appreciated  that
    he had.  The difficulty with the decision now under challenge  is  that
    although the letter from the Lebanese Embassy is referred to within the
    decision itself at paragraph 6(b)  nowhere  within  the  decision  does
    Judge Pooler consider the relevance of this evidence.

 7. In these circumstances we are satisfied that notwithstanding  that  the
    claimant knew  at  the  time  of  the  application  that  he  not  only
    previously but still held Lebanese nationality  and  therefore  had  he
    addressed his mind to it the answer on the form that  he  had  not  was
    untrue and he knew it was untrue.

 8. This was a matter which on its face would suggest that his  answer  was
    not only incorrect but also made dishonestly.   If  the  judge  was  to
    disregard this evidence it was incumbent on him in the circumstances of
    this case to give proper reasons for so doing.  In our  view  this  was
    clearly a material error because had the judge considered this evidence
    properly it certainly cannot be said that he would have been  bound  to
    reach the same conclusion,  namely  that  the  claimant  had  not  been
    dishonest when saying he had never had any other nationality and so the
    decision must be set aside.

 9. We have regard to the decision of our current President in the reported
    decision in Deliallisi (British  citizen:  deprivation  appeal:  Scope)
    [2013] UKUT 00439, in which the head note is as follows:

         "(1) An appeal under Section 40A of  the  British  Nationality  Act
             1981 against  a  decision  to  deprive  a  person  of  British
             citizenship requires the  Tribunal  to  consider  whether  the
             Secretary of State's discretionary decision to deprive  should
             be exercised differently.   This  will  involve  (but  not  be
             limited to) ECHR Article 8 issues, as  well  as  the  question
             whether deprivation would be a  disproportionate  interference
             with a person's EU rights.

         (2)   Although,  unlike  Section  84(1)(g)  of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, Section 40A of the  1981  Act
             does not involve any statutory hypothesis that  the  appellant
             will be removed from the United Kingdom in consequence of  the
             deprivation decision, the Tribunal is  required  to  determine
             the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation,  which
             may, depending on the facts, include removal.

         (3)  A person who, immediately before becoming a  British  citizen,
             had indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom, does not
             automatically  become  entitled  to  such  leave,  upon  being
             deprived of such citizenship."

10. Clearly, because the judge reached his decision having made  a  finding
    that the Secretary of State had not established that the  claimant  had
    been dishonest when he made the factually false statements contained in
    the application he did not go on to make any findings  with  regard  to
    the Article 8 issues as set out within Deliallisi.  These findings will
    in  due  course  have  to  be  made  and  in  these  circumstances  the
    appropriate course is to remit this appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing by any judge other than  Judge  Pooler.   We  accordingly
    make the following decision:

Decision

We set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler as  containing
a material error of law and remit the appeal to be reheard at  Taylor  House
by any judge other than Judge Pooler.

No anonymity direction is made.

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 30 April 2018



