
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00098/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2020                 |On 07 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                klodian naski
                             (AKA klajdi nakdi)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Foot, instructed by Oliver & Hasani Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is an Albanian national who was born on  15  March  1985.
    He appeals, with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-
    Hutchison, against a decision which was issued by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Louveaux on 13 November 2019.  By that decision,  Judge  Louveaux
    ("the judge") dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
    decision to deprive him of British citizenship under s40 of the British
    Nationality Act 1981.

Background

 2. There is a lengthy history to this case and it is necessary to  set  it
    out in some detail.

 3. The appellant arrived in the  UK  as  an  Unaccompanied  Asylum-Seeking
    Child ("UASC") on 14 May 1999.  He claimed asylum, stating that he  was
    a Kosovan who had been born in Decan in the west of that  country.   He
    gave his correct date of birth but a false name: Klajdi Nakdi.  He said
    that he was in fear of the Serbs and that he and his  father  had  been
    beaten by the Serbian police on many occasions.

 4. On 23 February 2001, the  appellant  was  refused  asylum  because  the
    respondent concluded  that  there  was  no  longer  a  risk  to  ethnic
    Albanians  in  Kosovo.   The   appellant   was   nevertheless   granted
    Exceptional Leave to Enter ("ELE"), due to his status as a UASC,  until
    15 March 2003, that being the date on which he was due  to  attain  his
    majority.

 5. The appellant seemingly applied for further leave before the expiry  of
    his ELE.  On 16  February  2008,  whilst  that  application  was  still
    pending, he applied for a Home Office Travel Document because he wished
    to visit his mother, who was said to be very ill, and  because  he  was
    said to be concerned that the Serbian authorities might take a year  to
    issue him with a passport.  He gave his name as Klajdi Nakdi once more,
    and stated that he was a Kosovan who  had  been  born  in  Decan.   The
    Travel Document was granted on 17 July 2008, and  was  valid  until  16
    July 2009

 6. On 26 March 2008, the respondent granted the appellant Indefinite Leave
    to Remain in  the  Nakdi  identity.   It  is  common  ground  that  the
    appellant made no application prior to this decision.  ILR was  granted
    under the Legacy programme, as considered in cases such as R (Hakemi) v
    SSHD [2012] EWHC 1967 (Admin) and R (Geraldo) v SSHD [2014] Imm AR 400,
    and the letter stated that  leave  was  being  granted  'exceptionally,
    outside the Immigration Rules.'

 7. On 22 May 2009, the applicant applied for naturalisation as  a  British
    citizen under s6(1) of the British  Nationality  Act  1981  ("the  1981
    Act").  The application was  approved  and,  on  20  August  2009,  the
    appellant attended a naturalisation ceremony.  In the application  form
    and at the ceremony, he gave his name as Klajdi  Nakdi.   He  became  a
    British citizen in that identity.

 8. In 2017, the respondent undertook checks with the Albanian  authorities
    which revealed that the applicant's real identity was Klodian Naski, an
    Albanian national who was born in Tirana on 15 March  1985.  Copies  of
    the appellant's birth certificate and family certificate were  provided
    to the respondent by the Albanian authorities in September 2017.

 9. On 28 March 2019, the respondent wrote to the appellant, notifying  him
    of the results of the enquiries I have detailed above and stating  that
    she believed he had obtained his British citizenship  as  a  result  of
    fraud.  She was considering whether  to  deprive  him  of  his  British
    citizenship under s40(3) of the  1981  Act.    She  sought  a  response
    within 21 days.

10. On 16 April 2019, the appellant's then solicitors  (Malik  &  Malik  of
    London NW10) responded.   It was submitted,  with  reference  to  Upper
    Tribunal authorities (Ahmed [2017] UKUT 118 (IAC), Pirzada [2017]  UKUT
    196 (IAC) and Sleiman [2017] UKUT 367 (IAC))  and  Chapter  55  of  the
    Nationality Instructions, that the deception had been immaterial to the
    grant  of  citizenship  and  that  it   would   be   unreasonable   and
    disproportionate to take deprivation action.  It was further  submitted
    that the appellant  had  been  suffering  from  severe  depression  and
    anxiety between 2008 and 2014; that he had been a minor who was  acting
    on the advice of others when he first claimed to be  Kosovan;  that  he
    was remorseful for his actions; and that he had settled in the UK  with
    his wife and children.  Evidence in support  of  these  assertions  was
    provided by way of 36 enclosures.

The Respondent's Decision

11. On 13 September 2019, the respondent made a  decision  to  deprive  the
    appellant of his British citizenship, under s40(3)  of  the  1981  Act,
    because it had been obtained fraudulently.  The respondent referred  to
    parts of  chapter  55  of  the  Nationality  Instructions  ("NIs")  and
    recalled that the standard  of  proof  was  the  civil  standard.   She
    rehearsed the history I have described above.  She noted, amongst other
    matters, that the appellant had confirmed that  he  was  Kladji  Nakdi,
    born in Decan, Kosovo, in his asylum application, his  Travel  Document
    application,  his   application   for   naturalisation   and   at   his
    naturalisation ceremony.  Having set  out  the  basis  upon  which  the
    respondent had concluded that the appellant's name and nationality were
    not  as  stated,  and  having  noted  what  had  been   said   by   his
    representatives in mitigation, the respondent concluded as follows:

         "[17] It is noted that you became an adult on 15 March 2003 and yet
         continued the deception claiming  to  be  a  Kosovo  national.  You
         submitted further representations and obtained travel document, ILR
         and British citizenship as an adult. You maintained this  deception
         throughout your time in the United Kingdom up until the  point  you
         were challenged about your identity by the Home Office. At the time
         you obtained ILR it was not known to the Home Office you were using
         a false identity or that your years  of  residence  partly  accrued
         through the fact that the Home Office was not  aware  you  were  an
         Albanian national. It is reasonable to assume that you  would  have
         continued with the fraud if it  had  not  been  put  to  you.  Good
         character  requirement,  Section  9  of   the   nationality   staff
         instructions in use on the date of your naturalisation  that  deals
         with deception and dishonesty (Annex N, Page 25-26, Section 9, 9.1.-
         9.2).

         [18] It is apparent that you set out to deceive  the  Secretary  of
         State so you could remain in the United Kingdom. You persisted with
         the material fraud and deception for  over  20  years.  Chapter  55
         states "If the facts, had they  been  known  at  the  time  of  the
         application for citizenship was considered, would have affected the
         decision to grant citizenship via  naturalisation  or  registration
         the case worker should consider  deprivation."  (Annex  O,  55.7.1-
         55.7.2).

         [19] For the reasons given above it is  not  accepted  there  is  a
         plausible, innocent  explanation  for  the  misleading  information
         which led to the decision to grant  citizenship.   Rather,  on  the
         balance  of  probabilities,  it  is  consider  that  you   provided
         information with the intention  of  obtaining  a  grant  of  status
         and/or citizenship in circumstances where your application(s) would
         have been unsuccessful if you had told the truth.  It is  therefore
         consider  that  the  fraud  was  deliberate  and  material  to  the
         acquisition of British citizenship.

         [20] It is acknowledged that the decision to deprive on the grounds
         of fraud is at the Secretary of State's discretion.  In making  the
         decision to deprive you of citizenship, the Secretary of State  has
         taken  into  account  the  following  factors,  which  include  the
         representations made by your legal representative in  their  letter
         dated 16 April 2019 and concluded that deprivation  would  be  both
         reasonable and proportionate."

12. The letter  then  turned  to  Article  8  ECHR,  s55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  to  statelessness.   She
    considered that deprivation was proportionate  under  Article  8  ECHR;
    that it was in line with her statutory duty under s55; and that even if
    the appellant was rendered stateless by the decision, that  consequence
    was reasonable, given the seriousness  of  the  fraud  and  the  public
    interest in preserving  the  legitimacy  of  nationality.   The  letter
    concluded with reference to  the  appellant's  right  of  appeal  under
    s40A(1) of the 1981 Act.

The Appeal to the FtT

13. The appellant gave notice of his appeal  on  25  September  2019.   The
    detailed  grounds  rehearsed  much  of  the  same  territory   as   the
    representations made in  the  original  response  to  the  respondent's
    'minded to deprive' letter.  The heads of challenge were set out at the
    end  of  the  grounds,  however,  in  10  separate  sections.   It  was
    submitted, in summary, that the deception had not been material to  the
    grant of citizenship and that the decision  was  not  a  reasonable  or
    proportionate use of the respondent's discretion.

14. In preparation for the hearing, the appellant's former solicitors filed
    and  served  a  bundle  of  215  pages,  which  began  with  a  helpful
    chronology.  Counsel was instructed to represent the appellant  at  the
    hearing before the FtT on 11 November  2019.   He  settled  a  skeleton
    argument on the preceding day, which was handed to the judge on the day
    of the hearing.  Having set out the salient parts of the  history,  the
    skeleton stated that the 'potential legal issues  in  this  appeal  are
    very limited.'  The issues were described by counsel in  the  following
    terms:

         "The first is whether the section 40(3) condition is  satisfied  on
         the facts.  The second is whether any removal or exclusion from the
         United Kingdom would represent a  disproportionate  breach  of  the
         Appellant's article 8 ECHR rights."

15. The submissions made in the skeleton argument on  the  first  of  those
    issues were set out at [6], which I must reproduce in full:

         "As to whether the Appellant did obtain naturalisation by dishonest
         means (the section 40(3) question), the Appellant  regretfully  but
         unequivocally  accepts  that  he  did.   He  regrets  the  use   of
         dishonesty as he had done so prior to detection, but this does  not
         remove the satisfaction of the section 4)(3) condition.  There  are
         numerous potential mitigating factors, and his life in  the  United
         Kingdom since coming to the country in 1999 has been a positive and
         pro-social one, but he  accepts  that  these  do  not  vitiate  the
         background on which section 40(3) is satisfied."

16. The skeleton then turned to Article 8 ECHR.  The  author  recalled  the
    Upper Tribunal's approach to Article 8 in deprivation appeals,  as  set
    out in cases including AB  (Nigeria)  [2016]  UKUT  451  (IAC)  and  BA
    (Ghana) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC).  Having referred to those cases,  counsel
    reminded  the  FtT  that  they  'required  the  next  decision  to   be
    prejudged'.  He set out salient parts of the  headnote  to  BA  (Ghana)
    before stating that the Upper Tribunal's approach had 'been disapproved
    by the decision of the Court of Appeal in Aziz & Ors v SSHD [2018] EWCA
    Civ 1884; [2019] 1 WLR 266.  He then set out the relevant part  of  the
    headnote from the Weekly Law Reports before the skeleton concluded with
    the following two paragraphs:

         "[8] The appellant accepts that accordingly the instant  appeal  is
         not the point at which the appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights  fall
         to be examined judicially.   If  necessary  that  will  follow  the
         further  anticipated  decision  of  the  respondent,   though   the
         appellant hopes that the respondent at that stage  will  give  full
         consideration to all relevant factors  including  those  mitigating
         his  original  false  claim  and  applications  dependent  upon  it
         thereafter, and the  appellant's  positive,  responsible  and  pro-
         social existence in the United Kingdom over the more than 22  years
         since his arrival in 1997.

         Conclusion

         [9] It is accepted that the appeal falls to be  dismissed,  without
         consideration of article 8 ECHR, in light of the  reasons  set  out
         above."

17. A copy of the report of the decision in Aziz was provided to the  judge
    by counsel.

18. It is clear from the  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings  that  counsel's
    written concessions formed the basis of a discussion between the  Bench
    and the representatives at  the  start  of  the  hearing.   Counsel  is
    recorded to have stated that the appeal fell to  be  dismissed  on  the
    basis of the respondent's findings.  Understandably,  the  judge  asked
    counsel whether the appellant preferred the matter to be dealt with  in
    that way, rather than withdrawing  the  appeal.   Counsel  invited  the
    judge to determine the appeal, and the appellant  was  duly  called  to
    give evidence.

19. In chief, the appellant adopted his statement and gave  evidence  about
    his age on arrival in the UK, the difficulty of leaving his family as a
    teenager, his life in the UK, including work  and  family.   He  stated
    that he was driving for Uber and that he had three children and a step-
    child.  He said that he was the  main  breadwinner.   Asked  about  the
    false representations he had made about his name  and  nationality,  he
    said that he had been told to say this by the people who brought him to
    the UK, that he had been scared to correct the position and that he had
    grown up with the idea that he was from Kosovo.

20. Cross-examined by the Presenting Officer, the appellant confirmed  that
    he had signed relevant application forms which confirmed  that  he  was
    from Kosovo.  He was 23 when he made the  travel  document  application
    and 24 when he applied  for  naturalisation.   He  was  suffering  from
    'major depression' when he applied for naturalisation.  He had received
    treatment and had started working again in 2012.

21. In closing submissions, counsel for the appellant accepted, as  he  had
    in his skeleton, that the s40(3) conditions were 'met'.   He  submitted
    that there were some points in mitigation: the  appellant  had  been  a
    minor when he left home and had been under the direction of others;  he
    had been in the UK for more than 20 years and had accrued a substantial
    private and family life; he had  acquired  leave  to  remain  and  then
    citizenship and had no criminal record; he was of good character,  save
    for the deception.  It was submitted that the appellant had been  faced
    with a dilemma of whether to admit the long-standing deception and  had
    felt this conflict 'quite keenly'.  The judge was invited  to  consider
    and making findings on these points, which would be significant in  the
    event that the respondent took a decision to remove the appellant  from
    the United Kingdom.  At the end of the  hearing,  the  judge  indicated
    that the appeal would be dismissed for reasons  he  would  subsequently
    provide in writing.

22. The judge's decision was issued two days after the hearing.  Given  the
    events I have described above, it is a concise decision.  The judge set
    out the relevant background and a short synopsis of the arguments, such
    as they were.  At [16], he recorded the acceptance that  the  appellant
    had obtained naturalisation by dishonest means and he found that s40(3)
    was 'satisfied'.  At [17], he noted the  further  concession  that  the
    appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights did not "fall to be examined (save in
    so far as the making of the deprivation order itself will be lawful and
    compatible  with  Convention  rights...".    He   recorded   that   the
    appellant's removal was not a subject which had been ventilated  before
    him and that 'the decision to revoke the appellant's  citizenship  will
    not, in and of itself, interfere  with  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 ECHR nor impact the best interests of the children'.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

23. The appellant instructed new solicitors following the dismissal of  his
    appeal and an application for permission to  appeal  was  duly  lodged,
    supported by grounds of appeal settled by  Ms  Foot.   There  were  are
    three grounds of appeal.  Although they are developed over  the  course
    of several pages, they may be summarised quite shortly:

      i) The judge erred in failing  to  consider  the  materiality  of  the
         appellant's deception.

     ii)  The  judge  failed  to   consider   the   reasonably   foreseeable
         consequences of deprivation and 'limbo'.

    iii) The judge misdirected  himself  in  law  in  his  approach  to  the
         appellant's minority and other matters relevant to mitigation.

24. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal,
    who considered each of the grounds to be arguable.

25. The papers were placed before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Smith  on27  April
    2020.  Her provisional view was that the appeal might fairly and justly
    be determined on the papers, and she issued directions to  the  parties
    seeking submissions on that issue and on the merits of the appeal.

26. Written submissions were made by Ms Foot, for the appellant, on 20  May
    2020.  Written submissions were made by Mr Clarke, for the  respondent,
    on 9 June 2020.  Ms Foot responded in writing on 15 June 2020.

27. The papers were placed before Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on  7  July
    2020.  He ordered that the appeal should be listed remotely, via  Skype
    for Business.  It was as a result of that  direction  that  the  appeal
    came before me on 8 September  2020,  with  Ms  Foot  representing  the
    appellant and Mr Clarke representing the respondent.

28. Ms Foot confirmed that the appellant's  consolidated  bundle  contained
    the written  submissions  which  had  been  made  on  each  side.   She
    continued to rely on those she  had  filed  in  compliance  with  Judge
    Smith's order.  At my request, Ms Foot turned first to the  concessions
    which had been made before the FtT.  It was accepted  that  concessions
    had been made; the skeleton before the FtT appeared in the consolidated
    bundle.  It was accepted, in particular,  that  it  had  been  conceded
    before the FtT that the appellant had obtained his citizenship by means
    of false representations.  It was  clear  from  [15]  of  the  decision
    letter that the materiality of the lie had been in  issue  between  the
    parties and the stance in the skeleton appeared to have  been  prompted
    by a lack of awareness of, or focus upon, the importance  of  causation
    and materiality in such a case.  The centrality of  that  question  was
    underlined in cases such as Sleiman [2017] UKUT 367 (IAC) and this  was
    a point which fell into the 'Robinson obvious' category: R v  SSHD,  ex
    parte   Robinson   [1998]   QB    929.     Sleiman    was    materially
    indistinguishable, in that the appellant in  this  case  would  in  all
    likelihood have been granted leave  as  a  UASC  whether  he  was  from
    Albania or Kosovo.

29. Ms Foot submitted that the  authorities  on  concessions  favoured  the
    appellant.  She cited Grobelaar v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2002] UKHL
    40; [2002] 1 WLR 3024, at [56].  She sought to distinguish  AK  (Sierra
    Leone) [2016] EWCA Civ 999; [2017] Imm AR 319,  upon  which  Mr  Clarke
    sought to rely, on the basis that the concession in that case  was  one
    of fact and because it would be unjust, in  the  appellant's  case,  to
    hold him to the concession made before the FtT.  The  Upper  Tribunal's
    statutory task was to consider whether the decision of the FtT involved
    the making of an error on a point of law and that included errors which
    had come about as a result of improper concessions.

30. Turning to the merits of her first ground, Ms Foot submitted  that  the
    decision to grant the appellant ILR  under  the  Legacy  programme  had
    broken the chain of causation.  In Sleiman, there had been a  deception
    as regards the appellant's age.  That decision applied equally  to  the
    appellant's circumstances, in that his name and  his  nationality  were
    immaterial to the decisions to grant him ILR and  naturalisation.   The
    Legacy scheme was described in authorities such as Hakemi  and  Geraldo
    and it was plain that the appellant would have been granted  ILR  under
    that programme regardless of his real name and nationality.

31. It was not a foregone conclusion, submitted Ms Foot, that the appellant
    would have been refused nationality on grounds of good character if  he
    had 'come clean'  about  the  lies  he  had  maintained  prior  to  the
    application  for  British  citizenship.  The  policy  appeared  in  the
    respondent's bundle and there was evidently scope for an argument  that
    the respondent might have naturalised the appellant even if he had told
    the truth about his previous deception.  The respondent was required to
    consider her discretion in the face  of  any  such  deception  and  the
    appellant   could   have   succeeded   in   all   the    circumstances,
    notwithstanding his previous lies.  The  judge  consequently  erred  in
    failing to consider the materiality of  the  lies  to  the  citizenship
    decision.

32. Turning to ground two, Ms Foot submitted that the FtT had  fallen  into
    plain error in stating that the decision to deprive  the  appellant  of
    his citizenship did not raise Article 8 ECHR issues.  It was clear from
    Hysaj [2020] UKUT 128  (IAC)  and  Aziz  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered the immediate consequences of the deprivation  decision  and
    he had erred in failing to do so.  Ms Foot  acknowledged  that  it  was
    potentially difficult for her to succeed on this point in light of what
    had been said in Hysaj but there were still points  to  consider.   The
    appellant would not be able to rent property or receive an  income  and
    there would be knock-on consequences  on  the  best  interests  of  his
    children.  It was relevant to recall that he had  been  unwell  at  the
    time of the deception.

33. As for ground three, Ms Foot submitted that  the  appellant's  minority
    had not been taken adequately into account by the judge.  Although  the
    appellant was an adult when he applied for a travel document, and  when
    he applied for citizenship, he had been a child when he  first  arrived
    and told lies about his name and nationality.  The appellant had  found
    it difficult to tell the truth about these matters when he came to make
    his subsequent applications because he was suffering from mental health
    problems.

34. Ms Foot submitted that the FtT 's decision on the appeal should be  set
    aside as a whole and that the appeal should be remitted to be heard  de
    novo.

35. Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant was  inviting  the  Tribunal  to
    permit the entire case to  be  relitigated.   It  was  clear  from  the
    skeleton argument before the FtT that clear and unequivocal concessions
    had been made, in relation to s40(3), Article 8 ECHR and  the  ultimate
    outcome of the appeal.  There was no  proper  basis  upon  which  these
    concessions  could  be  withdrawn.   As  in  AK  (Sierra  Leone),   the
    concessions were determinative of the  appeal.   Significant  prejudice
    arose to the respondent in the event that they  were  withdrawn,  since
    the whole appeal would be re-opened.  The judge had  been  entitled  to
    rely on those concessions and to determine the appeal accordingly.

36. Ms Foot had attempted to submit that no criticism was made  of  counsel
    who appeared below but that did not withstand  any  scrutiny  when  set
    against her submission  that  the  Robinson  obvious  points  had  been
    overlooked.  What was clearly  submitted  was  that  counsel  had  been
    negligent but there had been no opportunity for counsel to answer  that
    charge, contrary to authorities such as BT (Nepal)  [2004]  UKIAT  311.
    The circumstances in which the concessions had been made were  entirely
    unclear: they could have been made following written advice and careful
    consideration by counsel's professional and lay client  or  they  could
    have been made on a whim, without proper instructions or  consideration
    of the law.  It should not be presumed that counsel had  acted  in  the
    latter fashion.

37. Ms Foot had submitted that Sleiman was materially indistinguishable but
    that was not so.  On proper analysis, Sleiman was  a  narrowly  focused
    case, in which the respondent had accepted that the appellant's age had
    been  immaterial  to  the  decision  to  grant  ILR  and  in  which  no
    submissions had been made as to the good  character  requirement.   The
    circumstances of the present case were quite different,  in  that  good
    character had been at the forefront of the respondent's  case,  as  was
    clear from the decision letter.  Had the appellant told  the  truth  in
    the course of his naturalisation application, it  was  clear  from  the
    respondent's policy that  he  would  have  been  refused  on  character
    grounds.  The operative  question  was  the  effect  of  fraud  in  the
    naturalisation application.

38. As to ground two, Mr Clarke submitted that the cogent  public  interest
    in the appellant being deprived of his British citizenship could not be
    outweighed by the limited effect  on  the  Article  8  ECHR  rights  in
    question.  Counsel had taken the limbo point before the FtT and it  had
    been considered but nothing else had been ventilated before the  judge.
    In truth, there was nothing on the facts of this case which came  close
    to the rare case contemplated  in  Hysaj,  in  which  the  decision  to
    deprive was disproportionate in Article 8 ECHR terms.

39. As for ground three, Mr Clarke accepted that the appellant had  been  a
    child when he first applied for asylum but he had been an adult when he
    made his applications for a travel document  and  naturalisation.   The
    respondent's guidance was quite clear that adults should  generally  be
    held responsible for misrepresentations such as this.  The reality  was
    that  the  appellant  chose  to  make  an   application   for   British
    citizenship, during which he chose to  tell  lies.   He  had  not  been
    required to make that application as he had ILR at the time.

40. In response, Ms Foot submitted that there  had  been  no  consideration
    whatsoever of the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation or
    the  mitigating  factors  which  were  relevant  to  the   respondent's
    discretion.   She  initially  sought  to  submit  that  she   was   not
    criticising counsel who had appeared before the FtT.  I observed that I
    found that submission rather difficult to reconcile with the submission
    that Robinson obvious points had been missed by counsel and the  judge.
    On reflection, Ms Foot submitted that relevant points had plainly  been
    missed by counsel before the FtT.  In the event that it was  to  become
    significant, she sought an opportunity  to  put  these  allegations  to
    counsel who had appeared before the FtT. She could take instructions as
    to whether the appellant was content to waive privilege in  respect  of
    his dealings with his former  representatives.   I  indicated,  without
    objection from Mr Clarke, that I would provide such an  opportunity  in
    the  event  that  I  considered  it  necessary   to   investigate   the
    circumstances in which the concessions came to be made.

41. After the hearing, I received confirmation by email that the  appellant
    was content to waive privilege in respect  of  his  dealings  with  his
    former solicitors and his former counsel.




Discussion

     Concessions in the FtT

42. There can be no doubt that the dismissal of the appellant's  appeal  by
    the First-tier Tribunal was brought about by the  concessions  made  by
    counsel.  I have set out those concessions  above  and  Mr  Clarke  was
    undoubtedly correct to describe them as unequivocal; that was  not  his
    choice of words but the  choice  of  counsel  who  wrote  the  skeleton
    argument.  The first question,  logically,  is  whether  the  appellant
    should be held to those concessions or whether, as  Ms  Foot  contends,
    that should not be the case because the  concessions  were  erroneously
    made.  Before I turn to the authorities on  concessions,  I  must  make
    some preliminary observations.

43. Firstly, it is unfortunately all too commonplace for judges sitting  in
    the Immigration and Asylum Chamber, particularly at first instance,  to
    receive limited assistance from the advocates.  Skeleton arguments  are
    not prepared, or when they are prepared they comprise little more  than
    boilerplate submissions.  Relevant authorities are  not  drawn  to  the
    attention of the Tribunal, regardless  of  the  assistance  they  might
    provide to one party or the other.  Many different  heads  of  argument
    are deployed,  with  little  regard  for  the  merits  of  the  various
    submissions.  And representatives on both sides decline to  narrow  the
    issues by making appropriate concessions, preferring merely  to  invite
    the Tribunal to determine all the issues which arise, on the  basis  of
    the evidence before it.  This style of advocacy is to be deprecated.

44. The advocacy which the FtT encountered in  the  instant  case,  on  the
    other hand, is to be encouraged.  Counsel produced a skeleton  argument
    which drew relevant authority to the attention  of  the  FtT,  none  of
    which served to advance his client's case.  He had  plainly  considered
    the issues in the case and was able to explain to the judge the outcome
    he sought, which was for favourable findings of fact to be  made  which
    would stand the appellant in the best possible  stead  for  any  future
    consideration of his expulsion from the United  Kingdom.   The  hearing
    was accordingly focused, with the judge's typed Record  of  Proceedings
    spanning no more than three pages.  This is the co-operation which  any
    tribunal is entitled to expect from the advocates who appear before it.

45. Secondly, counsel who appeared before the FtT  in  this  case  is  well
    known in this jurisdiction.  He has appeared in many reported decisions
    in this field and has written two  practitioner  texts,  the  first  of
    which "The Law and Practice of Expulsion and Exclusion from the  United
    Kingdom" is, to my knowledge, the only text on  that  specific  subject
    matter.  It is relevant to note that the fourth  of  that  text's  five
    parts is entitled Denial and Deprivation of Citizenship  and  contains,
    at 12.38-12.48, a detailed examination of the power conferred by s40(3)
    of the 1981 Act.  Within that section, at 12.43,  there  is  a  section
    dealing with the materiality of false representations to the  grant  of
    citizenship.  That section includes reference to relevant authority and
    to the Nationality  Instructions  ("NIs")  and  states,  amongst  other
    things:

         'If fraud, false representation or concealment or  concealment  did
         not have a direct impact upon the grant of  citizenship,  then  the
         NIs at 55.7.3-4 envision that 'it will not be appropriate to pursue
         deprivation action'.'

46. Thirdly, although Ms Foot was initially at pains  to  submit  that  she
    intended no criticism of counsel who appeared below,  the  reality  (as
    she was eventually constrained to  accept)  is  that  her  entire  case
    before me rests on various criticisms of the way in  which  the  appeal
    was conducted before the FtT.  The absence of detailed consideration of
    materiality (ground one) or Article 8 ECHR (ground two), or the failure
    to consider mitigation (ground three); all of these points are made  on
    the basis that counsel should have erected an argument but failed to do
    so.  Counsel, who I shall not name but whose identity is likely  to  be
    discernible from what I have said above, has been given no  opportunity
    to comment on these allegations.  It was only  on  reflection,  and  in
    response  to  Mr  Clarke's  submissions,  that  Ms  Foot  requested  an
    opportunity to put the allegations to him.  I also note that it has not
    been suggested by the appellant that the concessions  which  were  made
    orally and  in  writing  by  counsel  were  made  without  his  express
    instructions.  It has been confirmed in writing that he is  content  to
    waive privilege, but he has not suggested that he was not advised about
    the approach counsel intended to adopt before the FtT.

47. I turn to the authorities on concessions and their withdrawal.

48. Ms Foot cited Grobelaar, in which it had been conceded before the Court
    of Appeal that the jury in a defamation action must have been satisfied
    that none of the charges made against  a  professional  footballer  had
    been proved by the  newspaper  in  question:  [20]  of  Lord  Bingham's
    opinion refers.  The full range of  that  concession,  upon  which  the
    Court of Appeal had proceeded, was said by Lord Bingham, also at  [20],
    to  defy  reason,  since  the  tape  recordings  which  were  available
    contained clear admissions of a corrupt agreement and the acceptance of
    bribes on the part of the appellant.  Lord Bingham stated that it would
    only be rarely and with extreme caution that  the  Appellate  Committee
    would permit counsel to withdraw from a concession which had formed the
    basis of argument and judgment in the Court of Appeal.  On the  unusual
    facts of that case, however, Lord Bingham was  prepared  to  allow  the
    concession to be withdrawn and to  consider  for  himself  the  verdict
    returned by the jury: [21]-[27].

49. Lord Steyn disagreed, and was not prepared to depart  from  the  agreed
    basis put before the Court of Appeal: [32]  Lord Hobhouse  (upon  whose
    speech Ms Foot particularly relied) noted, at [56], that the 'so-called
    concession' which had been made in the Court  of  Appeal  was  deployed
    before the House of Lords as a reason for dismissing the appeal.   Lord
    Hobhouse considered that acceding to that submission would merely  have
    served to compound the Court of Appeal's error.  He noted that  counsel
    in the Court of Appeal had been subjected to 'close questioning  by  an
    unsympathetic court' and that it was improper to try to decide  a  case
    'by obtaining 'concessions' from counsel.'   In  the  closing  part  of
    [56], Lord Hobhouse said this:

         "The purpose of oral argument is to inform, clarify  and  enlighten
         the minds of the court  (hopefully  in  favour  of  the  advocate's
         client). It is not right to seek to decide cases upon the  tenacity
         of the advocate or 'concessions' forced out of the advocate in  the
         course of oral argument. (This is not a case where a point has been
         conceded, in the proper sense of that word, either by a pleading or
         a statement in court and has thereafter governed what issues do and
         do not arise.) Still less is it right to decide  appeals  upon  the
         basis  of  upholding  wrong  decisions  arrived  at  using  legally
         mistaken 'concessions'  by  counsel.  To  have  conceded  that  the
         excessive amount of  the  jury's  second  verdict  invalidated,  or
         demonstrated perversity in, their first  verdict  would  have  been
         both legally and logically wrong (as well as being based upon wrong
         factual assumptions)."

50. Lord Millett agreed with Lord Bingham, noting at [66] that the  premise
    on which the case had been argued in the Court  of  Appeal,  which  was
    neither an agreement between the parties nor a concession,  was  false.
    Lord Scott did not touch  on  the  withdrawal  of  the  concession  (or
    assumption) on which the Court of Appeal had proceeded, and his opinion
    is more frequently cited for what he said at [90] (regarding the  maxim
    that he who comes into equity must come with clean hands).

51. What was said by Lord Hobhouse in Grobelaar was considered by the Court
    of Appeal in Hendricks v The Commissioner of Police of  the  Metropolis
    [2002] EWCA Civ 1686; [2003] 1 All ER 654, at [32]-[37].   Mummery  LJ,
    with whom May and Judge LJJ agreed, rejected a submission made by  John
    Cavanagh QC (as he then was) that the appellant should  be  held  to  a
    concession made in the Employment Tribunal and  the  Employment  Appeal
    Tribunal.  At [37], he said this:

         "In my judgment, the court should only allow  a  concession  to  be
         withdrawn  in  very  special  circumstances.  In  this  case,  such
         circumstances exist, as the concession was not made in sufficiently
         clear and unambiguous terms  to  be  treated  as  binding  on  Miss
         Hendricks.  It  is  impossible  to  reconcile  what  is  stated  in
         paragraph 11 of the  extended  reasons  with  other  parts  of  the
         decision, from which it is clear that the tribunal appreciated that
         reliance was being  placed  by  Miss  Hendricks  on  acts  of  less
         favourable treatment on the grounds of sex and race alleged to have
         continued while she was on extended sick leave and into the  period
         of  3  months  immediately  preceding  the  commencement   of   the
         discrimination proceedings. In those circumstances I do not  regard
         Miss Hendricks as being bound by any concession inhibiting Mr Allen
         from submitting that this is a case of "an  act  extending  over  a
         period", so that it is not out of time. Lord Hobhouse indicated  in
         Grobelaar v. News Group Newspapers Ltd [2002] UKHL 40 at  paragraph
         56 it is not right to  decide  appeals  on  the  basis  of  legally
         mistaken concessions. Nor would it be right  to  do  so  where  the
         Court or Tribunal recorded the concessions in unclear and confusing
         terms."

52. In terms of immigration authorities on the subject, the most frequently
    cited must be NR (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ 856;  [2010]  INLR  169,  in
    which the Court of Appeal  considered  that  the  respondent  had  been
    permitted to withdraw  concessions  regarding  the  appellant's  sexual
    orientation and risk on  return  to  Jamaica.   The  court  rejected  a
    submission that the Tribunal was bound to consider whether  a  decision
    to withdraw a concession was  rationally  made  in  public  law  terms.
    Goldring LJ, with whom Mummery and Lloyd LJ  agreed,  echoed  what  had
    been said in  Davoodipanah  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  106,  noting  that  'the
    Tribunal may in its discretion permit a concession to be  withdrawn  if
    in its view there is good reason in  all  the  circumstances  for  that
    course to be taken': [12].  He continued as follows:

         "Its discretion is wide. Its exercise will depend on the particular
         circumstances of the case before it. Prejudice to the applicant  is
         a significant feature. So is its  absence.  Its  absence  does  not
         however mean that an application  to  withdraw  a  concession  will
         invariably be granted. Bad faith will almost certainly be fatal  to
         an application to withdraw a concession.  In  the  final  analysis,
         what is important is that as  a  result  of  the  exercise  of  its
         discretion the Tribunal is enabled to  decide  the  real  areas  of
         dispute on their merits so as to reach a result which is just  both
         to the appellant and the Secretary of State."

53. Notably, the concession in NR (Jamaica) was made and withdrawn at first
    instance.  The circumstances in the instant appeal  are  different,  in
    that concessions were made at first instance and it is only  on  appeal
    that a party seeks to withdraw them.  The circumstances in  AK  (Sierra
    Leone) were similar to those before  me,  albeit  that  the  concession
    which was sought to be withdrawn was made  at  first  instance  by  the
    respondent.  Before the FtT, the respondent's  Presenting  Officer  had
    accepted that the appellant - who was threatened with deportation - met
    the first of the statutory exceptions to deportation in Part 5A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Since the appellant was a
    'medium offender', that concession was  determinative  of  the  appeal,
    which was accordingly allowed by the FtT.

54. On appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the respondent sought to withdraw  the
    concession made by the Presenting Officer.  The  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    mentioned NR (Jamaica) and stated that 'the respondent is  entitled  to
    withdraw that concession'.  He then found fault with  the  decision  of
    the FtT, which had made no findings on the first  statutory  exception.
    He set aside the FtT's decision and remade the decision on the  appeal,
    substituting a decision dismissing the appeal.

55. Each of the three grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal  centred  on
    the Upper Tribunal's treatment of the concession.  Jackson LJ  reviewed
    the  authorities  on  concessions,  including   Davoodipanah   and   NR
    (Jamaica).  He considered that the Upper Tribunal Judge  had  erred  in
    his approach to the concession, for the following reasons:

         "[39] Bearing in mind that guidance from the authorities, I turn to
         the Upper Tribunal decision in the present case. The Upper Tribunal
         Judge deals with withdrawal of the concession in  paragraph  39.  I
         have read that paragraph out in part 3 of this judgment. He  simply
         says that he follows NR and considers that the Secretary  of  State
         is entitled to withdraw her concession. There is no analysis of the
         circumstances of the case. There is no consideration of  prejudice.
         There is no consideration of the interests of  justice.  The  Upper
         Tribunal Judge did not have to make any finding about the extent of
         the concessions because the argument was presented  on  the  simple
         basis that they had been withdrawn."

56. These criticisms were positively accepted by counsel for the  Secretary
    of State but he submitted that the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the
    Upper Tribunal so that it could consider the respondent's  appeal,  and
    in particular the question of whether  the  appellant  would  encounter
    'very  significant  obstacles'  on  return  to  Sierra  Leone,  afresh.
    Counsel for the appellant submitted,  however,  that  this  was  not  a
    'satisfactory remedy'; the case  had  been  conceded  in  its  entirety
    before the FtT and the respondent should not be permitted to go  behind
    that concession.

57. Jackson LJ noted  that  limb  (c)  of  the  statutory  exception  (very
    significant obstacles) had been the subject of a  carefully  considered
    concession after hearing the evidence of a witness and that  there  was
    no obligation on the judge in the FtT to query that concession.    That
    concession, taken together with  the  concessions  made  regarding  the
    other parts of Exception One, was determinative of the appeal; it  was,
    as Jackson LJ put it at [47], the end of the matter.  In  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal and reinstating the decision of the FtT, Jackson  LJ
    concluded:

         "[48] It follows that the  concessions  made  by  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer were such as to determine the entire appeal. The
         First-tier Tribunal Judge, as he was entitled to do, accepted those
         concessions. That was the end of the case.

         [49] I  do  not  need  to  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  in  such
         circumstances the Secretary of State  could  never  appeal  to  the
         Upper Tribunal, but on the facts  of  this  particular  appeal,  it
         seems to me quite  unjust  that  the  Secretary  of  State,  having
         conceded on all points, should be entitled to  resurrect  her  case
         and withdraw the concessions  which  she  had  made.  As  Mr  Fortt
         rightly concedes, the  Upper  Tribunal  gave  no  good  reason  for
         allowing the Secretary of State to take that course."

58. Having considered  these  authorities  in  detail,  I  fear  that  both
    advocates before me might have pitched  their  submissions  rather  too
    high.

59. If Ms Foot's submission was that the appellant  must  be  permitted  to
    withdraw the concessions made below merely because  he  maintains  that
    they  were  wrong,  I  do  not  consider  Grobelaar  to  support   that
    submission.  That was a case in which there had, in  reality,  been  no
    concession before the Court of Appeal and there were concerns,  in  any
    event, that counsel had been placed  under  improper  pressure  in  the
    Court of Appeal to adopt the stance in question.  There can be no doubt
    in this case that the concessions, which were  made  in  writing  in  a
    carefully  researched  skeleton  argument,  were  anything  other  than
    clearly and freely made.  I do not understand  Lord  Hobhouse  to  have
    been enunciating a rule  when  he  said  what  he  said  in  the  final
    paragraph of [56].  The decision of the majority in that case reflected
    the  justice  of  the  case  and  the  flimsiness  of  the   'so-called
    concession' as it was described on more than one occasion.

60. If Mr Clarke's submission was that a party can never  be  permitted  to
    withdraw a concession which is determinative of an  appeal,  I  do  not
    consider that to be the ratio of AK (Sierra  Leone).   Jackson  LJ  was
    careful to ensure that he would not be understood to decide the case on
    that basis, as is clear from [49]. Instead, the basis for  the  court's
    decision is to be found in [39] of Jackson LJ's judgment, in  which  he
    applied the considerations in NR  (Jamaica)  to  the  circumstances  in
    which a party seeks in the Upper  Tribunal  to  withdraw  a  concession
    which was made in the FtT.  Given the public law nature of  proceedings
    before the IAC, it was scarcely surprising (with respect) that  Jackson
    LJ did not endorse the absolute approach contended for by  counsel  for
    the appellant in  that  case.   (The  increased  flexibility  which  is
    required in this context has been  noted  in  a  number  of  decisions,
    including E & R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49; [2004] QB 1044).  Indeed, in
    AM (Iran) [2018] EWCA Civ 2706, Simon LJ (with whom Sharp and Thirlwall
    agreed) cited AK (Sierra Leone) and other authorities and proceeded  on
    the basis that a concession could be withdrawn  (before  the  Court  of
    Appeal), and underlined the importance  of  considering  principles  of
    fairness when any such application was under consideration:  [39]-[45].
    At [44], Simon LJ stated that  he  would  expect  "those  who  seek  to
    withdraw a concession to explain both  promptly  and  frankly  why  the
    concession was made, why it was mistaken and why it  is  now  just  and
    fair that they be allowed to withdraw it."

61. Drawing all of these threads together,  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant should be permitted to withdraw the clear  concessions  which
    were made by expert  counsel  before  the  FtT.   These  were  precise,
    calculated concessions which were made in full knowledge  of  the  law.
    It was also conceded, in writing and in terms, that the appeal fell  to
    be dismissed.  The  appellant  has  not  personally  claimed  that  the
    concessions  were  made  without  instructions,  or  on  the  basis  of
    instructions which were obtained without comprehensive  advice  on  the
    law.  Whilst the appellant has agreed to waive privilege, no  complaint
    has been made against counsel and he has been given no  opportunity  to
    answer the allegations that he missed a total of three points,  all  of
    which are said to be Robinson obvious.  The reality  is  that  Ms  Foot
    might have argued the case differently below but, as we  will  come  to
    see, it is quite clear that the concessions were made  quite  properly.
    To allow the concessions to be withdrawn at this  stage  would,  as  Mr
    Clarke submitted, be highly prejudicial to the respondent, as it  would
    potentially necessitate re-opening the entire appeal upon  remittal  to
    the FtT, that being the relief ultimately sought by Ms Foot.

62. I must not confine my consideration of  prejudice  to  the  respondent,
    however,  since  what  really  underpins  Ms  Foot's  argument  is  the
    submission that the appellant should not be held to  concessions  which
    led to an unjust result.  For  the  reasons  which  follow,  I  do  not
    consider that the concessions which were made were anything but  proper
    and I do not accept that the appellant has been unfairly prejudiced  by
    the stance taken by counsel before the FtT.  In order to  explain  why,
    it is necessary to examine Ms Foot's grounds of appeal.   Before  I  do
    so, I shall set out the relevant parts of s40 of the 1981  Act,  as  in
    force since 28 July 2014:

         40 Deprivation of citizenship

         (1)  In this section a reference to a person's "citizenship status"
         is a reference to his status as-

             (a)  a British citizen,

             (b)  - (f) ...

         (2)  ...

         (3)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
         citizenship  status  which  results  from   his   registration   or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

             (a)  fraud,

             (b)  false representation, or

             (c)  concealment of a material fact.

         (4)  The Secretary of State may not make an order under  subsection
         (2) if  he  is  satisfied  that  the  order  would  make  a  person
         stateless.

         (4A) - (6) ...

63. There has been a great deal of case-law on the proper approach to these
    provisions.  I do not propose to undertake a  comprehensive  review  of
    the authorities, whether at this stage of my decision or at  all.   For
    present purposes, it suffices to recall  that  Leggatt  LJ  (with  whom
    Haddon Cave LJ and Sir Geoffrey  Vos  C  agreed)  set  out  the  proper
    approach to an appeal under s40A of the 1981 Act in KV  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 2483; [2018] 4 WLR 166:

         [6] Pursuant to section 40A(1) , a  person  who  is  given  such  a
         notice may appeal against the decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ("FTT"). The task of the  tribunal  on  such  an  appeal  has  been
         considered by the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)
         in a number of cases including Deliallisi v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) and,  more  recently,  BA
         (Deprivation of Citizenship: Appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC);  [2018]
         Imm AR 807. I would endorse  the  following  principles  which  are
         articulated in those decisions and which I did not understand to be
         in dispute on this appeal:

          1)  Like  an  appeal  under  section  82  of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 , an appeal under section  40A
             of the 1981 Act is not a review of the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision but a full reconsideration of the decision whether to
             deprive the appellant of British citizenship.

          2) It is thus for the tribunal to find the relevant facts on  the
             basis of the evidence adduced to the tribunal, whether or  not
             that evidence was before the Secretary of State when  deciding
             to make a deprivation order.

          3)  The  tribunal  must  first  establish  whether  the  relevant
             condition precedent specified in section 40(2) or  (3)  exists
             for the exercise of the  discretion  whether  to  deprive  the
             appellant of British citizenship. In  a  section  40(3)  case,
             this requires the tribunal to  establish  whether  citizenship
             was obtained by one or more of the  means  specified  in  that
             subsection.

          4) If the condition precedent is established,  the  tribunal  has
             then to ask whether the Secretary  of  State's  discretion  to
             deprive  the  appellant  of  British  citizenship  should   be
             exercised differently. For this  purpose,  the  tribunal  must
             first determine the  reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of
             deprivation.

          5) If the rights of the appellant or any  other  relevant  person
             under article 8 of the European Convention for the  Protection
             of Human Rights and  Fundamental  Freedoms  are  engaged,  the
             tribunal will have to decide whether depriving  the  appellant
             of British citizenship  would  constitute  a  disproportionate
             interference with those rights. But even if article 8  is  not
             engaged,  the  tribunal  must  still  consider   whether   the
             discretion should be exercised differently.

          6) As it is the Secretary  of  State  who  has  been  charged  by
             Parliament with responsibility for making decisions concerning
             deprivation of citizenship, in so  far  as  the  Secretary  of
             State has considered the  relevant  facts,  the  Secretary  of
             State's view  and  any  published  policy  regarding  how  the
             discretion should be exercised  should  normally  be  accorded
             considerable weight (in which regard see Ali  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC  60;  [2016]  1  WLR
             4799 ).




    Ground One

64. Ms Foot's first ground of appeal concerns the  third  of  the  KV  (Sri
    Lanka) stages.   She submits that the FtT fell into error in concluding
    that the condition precedent in s40(3) was met, in that  any  deception
    practised by the appellant in the past was not directly material to the
    grant of citizenship.  She takes the words 'directly material' from the
    decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek in Sleiman [2017]  UKUT  367
    (IAC).  Pirzada [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC), a decision of the Vice President
    and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin,  also  underlined  the   statutory
    requirement that  the  deception  must  have  motivated  the  grant  of
    citizenship.   The  relevant  statutory  language  is  obviously   that
    citizenship was obtained by means of false representations etc.

65. I have no difficulty with Ms Foot's submissions regarding  the  history
    preceding the  application  for  citizenship.   The  appellant  was  an
    Unaccompanied Asylum-Seeking Child when he arrived in the UK.   Whether
    he said that he was from Kosovo or Albania, he would have been  granted
    Discretionary Leave until he reached the age of 17.5 or  18,  depending
    on the policy in force at the time.   It  is  not  suggested  that  the
    respondent might have made enquiries  and  secured  adequate  reception
    arrangements for the appellant if only he had told the truth about  his
    name and nationality; experience suggests that no such  enquiries  were
    made at the time, whether with the Albanian authorities or otherwise.

66. The next step in Ms Foot's argument is  equally  unobjectionable.   She
    submits that the appellant made no application for ILR under the Legacy
    programme and that he accordingly made no false  representations  which
    led to the grant of ILR.  The Legacy programme was in the nature  of  a
    backlog clearance exercise and the appellant was granted ILR because he
    satisfied the basic criteria of that  programme;  he  had  applied  for
    asylum before a specific date, he had not been removed, and he  had  no
    criminal convictions.  I accept that his name and his  nationality  did
    not motivate the grant of ILR in any material way.

67. It is at the final step in  Ms  Foot's  argument  that  she  runs  into
    difficulty.  She accepts that the appellant made false  representations
    in his application for naturalisation, in that he once again claimed to
    be Klajdi Nakdi, a Kosovan national who  was  born  in  Decan  but  she
    submits that these representations were  immaterial  to  the  appellant
    satisfying the statutory residence requirements in s6(1)  of  the  1981
    Act (or, more accurately) in schedule 1 to the 1981 Act).  She  submits
    that  the   appellant   had   obtained   ILR   without   making   false
    representations; he had retained that ILR for the requisite period; and
    he was accordingly entitled to naturalise as a  British  citizen.   She
    submits that the  appellant's  position  is  a  fortiori  that  of  the
    appellant in Sleiman, who had obtained DLR as a result of a  lie  about
    his age  but  had  thereafter  obtained  ILR  under  the  Legacy.   UTJ
    Kopeiczek accepted, on those facts, that the grant of  ILR  had  broken
    the chain of causation and the appellant had not  obtained  citizenship
    by means of false representations.

68. As Mr Clarke submitted, however, it is necessary to consider  what  was
    and was not submitted  in  Sleiman.   Sleiman,  as  UTJ  Kopieczek  was
    careful to point out, was what might properly be described as a  'chain
    of causation' case, in which the respondent sought to submit only  that
    the appellant would not have met the statutory  residence  requirements
    in s6(1) if he had told the truth about his age.   She  submitted  that
    the appellant would not have been granted Discretionary Leave if he was
    not a UASC, that he would have been removed  thereafter,  and  that  he
    would not have been granted ILR under the Legacy because he  would  not
    have been in the United Kingdom.  UTJ Kopieczek was  unable  to  accept
    these submissions, and allowed the appeal because he was not  satisfied
    that the deception as to age was directly  material  to  the  grant  of
    citizenship in the manner asserted by the respondent.

69. At [62] - [65], UTJ Kopieczek set out very clearly what  had  not  been
    asserted by the respondent.  It was not suggested,  he  said  at  [65],
    that had the false date of birth been known to the  respondent  at  the
    time of the citizenship application, the application  would  have  been
    rejected on the ground that the appellant had not shown that he was  of
    good character (as required by paragraph 1(1)(b) of schedule 1  to  the
    1981 Act).

70. As Mr Clarke submitted orally and in  writing,  however,  that  precise
    submission has been made by the respondent throughout this case, as  is
    clear from the part of the decision letter which I have set out  above.
    The respondent's principal submission is that the appellant would  have
    been refused British citizenship on  'character'  grounds  if,  in  his
    citizenship application, he had stated that he had lied about his  name
    and his nationality throughout his time  in  the  United  Kingdom,  had
    received grants of status in that false  identity  and  had  also  been
    granted a travel document in that identity.

71. In considering that submission, I am  obliged  by  KV  (Sri  Lanka)  to
    consider the Nationality Instructions.  I was taken to the instructions
    by both advocates.  It was  agreed  that  the  July  2017  version,  as
    reproduced in  the  respondent's  bundle,  was  the  version  I  should
    consider.  (Oddly, this part of the NIs has not been revised  following
    the decision of the Supreme Court in Hysaj [2017] UKSC 82; [2018] 1 WLR
    221, and  appears  to  contain  some  positively  incorrect  advice  to
    caseworkers.) Ms Foot relied particularly on paragraphs  55.7.3-55.7.4,
    which provide, in full, as follows:

         55.7.3  If  the  fraud,  false  representation  or  concealment  of
         material fact did not  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  grant  of
         citizenship, it will  not  be  appropriate  to  pursue  deprivation
         action.

         55.7.4 For example, where a person acquires ILR under a  concession
         (e.g. the family ILR concession) the fact that we  could  show  the
         person  had  previously  lied  about  their  asylum  claim  may  be
         irrelevant. Similarly, a person may use a different  name  if  they
         wish (see NAMES in the General Information section of Volume  2  of
         the Staff Instructions): unless it conceals criminality,  or  other
         information relevant to an assessment of their good  character,  or
         immigration history in another identity it is not material  to  the
         acquisition  of  ILR  or  citizenship.  However,  before  making  a
         decision not to deprive, the caseworker should ensure that relevant
         character checks are undertaken in relation to the  subject's  true
         identity to ensure that the false information provided to the  Home
         Office was not used to conceal  criminality  or  other  information
         relevant to an assessment of their character.

72. Ms Foot's reliance on this part of the  NI's  is  misconceived  in  the
    context of this case.  The principal submission made by the  respondent
    is not that the  appellant  would  have  been  unable  to  satisfy  the
    statutory residence requirements for naturalisation if he had told  the
    truth. It is that he told lies in his  application  for  naturalisation
    and that the telling of lies is directly relevant to the assessment  of
    his character in that application.

73. The relevant question was that which was posed  by  Mr  Clarke  in  his
    cogent oral submissions: if the appellant had 'come clean' at the point
    of his citizenship application, and confessed that he  had  lied  about
    his name, nationality and place of birth for the preceding  ten  years,
    would that have altered the  respondent's  conclusion  that  he  was  a
    person of good character?  Or, to approach the  same  question  from  a
    different  angle,  if  the  respondent  had  discovered,   whilst   the
    application for naturalisation was pending, that the appellant had lied
    in that application and in all preceding applications about  his  name,
    nationality  and  place  of  birth,  would  that   have   altered   the
    respondent's conclusion that he was a person of  good  character.   The
    answer to those questions might be thought to  be  as  simple  as  Lady
    Hale's answer to the substantive question before the Supreme  Court  in
    Miller v The Prime Minister [2019] UKSC 41; [2020] AC 373: of course it
    would have.

74. It is appropriate  to  turn,  in  that  connection,  to  the  Guide  AN
    (Naturalisation as a British Citizen - a Guide for Applicants)  and  to
    the Nationality Instructions on Good Character, both of which are  also
    helpfully reproduced in the respondent's bundle.  It was agreed between
    the representatives that the Good Character guidance  produced  in  the
    respondent's bundle (which was then at Annex D to  Chapter  18  of  the
    NIs) is the relevant version for present purposes.

75. At page 4 of Guide AN, there is a list of the attributes  required  for
    naturalisation, the sixth of which is that the  applicant  must  be  of
    good character.   Paragraph  1.8  requires  an  individual  to  provide
    details of any other names by which they  have  been  known,  and  why.
    Section 3 is entitled 'Good  Character'  and  provides,  amongst  other
    things, that a person who is not  honest  about  the  information  they
    provide is liable to have their citizenship  taken  away  and  to  face
    prosecution.  At page 21, the guidance states that  an  applicant  must
    state whether they have been involved in anything which might  indicate
    that they are not of good character; if in 'any doubt', the information
    should be disclosed.

76. Turning to the Good Character guidance as in force at the time  of  the
    appellant's naturalisation, I note that paragraph 2.1 contains  a  list
    of circumstances in which an applicant would not normally be considered
    to be of good character.  The  final  example  is  a  person  who  'had
    practised deceit, for example, in their dealings with the Home  Office,
    Department for Work and Pension or HM Revenue & Customs...'.  Then,  at
    section 9, there are the following paragraphs:

         '9.1 It should count heavily  against  an  applicant  who  lies  or
         attempts to conceal the truth about an aspect  of  the  application
         for naturalisation - whether on the  application  form  or  in  the
         course  of  enquiries.  Concealment  of  information  or  lack   of
         frankness in any matter  must  raise  doubt  about  an  applicant's
         truthfulness in other matters.

         9.2 We should take into account the intentions of any  concealment.
         If it is on a minor matter, not relevant to the decision, it may be
         overlooked. If it relates to a criminal conviction, we should  only
         be prepared to overlook the deception if  there  are  good  reasons
         which we accept as genuine - such  as  a  misunderstanding  of  the
         effect of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act  or  that  applicants
         have good reasons  for  not  wishing  to  disclose  their  past  to
         someone, such as a referee or a spouse/civil partner, who would see
         the application form, and the applicant is open  at  interview  and
         otherwise suitable for naturalisation. However, if the deception is
         serious and deliberate, particularly if the applicant did  not  co-
         operate in our enquiries, or if  it  contributes  to  other  doubts
         about  the  decision,  then  the  application  should  normally  be
         refused. For guidance on how to deal with  applications  where  the
         applicant has failed to declare an impending prosecution please see
         paragraphs 3.7.7 above.'

77. Ms Foot's written and oral submissions in response to  Mr  Clarke  fail
    entirely, with respect, to come to grips with this aspect of  the  case
    and with these parts of the guidance.  The respondent is  not  required
    to demonstrate that the appellant would  have  been  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom and would not have been granted ILR if he had  told  the
    truth about his nationality at an earlier stage.  That was how the case
    was put in Sleiman but it is not how this case is put.  Considering the
    guidance above, it is quite apparent that there is  no  answer  to  the
    case  advanced  in  the  refusal  letter  about  the   good   character
    requirement.  The appellant employed deception in his  application  for
    naturalisation.  He did so, as he explained in his evidence before  the
    FtT, because he suspected (correctly) that  the  truth  would  have  an
    impact on his application.  It is quite apparent from  the  section  of
    the guidance  which  I  have  reproduced  immediately  above  that  the
    application for naturalisation would have  been  refused  on  character
    grounds if  the  respondent  had  discovered  that  the  appellant  had
    deceived her in that application regarding his  name,  nationality  and
    place of birth.  These were not, on any proper view, 'minor matters' of
    the type considered at 9.2 of the Good Character guidance.

78. Whether on the evidence and submissions before the FtT or those  before
    me, I  conclude  that  there  is  simply  no  arguable  case  that  the
    appellant's false representations in his application for naturalisation
    were not directly material to the decision to grant citizenship.  Those
    false representations were obviously directly material to the decision,
    for the reasons I have set out  above.   It  was  entirely  proper  for
    counsel to concede, in those circumstances, not  only  that  there  had
    been false representations but also that citizenship had been  obtained
    by means of the same.  The acceptance that the condition  precedent  in
    s40(3) was  satisfied  was  inevitable,  and  did  not  result  in  any
    injustice to the appellant.

    Ground Two

79. Ms Foot put her oral argument on ground two rather less forcefully than
    she had in writing.  At [18] of  her  final  written  submissions,  she
    contended that there was nothing in the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Hysaj which precluded an Article 8 ECHR argument from succeeding in any
    deprivation case.  That is undoubtedly correct but the effect of Hysaj,
    as is clear from [89]-[111] is that it will be an unusual case in which
    the strong public  interest  in  deprivation  of  citizenship  will  be
    outweighed by the upheaval and the 'limbo' caused by an individual such
    as the appellant being deprived of their British citizenship.

80. There was nothing before the FtT, just as there is nothing  before  me,
    which  even  arguably  begins  to  outweigh  the  public  interest   in
    deprivation.  Ms Foot notes, amongst other things, that  the  appellant
    will not have any status  in  the  event  that  he  loses  his  British
    citizenship; that he will no longer be able to work or  rent  property,
    and that this will have an impact on his wife and  his  children.   The
    latter impact is said to be relevant to their best interests.  I do not
    doubt the factual underpinnings of these submissions.  I  observe  that
    the Upper Tribunal in Hysaj noted the ability of that appellant's  wife
    to work (if necessary, in unskilled employment), and to rent,  and  the
    availability  of  benefits  if  British  children  are   at   risk   of
    destitution. There is no reason to think that the same safety nets  are
    unavailable in this case.  Before the FtT, there was no semblance of an
    arguable case that deprivation would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.  As
    with ground one, the reasons that counsel did not seek  to  argue  that
    deprivation would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR is quite apparent;  the
    point is unarguable on the facts.  Any error on the part of  the  judge
    in failing to consider the point in  greater  detail  was  consequently
    immaterial.

    Ground Three

81. Ground three concerns the fourth of Leggatt  LJ's  stages  in  KV  (Sri
    Lanka).  Satisfaction of the condition precedent  in  s40(3)  does  not
    result, without more, in deprivation.  Since  the  statutory  power  is
    discretionary, it remains for the respondent (and then the Tribunal) to
    consider  whether  deprivation  is  the  proper  course  in   all   the
    circumstances of the case.  As with ground one, the submissions on this
    point became unduly focused on the historical  deception,  rather  than
    the deception in the application for naturalisation.  For  what  it  is
    worth, I accept Ms Foot's submission that the appellant should  not  be
    held responsible for the deception which he first practised on  arrival
    in the UK.  He was a child and was under the instruction of an agent to
    pretend that he was from a region which, unlike his own, was  suffering
    from war crimes and crimes against humanity.  The respondent's guidance
    (at 55.7.8 of the NIs) states that a child should be assumed not to  be
    complicit in such deception perpetrated by a parent or guardian.  I  am
    unable to accept Mr Clarke's submission that this should not extend  to
    a child who has been influenced by a people smuggler.

82. The reality, however, as Mr Clarke went on  to  submit,  was  that  the
    appellant was an adult when  he  made  his  application  for  a  travel
    document and, more importantly, when he came to  make  his  application
    for naturalisation.   As  is  clear  from  55.7.8.5  of  the  NIs,  the
    presumption must be  that  an  adult  is  held  responsible  for  false
    information submitted in a citizenship application.

83. Ms Foot also sought to submit that the appellant was mentally unwell at
    the time of his  application  for  citizenship.   There  was  certainly
    evidence to that effect before the FtT.   Evidence  at  pp70-74  showed
    that the appellant suffered from 'mood  disturbance,  chronic  anxiety,
    panic disorder, nerves and insomnia' as a result of a history  of  drug
    abuse, and that he was  taking  medication  and  awaiting  counselling.
    That evidence came nowhere close to establishing, however, the level of
    mitigation contemplated at 55.7.11 of  the  NIs.   The  evidence  must,
    pursuant to those instructions, demonstrate clearly  that  the  subject
    had a 'lack of free will and/or sound judgement' at the relevant  time.
    Without wishing for a moment to downplay the seriousness of  conditions
    such as those described in the GP's letters, they fall very  far  short
    of establishing that the appellant did not  have  free  will  or  sound
    judgment at the time that he applied for  citizenship.   As  Mr  Clarke
    submitted, he did not need to make an application for  citizenship;  he
    had ILR.  He chose to make the application,  to  pay  the  fee  and  to
    instruct  solicitors.   There  was,  and  is,  no   proper   evidential
    foundation for an argument that the statutory  discretion  should  have
    been  exercised  differently,  given  the  strong  public  interest  in
    deprivation, as described in the authorities including Hysaj.

Conclusion

84. Ms  Foot  noted  in  her  grounds  of  appeal  and  in  her  subsequent
    submissions  that  it  had  been  argued  by  the  appellant's   former
    solicitors that the appellant's  deception  was  not  material  to  the
    decision to grant citizenship; that deprivation would  be  contrary  to
    Article 8 ECHR; and that there were  mitigating  factors  which  argued
    against deprivation.  That was clearly how the case was prepared by the
    previous solicitors.  When counsel came to prepare the  case,  however,
    he exercised his professional judgement  and  concluded  that  none  of
    these arguments could properly be made on the evidence before the  FtT.
    It is clearly possible to draw that inference, whereas it is simply not
    possible to conclude (as Ms  Foot  has  submitted)  that  these  wholly
    unmeritorious lines of argument were overlooked by counsel.

85. In all the circumstances, I conclude that the appellant should  not  be
    permitted to withdraw the determinative concessions made by counsel  in
    the FtT.  Had I permitted those concessions to be withdrawn, I would in
    any event have found that any errors  on  the  part  of  the  FtT  were
    immaterial to the outcome.  The only proper course was for this  appeal
    to be dismissed  and  for  the  appellant  to  await  the  respondent's
    decision on the question of whether he  should  be  expelled  from  the
    United Kingdom.  In the event of an adverse decision in  that  respect,
    the appellant will have an opportunity to ventilate his real Article  8
    ECHR and section 55 BCIA 2009 arguments.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the FtT stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                           30 September 2020
