
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00018/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Business                              |                                      |
|On 4 May 2021                         |On 28 May 2021                        |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 EDUART DOCI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Vanguard
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in this matter is referred to as the 'Secretary of State'
    in the body of this decision, the respondent as the 'claimant'.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Athwal ('the Judge')  who  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal against a decision to deprive him of  British  nationality.  The
    decision of the Judge was sent to the parties on 16 December 2020.

Remote Hearing

 3. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing  room  at
    Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public.
    The hearing and its start time were listed in the  cause  list.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as if we  were
    together in the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this  constituted  a
    hearing in open  court;  that  the  open  justice  principle  has  been
    secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as  there
    has been any restriction on a right or interest,  it  is  justified  as
    necessary and proportionate.

Anonymity

 4. No anonymity direction was issued by the Judge and no  application  for
    such direction was made before me.

Background

 5. The claimant is a citizen of Albania. He was born on  14  January  1978
    and is aged 43.

 6. He entered the United Kingdom and claimed asylum in April 2001. He  was
    aged 23 at the date of  his  claim  but  falsely  informed  the  United
    Kingdom authorities that he was born on 1 January 1984 and aged 17.  In
    addition, he falsely asserted that he was an ethnic  Albanian  national
    of the Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia  who  had  resided  in  Presheve
    before travelling to  this  country.  He  asserted  that  he  had  fled
    persecution at the hand of Serbian dominated security forces, detailing
    that in January 2000 he had been  subject  to  a  stop  and  search  by
    security forces that resulted in his being tortured for two  hours  and
    left to die. He further asserted that in March 2001 he returned home to
    find  the  presence  of  Serbians  who  threatened  to  kill  him.   He
    subsequently left the country.

 7. The claimant states that he was informed by an  agent  who  helped  him
    travel to this country that if he revealed his true identity  he  would
    be deported back to Albania and sent to prison.  The  claimant  asserts
    that he followed the advice of his agent.

 8.  The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's  application   for
    international protection on 8 August 2001 but granted  him  exceptional
    leave to remain for four years. The  claimant  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain on 7 December 2005 and naturalised as a British citizen
    on 12 February 2007.

 9. The claimant applied for a British passport which was issued to him  on
    14 August 2007.

10. The claimant's then fianc�e, now wife, made  an  application  to  enter
    this country in 2007 and provided the claimant's true personal  details
    with her application. The application was refused.

11. The claimant travelled to Albania and married his wife  on  16  October
    2007. Shortly  afterwards  his  wife  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse. She submitted the claimant's  original  Albanian
    birth certificate, accompanied with a translation. The claimant  states
    that to date his wife has not received a decision upon her application.

12. The claimant's wife subsequently entered this country clandestinely  in
    2011 and the couple have two children, both of whom are minors and  are
    British citizens. His wife enjoys leave to remain in this country.

Decision to deprive nationality

13. The Secretary of State wrote  to  the  claimant  on  15  November  2019
    confirming that there was reason  to  believe  that  the  claimant  had
    obtained British citizenship as a result of fraud. The claimant's  then
    legal representatives, Blackstone Law, wrote to the Secretary of  State
    on behalf the  claimant  by  a  letter  dated  6  December  2019.  They
    confirmed the claimant's true identity, namely that he was an  Albanian
    national born in January 1978. The letter detailed  representations  as
    to why it would be unreasonable and unfair for the claimant to  now  be
    deprived of his British citizenship. Reference was made to the claimant
    being frightened when he came into this country and his acting upon the
    instructions of his agent. Reliance was placed upon both  his  and  his
    family's  protected  human  rights,  and  it  was  noted  that  he  had
    contributed to the British economy through his employment.

14. On 11 February 2020 the Secretary of State served notice of decision to
    deprive the claimant of British nationality under section 40(3) of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981. The Secretary of State concluded that the
    claimant had obtained his British  citizenship  fraudulently.  Reliance
    was placed upon what the  Secretary  of  State  identified  as  various
    instances where the claimant provided false personal details, initially
    when seeking international protection and then when  seeking  a  travel
    document, indefinite leave to remain and naturalisation. In respect  of
    the latter application reliance was placed upon the claimant not having
    been able to meet the 'good character requirement' if his true personal
    history and identity had been known to the Secretary of  State  at  the
    relevant time:

         '24. It is important to note that you have perpetrated a deliberate
             fraud against the UK immigration system,  where  you  employed
             deception to obtain status that would not have been granted to
             you if the truth had been known. Parliament has  provided  the
             power to deprive British citizenship status if  the  Secretary
             of State is satisfied  that  naturalisation  was  obtained  by
             means of fraud,  false  representation  or  concealment  of  a
             material fact, which is clearly the case here,  and  it  is  a
             balanced and proportionate step to take. As you would not have
             satisfied the Good Character Requirement  had  your  deception
             been known your application to naturalise would have therefore
             been refused.  Chapter  18  the  Good  Character  Requirement,
             Section 6 Deception, section  6.1  states,  "It  should  count
             heavily against an applicant who lies or attempts  to  conceal
             the  truth  about   an   aspect   of   the   application   for
             naturalisation - whether on the application  form  or  in  the
             course of enquiries. Concealment of  information  or  lack  of
             frankness and any matter must raise doubt about an applicant's
             truthfulness in other matters" (Annex  R,  page  15.  Sections
             6.1. & 6.2).

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

15. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Birmingham on  11  December
    2020. The appellant attended and gave oral evidence.

16. By her decision sent to the parties  on  16  December  2020  the  Judge
    observed that the letter confirming the grant of exceptional  leave  to
    remain in 2001 did not provide any detail as to why the  appellant  was
    granted such status, save for noting:

         'However, because of the particular circumstances of your case,  it
         has been decided that it would be right to  grant  you  exceptional
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 08/08/05'.

17. The Judge undertook an examination as to what policy was applied to the
    claimant by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  respect  of  the  grant  of
    exceptional leave to remain in 2001, at [33]-[40] of her decision.  She
    concluded that there was insufficient evidence  placed  before  her  to
    establish whether the initial decision by the  Secretary  of  State  to
    grant the claimant exceptional  leave  to  remain  was  taken  under  a
    policy. Consequently, she determined:

         '41. It is for the respondent to prove on a balance of  probability
             that the appellant's naturalisation was obtained by  fraud  or
             false  representation  that  was  directly  material  to   the
             decision  to  grant  citizenship.  In   the   deprivation   of
             citizenship notice  sent  in  February  2020,  the  respondent
             submitted that the appellant was granted ELR on the  condition
             that he was a minor, but for the reasons set  out  above,  she
             has  failed  to  prove  that  this  was  the  case.  That  the
             respondent has completely failed to establish upon what  basis
             ELR was granted. In these circumstances I do not  accept  that
             the SSHD have [sic] the  power  under  section  40(3)  of  the
             British Nationality Act 1981 to make an  order  depriving  the
             appellant with British citizenship.

Grounds of Appeal

18. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Beach granted permission to appeal  by
    a decision dated 22 January 2021. Judge Beach summarised the  Secretary
    of State's grounds concisely:

         '2.  The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed
             to make findings with regard to the respondent's argument that
             the appellant's character and conduct excluded  him  from  the
             grant of British citizenship. The grounds further  state  that
             the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  give  any  or  any
             adequate reasons for accepting the appellant's  argument  that
             his case fell within the parameters of Sleiman (deprivation of
             citizenship; conduct)  [2017]  UKUT  367  (IAC).  The  grounds
             further state that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misapplied
             the case of Sleiman. The grounds state  that  Sleiman  is  not
             authority  for  a  grant  of  leave  under  the   legacy   (or
             otherwise).'

19. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Beach reasoned:

         '3.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  refers  to  the  respondent's
             position at paragraph 6 of the decision  and  notes  that  the
             respondent's position included an assertion that the appellant
             would not have been naturalised had his deception  been  known
             because of the good character  requirements.  It  is  arguable
             that the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not make any  findings
             regarding this issue and that the failure to do so also  means
             that  consideration  has  not  been  given  to   whether   the
             appellant's case could be distinguished from the principles in
             Sleiman.'

Rule 24 response

20. The claimant sought to file a rule 24 response on the  morning  of  the
    hearing. The filing of a response is not mandatory, but if relied  upon
    rule 24(2)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    ('the 2008 Procedure Rules') confirms that it is to be filed  no  later
    than one month after the date on which notice of permission  to  appeal
    having been granted was sent to the parties. In this matter  such  time
    expired in February 2021.

21. Mr. Sellwood informed me that he was instructed  to  draft  a  rule  24
    response in place of a skeleton  argument  on  Friday  30  April  2021.
    Consequent to this hearing being listed on a Tuesday following  a  Bank
    Holiday, Mr. Sellwood received his instructions on the last working day
    prior to the hearing.

22. The rule 24 response was filed and served by the claimant's  solicitors
    at 11.11 on the morning of the hearing, which was listed to be heard at
    14.30.

23. Field House receives a  considerable  amount  of  email  correspondence
    during the day, and any reasonable professional working in  this  field
    would expect a time delay in the internal forwarding of correspondence.
    Despite the best endeavours of administrative staff at Field House, the
    skeleton argument was forwarded onto me at 13.19. I had a full list  on
    the day of the hearing, including a resumed hearing,  and  only  became
    aware of the document a matter of minutes before the hearing commenced.
    I did not have the opportunity to consider the document before starting
    the hearing.

24. I observe that Ms. Cunha represented the  Secretary  of  State  in  all
    matters in my list on the day of the  hearing,  including  the  resumed
    hearing, and the late service of the response required her to  consider
    the document in the short time available between hearings.

25. Whilst observing the professional care he had taken as to drafting  the
    content of the rule 24 response, and stating the aid it  would  provide
    to  the  Tribunal,  Mr.  Sellwood  was  unable  to  provide  a   cogent
    explanation as to why  his  instructing  solicitors  had  significantly
    delayed in instructing him to author the document, or  as  to  why  its
    filing and  service  at  11.11  on  the  morning  of  the  hearing  was
    considered to be an act complying with the obligation placed upon legal
    representatives by rule 2(4) of the 2008 Procedure Rules to  help  this
    Tribunal to further the overriding objective and to cooperate with  the
    Tribunal generally.

26. In the circumstances, I refused to exercise discretion and extend  time
    for the filing of the rule 24 response.

27. As to the approach adopted  by  Vanguard  Solicitors  to  instruct  Mr.
    Sellwood so late in the day to author a rule 24 response in  substitute
    for a skeleton argument, despite having been on the  record  throughout
    and further having been aware of this hearing since 31  March  2021,  I
    share the exasperation of the High Court  in  its  recent  judgment  of
    Ahmed v. Ahmed [2021] EWHC 1021 (Ch). There is no reasonable basis  for
    the holding of a belief that  the  very  late  service  of  a  skeleton
    argument, or in this case a rule 24 response, will aid a judge  in  his
    or her preparation for a hearing.

28. Advocacy is the art of persuasion through  communication.  A  carefully
    drafted written  submission  can,  when  skilfully  used  at  the  oral
    hearing, enhance the impact  of  argument.  In  the  hands  of  skilled
    practitioners such as Mr. Sellwood it can be a golden  opportunity  for
    an advocate to seek to persuade a judge of the merits of a case  before
    they enter a court  room.  At  its  core,  written  submissions  should
    properly be a crafted instrument  of  persuasion  designed  to  inform,
    educate, elucidate and persuade a judge  both  in  advance  of  and  in
    conjunction with oral argument.

29. However, as a  tool  designed  to  be  persuasive,  its  usefulness  is
    significantly, if not fatally, undermined when it reaches the desk of a
    judge minutes before a hearing commences. The adoption by certain legal
    practitioners, though thankfully a minority, of a practice of very late
    filing establishes an unhelpfully mechanical approach to the production
    of written submissions, rather than abiding  by  its  primary  role  of
    aiding a judge and consequently advancing their client's case. In  this
    matter, at the very least the approach adopted by  Vanguard  Solicitors
    was designed, whether intentionally or not, to delay  the  commencement
    of the hearing as there was no reasonable basis for  believing  that  a
    judge with a busy list would be able to consider and digest the written
    submissions  minutes  prior  to  the  hearing.  Such  practice  is  not
    consistent with the professional obligation of advancing their client's
    case to the best of their professional ability.

30. It remains a truism that written submissions handed to a judge  on  the
    day of hearing do not have the same effect as that presented to a judge
    with the case papers earlier in the week.

31. Consequent to the poor practice of Vanguard  Solicitors,  the  claimant
    may well have paid for detailed written  submissions  from  experienced
    counsel, who I have no doubt put considerable effort into drafting what
    he considered to be a persuasive document,  which  ultimately  was  not
    read by the judge in this matter. I am unable to see how  the  adoption
    of such practice by Vanguard Solicitors aids either their client or the
    Tribunal, particularly when the filing of a skeleton  argument  two  or
    more days before the hearing would have been beneficial.

Decision

32. I confirmed at the conclusion of the hearing that the decision  of  the
    Judge would be set aside for procedural unfairness and lack of adequate
    reasoning.

33. In her decision, the Judge set out  the  claimant's  case  as  detailed
    within the grounds of appeal and  a  subsequently  filed  statement  of
    issues. Submissions made on behalf of the claimant are detailed in  the
    decision and the Judge's observations as to the claimant's case run  to
    7 paragraphs over almost 2 pages.

34. The Judge noted the documentary contents of the  Secretary  of  State's
    bundle and summarised the Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter.  In
    respect of the Secretary of State's oral submissions, the Judge adopted
    a simple approach at [26] of observing that she had noted the  parties'
    submissions in the record  of  proceedings  and  had  taken  them  into
    account. No more detail is provided.

35. I observe that the record of proceedings confirms that the Secretary of
    State's representative at the hearing before  the  Judge,  Ms.  Tasnim,
    disagreed with the claimant's contention that he could  rely  upon  the
    reported  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in   Sleiman   (deprivation   of
    citizenship; conduct) [2017] UKUT 367  (IAC),  the  headnote  to  which
    details:

         'In an  appeal  against  a  decision  to  deprive  a  person  of  a
         citizenship status, in assessing  whether  the  appellant  obtained
         registration  or  naturalisation  "by  means   of"   fraud,   false
         representation, or concealment of a  material  fact,  the  impugned
         behaviour must be  directly  material  to  the  decision  to  grant
         citizenship.'

36. There is no express  or  implied  consideration  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission on the  applicability  of  Sleiman  in  the  Judge's
    decision. She simply proceeds on the basis that Sleiman is relevant and
    considered the appeal by unilaterally adopting the  approach  requested
    by the claimant.

37. I find that the Secretary of State has simply not enjoyed a fair  crack
    of the whip. After  the  Judge  summarises  the  decision  letter,  the
    Secretary of State becomes no more than  a  bystander  when  the  Judge
    embarks upon the detailed findings and reasons section of her decision,
    save for being criticized for not  identifying  whether  a  policy  was
    applied when the claimant was granted exceptional leave  to  remain  in
    2001. In the circumstances the Secretary of State was treated  unfairly
    by not being provided with a fair  opportunity  to  advance  her  case,
    which is a fundamental requirement.

38. The unfair process adopted to the consideration  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's submissions impacts upon the Judge's  reasoning.  It  is  trite
    that adequate and intelligible  reasons  must  be  given  for  judicial
    decisions: Anya v. University of Oxford [2001]  EWCA  Civ  405,  [2001]
    I.R.L.R. 377, at [12].

39. I am satisfied, upon careful consideration of the  decision,  that  the
    lack of express engagement with the Secretary of  State's  submissions,
    not only in respect of the application of Sleiman but also with  regard
    to the 'good character' consideration relied upon both in the  decision
    letter and orally before the Judge, results in anyone reading it  being
    unable to understand how the matter was  decided  as  it  was  and  how
    conclusions were reached on the 'principle controversial issues': South
    Bucks District Council v. Porter (No. 2) [2004] UKHL 33, [2004]  1  WLR
    1953, per Lord Brown, at [36]. The only true answer to the Secretary of
    State's complaint is that as the aggrieved party she has genuinely been
    substantially prejudiced by the failure of  the  Judge  to  provide  an
    adequately reasoned decision.

40. Mr. Sellwood sought, with notable patience, to address  questions  from
    the bench and to seek to establish that the decision  reached  was  the
    only true one that could be made in  the  circumstances.  However,  the
    combination of a lack of procedural fairness and  a  lack  of  adequate
    reasoning has led to substantial prejudice to the Secretary  of  State,
    striking at the roots of justice, and consequently  the  decision  must
    properly be set aside.

41. I observe that a relevant issue  arises  in  this  matter,  namely  the
    potential impact of the Supreme Court judgment in R (Begum) v.  Special
    Immigration Appeals Commission [2021] UKSC 7, [2021] 2  W.L.R.  556  on
    'section 40(3)' appeals  concerned  with  the  deprivation  of  British
    nationality. As I have determined above that the decision of the  Judge
    must be set aside, the operational import of  the  Begum  judgment  can
    properly be considered at the resumed hearing.

42. A further issue that can properly be addressed at the  resumed  hearing
    is the continued applicability of the Sleiman decision  post-Begum.  At
    the resumed hearing the parties should properly be expected to  address
    the conclusion  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Pirzada  (deprivation  of
    citizenship: general principles) [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC), [2017]  Imm  AR
    1257 namely that the central consideration in a section 40(3) appeal is
    whether the deception referred to motivated the grant  of  citizenship,
    and not whether it materially affected prior grants of leave to remain.





Remittal

43. In addition to the failing in respect of the Sleiman  consideration,  I
    observe Mr. Sellwood's acceptance that the  Judge  failed  entirely  to
    consider the 'good  character'  issue  that  was  before  her.  In  the
    circumstance, both parties agreed that this  is  a  matter  that  could
    properly be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to  be
    remade.

44. I agree with the  representatives  that  remittal  is  the  appropriate
    course in this matter. I have given careful consideration to the  Joint
    Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
    concerning the disposal of appeals  in  this  Tribunal,  in  particular
    paragraph 7.2(a). I observe the  fundamental  nature  of  the  material
    error identified and conclude that the effect of the error has been  to
    deprive the Secretary of State of a fair hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Consequently, I set aside this decision and remit it back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham.

45. The future listing of this appeal is solely a matter for the First-tier
    Tribunal. However, I take this opportunity to observe that I  indicated
    to the parties at the hearing that if the matter had  remained  in  the
    Upper Tribunal the resumed hearing would have been heard  by  a  panel.
    The application  of  the  Supreme  Court  judgment  in  Begum  and  its
    potential impact upon the reported decision in Sleiman are issues  that
    would have been suitable for a panel consideration in this Tribunal.

46. The Secretary of State should properly be expected to  aid  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as to whether she applied a policy to the  claimant  when
    granting  him  exceptional  leave  to  remain  in  2001.  The  relative
    importance of this issue will be a matter for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to consider at the remitted hearing.



Notice of Decision

47. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the  Judge's  decision  sent  to  the
    parties on 16  December  2020  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

48. No findings of fact are preserved.

49. The decision is to be remade by a Judge other than Judge Athwal sitting
    in the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham.



Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 May 2021
