
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00043/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2016                           |On 22nd August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   deputy UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 forhad [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Gore, Counsel instructed by Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Tiffin
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 9th June 2016.

 2. The history of this matter is as follows.

 3. The appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK  on  5th
    April 2009 and two years later, on  17th  November  2011,  was  granted
    British citizenship.  He applied for a British passport on 1st December
    2011 which was subsequently issued.

 4. On 18th September 2015 the respondent wrote to him  advising  him  that
    she had reason to believe that he  had  obtained  his  British  citizen
    status as a result of fraud and on  7th  December  2015  she  gave  her
    reasons for the decision to make an order to  deprive  him  of  British
    citizenship under Section 40 of the British Nationality  Act  1981.   A
    further notice of decision dated 8th February 2016 provided  the  basis
    of the appeal which came before  the  Immigration  Judge.   It  is  not
    necessary at this stage to go  into  any  detail  in  relation  to  the
    judge's findings. Suffice it to say that  she  concluded  that  he  had
    failed to  meet  the  good  character  requirement  for  the  grant  of
    citizenship.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that  decision  on  a
    number of grounds and permission was granted by  Judge  Kelly  on  20th
    July 2016.  Judge Kelly said that there was a Robinson obvious point of
    law not identified in the grounds which was nevertheless arguable.

 6. At paragraph 11 of the determination the judge said that it was for the
    respondent to satisfy  her  that  there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the evidence provided by her  representatives  supports
    the decision.

 7. As Mr Walker properly accepted, that is a plain misapplication  of  the
    law.  The judge cited the wrong standard of proof and consequently  her
    conclusions are unsafe.  This appeal will have  to  be  re-heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Tiffin in the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Before that hearing takes place the Secretary of State is  directed  to
    produce a copy of the passport application made in 2005  which  is  the
    subject of the dispute between the parties together  with  any  reasons
    given at that time as to why the passport application was rejected.

 9. The decision of Judge Tiffin is set aside, and the appeal will be heard
    by a different judge at Taylor House.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 20 August 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Tyalor
