
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00061/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Skype)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21 April 2021                     |On 10 May 2021                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LIRIM KOVACI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Hodgetts instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Flynn promulgated on 1 July  2019  in  which  the
       Judge allowed Mr Kovaci's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
       decision of 12 October 2018 to deprive him of his British citizenship
       pursuant to section 40 British Nationality Act 1981 on the basis  the
       decision was not in accordance with the law.

Background

    2. Mr Kovaci arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 June 1999  and  claimed
       asylum stating he was a citizen of Kosovo who  had  fled  persecution
       from the Serbian authorities. That claim was refused  but  Mr  Kovaci
       was granted four years Exceptional leave to remain on 28 April 2001.
    3. On 10 September 2005, Mr  Kovaci  was  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
       Remain (ILR), and on 29 November 2006 was issued with  a  Certificate
       of Naturalisation as a British citizen.
    4. On 11 June 2009 Mr Kovaci's wife submitted an application  for  entry
       clearance. The date of their marriage was 3 March 1999, and they have
       a daughter born on 4 December 2004.
    5. As a result of the application the British Embassy in Tirana  advised
       the Home Office that it had in its possession  an  Albanian  marriage
       certificate clearly showing Mr Kovaci to be a citizen of Albania.
    6. As a result, the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  Mr  Kovaci  on  30
       September 2009 stating he had reason to believe that he obtained  his
       status as a British citizen as a result of fraud.
    7. By letter dated 15 October 2019 Mr  Kovaci's  legal  representatives,
       Duncan Lewis, submitted a statement in which Mr Kovaci denied  making
       any false representations and claiming that in his  asylum  claim  he
       gave his correct details.
    8. On 22  January  2013  Tuckers  Solicitors  wrote  to  the  respondent
       advising that Mr Kovaci had admitted  he  was  born  in  Albania  but
       expressing regret for providing incorrect  details  and  arguing  any
       deprivation of citizenship would be disproportionate as Mr Kovaci had
       lived in the United Kingdom for almost 14 years and was integrated.
    9. By letter dated 21 March 2013 the Secretary of State stated the grant
       of  citizenship  was  null  and  void  as  it  was  based  on   false
       information, and on 23 October 2013 a decision was made to revoke  Mr
       Kovaci's ILR.
   10. Following the decision of the Supreme Court in Hysaj [2017]  UKSC  82
       the Secretary of State accepted Mr Kovaci was a British  citizen  and
       that the nullity decision was wrong in law.
   11. The decision under challenge before the Judge is the  later  decision
       of the 12 October 2018 in which it was said by the Secretary of State
       that having exercised discretion it was decided to deprive Mr  Kovaci
       of his British citizenship on the grounds of fraud, even having taken
       into account the period of time that had elapsed since Mr Kovaci  had
       been first contacted about his citizenship status of nearly 10  years
       and the fact the Secretary State awaited  clarification  of  the  law
       before taking the correct decision. The Judge noted the Secretary  of
       State's reasoning including it being stated that had she  known  that
       Mr Kovaci had obtained his ILR to remain  fraudulently  as  a  direct
       result of maintaining false representations he would have failed  the
       "Good Character" requirement for naturalisation.
   12. Having considered the documentary and oral evidence  and  have  heard
       submissions from the advocates the Judge sets out the  core  findings
       between [40 - 48] of the decision under challenge which  are  in  the
       following terms:

           "40.   I listened carefully to the appellant's evidence,  but  I
                do not find him to be a credible or reliable witness. In his
                oral evidence, he continued to  maintain  that  he  had  not
                intended to make false statements and either did  understand
                what he was signing; or that he did so only because  he  was
                following advice from more knowledgeable people.  I  do  not
                accept  that  any  of  his  explanation  is   credible.   In
                particular, I do not find  it  credible  that  he  told  his
                lawyer in October 2009 that he had lied about his country of
                origin when he claimed  asylum,  but  that  she  prepared  a
                statement denying this, which he signed without  reading.  I
                find his avoidance of any responsibility for the  fact  that
                he  continued  his  deception  for  over  13   years   casts
                significant doubt on his general credibility.  Nevertheless,
                the appellant's credibility has  limited  relevance  to  his
                appeal.


           41.     Mr  Hodgetts  submitted  that  the  appellant  met   the
                respondent's current guidance because of his long  residence
                and the fact that he would have qualified under the guidance
                applicable after his appeal was allowed  in  May  2014,  the
                respondent having conceded that the decision of  March  2013
                was defective.


           42.    The respondents Nationality Instructions, Chapter 55 sets
                out the guidance in place between 19  October  2012  and  27
                July 2017 [A244-260]:


                    "55.7.2.5. In general the Secretary of State or  not  to
                    deprive  of  British  citizenship   in   the   following
                    circumstances


                    ...


                      . If a person has been resident in the United Kingdom
                        for more  than  14  years.  We  will  not  normally
                        deprive of citizenship".


           43.    I appreciate that, had the respondent  taken  account  of
                this guidance in making the decision of 21  March  2013,  it
                would not have availed the appellant, who had resided in the
                UK since 25 June 1999, less than  14  years  at  that  time.
                However, the respondent conceded at the appeal hearing on 29
                April 2014 [A175-176]  that  the  March  2013  decision  was
                defective [6] and undertook to make a  fresh  decision  [8].
                The  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   was
                promulgated on  19  May  2014  [A174].  By  that  time,  the
                appellant had accrued over 14 years residence.


           44.    Chapter 55 set out aggravating factors, none of which was
                applicable  in  the  appellant's  case.  Although  they  are
                expressly  stated  not  to  be  exhaustive,  I  consider  it
                significant that  the  appellant  did  not  make  any  false
                representations at any  point,  except  in  respect  of  his
                claimed country of origin; and has no criminal record.


           45.    Mr Ojo submitted that the current version of  Chapter  55
                [A209-23] is the appropriate guidance to follow. It provides
                only three reasons for not depriving someone of citizenship,
                none of which  applies  to  the  appellant;  and  it  states
                expressly:


                    "55.7.6 length of residence in the  UK  alone  will  not
                    normally be a reason not to deprive a  person  of  their
                    citizenship."


           46.    I agree with Mr Hodgetts that the appellant  is  entitled
                to rely  on  the  respondent's  failure  to  make  a  lawful
                decision, taking account of the appropriate guidance,  in  a
                timely manner. The failure to make a decision until  October
                2018, more than four years after withdrawing his March  2013
                decision, is a relevant matter, but the respondent  did  not
                take account of the  guidance  applicable  during  the  long
                period of delay. I also agree with Mr Hodgetts that this  is
                a historic injustice that should have been considered as  an
                additional reason for concluding that the  appellant  should
                not be deprived of his citizenship, in addition to the  long
                period of residence.


           47.    I have considered  Mr  Ojo's  submissions  regarding  the
                appellant's lack of good character, but I  do  not  consider
                that this is a material issue in the  circumstances  because
                the guidance is devised specifically  for  people  who  have
                gained some form  of  status  through  misrepresentation  or
                fraud. I distinguish this appeal from Deliallisi because the
                guidance did not apply in that case.


           48.    I therefore conclude that the respondent's  decision  was
                not in accordance with the law. I note that it was for  this
                reason  that  the  respondent   withdrew   the   deprivation
                decisions in  two  appeals  linked  with  Deliallisi,  which
                fortifies my conclusion."

   13. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, which was granted
       by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, sitting as a judge for the First-tier
       Tribunal, on 23 July 2019. The operative part of the grant  being  in
       the following terms:

           "3.    It is arguable, as set out in detail in the grounds, that
                the Judge has erred in applying a policy that was  withdrawn
                in  2014;  in  conflating  the  earlier  decision  that  the
                citizenship was  a  nullity  (withdrawn  after  the  Supreme
                Court's decision in Hysaj [2018] UKSC 82, and  the  decision
                under appeal, to deprive him of that citizenship; in finding
                a historic injustice when none was applicable in  this  case
                and in erroneously finding that the Secretary of  State  had
                delayed  in  making  the  decision  under  appeal  when  the
                Secretary of State has acted properly after the SC had ruled
                in Hysaj."

   14. The Secretary of State relied upon four grounds  of  appeal  together
       with additional written submissions. Mr  Hodgetts  filed  a  skeleton
       argument which included his Rule 24  reply  which  was  perfected  by
       further pleadings received shortly before the error of  law  hearing.
       Both advocates made  their  oral  submissions  in  support  of  their
       pleaded cases before the Upper Tribunal.
   15. It must be recognised that the date of the decision  under  challenge
       of the First-tier Tribunal is 1  July  2019,  which  was  before  the
       authorities relied upon before the Upper  Tribunal  of  Hysaj  [2020]
       UKUT 00128 and Begum v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2021] UKSC 7 which are relevant to the issues in this appeal as they
       clarified the correct interpretation and application of  the  law  in
       this complex area.
   16. The Secretary States pleadings, whilst lengthy, warrant been set  out
       in full and are in the  following  terms  (bar  the  recital  of  the
       directions given by the Upper Tribunal and the grant permission):

           Background

           5. In this matter the Appellant appealed a notice  of  intention
                to deprive him of citizenship dated 12 October 2018.
           6. The Secretary of State exercised his discretion under s.40(3)
                of the 1981  BNA,  contending  that  the  Appellant  falsely
                claimed to be from Kosovo to obtain leave  and  citizenship,
                finding @ RFRL 9 "if the relevant facts, had they been known
                at the time of application for citizenship  was  considered,
                whatever affected the  decision  to  grant  citizenship  via
                naturalisation or registration" (Chapter 55.7.1)  and  @RFRL
                42 "Section 6 of the Nationality  Staff  Instructions  deals
                with deception and dishonesty. You would have  been  refused
                the  British  citizenship  under  S.6.1  and  6.2  had   the
                nationality caseworker been aware that he  had  presented  a
                false identity to the Home Office and continued to use  that
                identity throughout all your immigration history  (Annex  R.
                Chapter 18D, pg.1-14)."
           7. The Appellant entered the UK in  June  1999  as  an  Albanian
                national but  falsely  claimed  to  be  from  Kosovo,  as  a
                consequence, the Appellant was  granted  ELR  then  ILR  and
                finally British citizenship  on  29/11/06.  The  Appellant's
                fraud came to light when he applied for EC for his  Albanian
                wife on 11/6/09. On 30/9/09 the Appellant was  given  notice
                that he was being considered for deprivation on  account  of
                his fraud. However, the Appellant continued to maintain  the
                fraud and his innocence under letter from Duncan Lewis dated
                15/10/09.
           8. On 22/1/13 in response to a request for further evidence  the
                Appellant  finally  conceded  the  fraud   through   Tuckers
                solicitors.
           9. On 21/3/13 the Appellant was given notice that his  grant  of
                citizenship  was  deemed  a  nullity  and  on  23/10/13  the
                Appellants ILR was revoked. The Appellant  appealed  against
                the revocation of ILR. The revocation decision was found  to
                be unlawful and remitted back to the Secretary of  State  on
                account of a failure to consider Article 8.
           10.    On 9/6/17 the Appellant served a PAP upon  the  Secretary
                of State challenging the decision to revoke ILR.
           11.    On 27/3/18  the  Secretary  of  State  confirmed  to  the
                Appellant that it was accepted that he was a British citizen
                in light of the SC judgement in Hysaj.
           12.    On 12/10/18 the Appellant was served  with  a  notice  of
                intention to deprive, which is the subject  of  the  instant
                appeal.

           Key findings of FTIJ Flynn

           13.    FTJI Flynn set out his findings of fact, at paragraphs 39
                - 48:


                . @ 40 A  is  found  to  be  an  incredible  and  unreliable
                  witness. None of the explanations for A's fraud are  found
                  to   be   credible.   The   Appellant   tried   to   avoid
                  responsibility  for  his  deception  for  over  13  years,
                  "Nevertheless, the  Appellant's  credibility  has  limited
                  relevance to his appeal".
                . @ 41 A submitted  that  he  met  the  SOS  current  policy
                  guidance because of his long residence qualified under the
                  policy guidance after his ILR appeal was  allowed  in  May
                  2014.
                . @ 42 the Chapter 55  Policy  Guidance  in  effect  between
                  19/10/12 -27/7/17  included  under  55.7.2.5  a  provision
                  whereby the Secretary of State would not generally Deprive
                  Citizenship where a person has been resident for 14 years.
                . @ 43 had the SOS taken this  guidance  into  account  when
                  making the 21/3/13 nullity  decision  it  would  not  have
                  availed A as he did  not  have  14  years  at  that  time.
                  However by the time that the FTT remitted the ILR decision
                  to the SOS on 19/6/14 A had accrued 14 years.
                . @ 44 it is "significant that the Appellant  did  not  make
                  any false representation .... Except  in  respect  of  his
                  claimed  country  of  nationality:  and  has  no  criminal
                  record"
                . @ 45 the SOS  argued  that  the  Current  policy  guidance
                  provides 3 reasons not to deprive, none of  which  applies
                  to the Appellant and it expressly states  "55.7.6  Lengths
                  of Residence in the UK alone will not normally be a reason
                  not to deprive.....
                .  @  46  "the  appellant  is  entitled  to  rely   on   the
                  respondent's failure to make  a  lawful  decision,  taking
                  account of the appropriate guidance, in a  timely  manner.
                  The failure to make a decision until  October  2018,  more
                  than four years after withdrawing his March 2013 decision,
                  is a relevant matter, but  the  respondent  did  not  take
                  account during  the  long  "have  been  considered  as  an
                  additional reason for concluding that the appellant should
                  not be deprived of his citizenship,  in  addition  to  the
                  long period of residence."
                . @ 47 the Appellant's bad character is not material because
                  the guidance is  devised  for  people  who  gained  status
                  through misrepresentation or fraud.

           Summary of the Grounds of Appeal and  the  Secretary  of  States
           Further Submissions


           GROUNDS OF APPEAL

           14.    It is submitted that it is self-evident  @  40  that  the
                FTIJ finds that A used fraud in his acquisition  of  British
                Citizenship,  therefore,  the  condition   precedent   under
                s.40(3) is met, notwithstanding the requirement to  consider
                whether the  Secretary  of  State  correctly  exercised  his
                discretion and  whether  there  are  reasonably  foreseeable
                consequences that would render deprivation disproportionate.
           15.    The FTIJ appears to find @ 46 that the Secretary of State
                applied  his  discretion  wrongly  on  the  basis  that  the
                Secretary  of  State  failed  to  apply  a  14  year  policy
                contained within Chapter 55, which the Appellant should have
                benefited from. Equally the FTIJ found  that  the  Appellant
                suffered an historic injustice in this regard. On that basis
                the  FTIJ  found  the  decision  to  deprive  was  "not   in
                accordance with the law" @ 48.

           Ground 1: Mistake of Fact/Inadequate reasoning

           16.     It  is  submitted  first  that  the  FTIJ's  finding  at
                paragraph 42 that the 14 year policy  was  in  effect  until
                27/7/17 is a  mistake  of  fact.  The  14  year  policy  was
                withdrawn on 21/8/14. The FTIJ's finding @ 46 that the  "the
                respondent did not take account of the  guidance  applicable
                during the long period of delay" is unsustainable.
           17.    It is submitted that  the  Appellant  only  conceded  his
                fraud on 22/1/13, 3.5 years after the fraud was put to  him.
                A's citizenship was then deemed a  nullity  on  21/3/13,  on
                25/6/13 the Appellant accrued 14 years  in  the  UK  and  on
                21/8/14 the 14 year policy was withdrawn (14 months after  A
                accrued 14 years residence). It is submitted that there  was
                no long delay and in any event, as noted by  the  FTIJ  @43,
                even if the nullity decision had been a deprivation decision
                A had not accrued 14 years at that  time.  It  is  submitted
                that the  FTIJ's  findings  are  inadequately  reasoned  and
                predicated upon a mistake of fact.

             1.  Ground  2:   Conflation   of   Issues/Perversity/Inadequate
                Reasons/Failure to Take Material Matters into account

           18.    It is submitted that the FTIJ in any event, to  conflates
                @43 and @46 the  decisions  to  revoke  ILR  (23/10/13)  the
                Nullity decision (21/3/13) and the  decision  to  deprive  A
                citizenship (12/10/12). At paragraph 46 the FTIJ finds  that
                "the failure to make a decision  until  October  2018,  more
                than four years after withdrawing his March  2013  decision,
                is a relevant matter." The March 2013 decision was a nullity
                decision, this decision was withdrawn on 27/3/18; therefore,
                not four years  before  the  12/10/18  deprivation  decision
                under appeal. If it is the case that the  FTIJ  was  instead
                mistakenly  referring  to  the  ILR  decision;  it  was  not
                withdrawn but remitted to the SOS  to  consider  Article  8.
                Second, in any event, Chapter 55 is specific to  deprivation
                and does not bite upon ILR decision making.
           19.    With regard to the Nullity decision, it is submitted that
                "nullification" is not a discretion held by the Secretary of
                State nor does it involve the cancellation  of  citizenship,
                it is the recognition of the fact that citizenship was never
                acquired through the  operation  of  law.  As  noted  by  Mr
                Justice Ousley @39 of Kaziu [2014] EWHC  832  "nullification
                leaves no room for the exercise of any discretion: the grant
                either is or is not a nullity,  with  whatever  consequences
                may  flow  for  the  individual  and   for   relatives   and
                dependents, innocent or otherwise, and  however  long  after
                the deceit.  @41 of Kaziu HC "... he has not  been  deprived
                of "citizenship status obtained as a result of  registration
                or naturalisation". It is simply being pointed  out  to  him
                that he never obtained it at  all,  and  that  the  apparent
                grant is to him no grant at all."
           20.     It  is  therefore  submitted   that   the   Deprivation,
                discretionary consideration  under  the  Chapter  55  policy
                guidance were irrelevant to the 21/3/13 nullity decision.
           21.    It is submitted, as set out in  the  RFRL  @29,  that  in
                light of R v SSHD ex p Sultan Mahmood [1981] WB 59, R v SSHD
                ex parte Parvak Akhtar [1981] QB 46, R  v  SSHD  ex  p  Ejaz
                [1994] QB 496, R v Secretary of State the Home Department ex
                p Nahood Ejaz [1994] QB 496, Tohura Bibi v  Entry  Clearance
                Officer, Dhaka [2007] EWCA Civ 740  and  R  (Kadria)  and  R
                (Krasniqi's)  v  SSHD  [2010]   EWHC   3405   (Admin),   A's
                application for  naturalisation  was  deemed  a  nullity  by
                operation of law until the SC handed down Hysaj in 2018.  It
                is submitted that the Respondent cannot be impugned for  not
                pursuing deprivation in circumstances  where  the  Appellant
                was deemed to have no citizenship to deprive him of.  It  is
                submitted that the FTIJ fails  entirely  to  deal  with  the
                Court of Appeal precedent binding the Secretary of State  at
                the material time, despite  it  being  raised  in  the  2018
                decision letter.

             2. Material Misdirection of Law

           22.    It is submitted that the FTIJ's  application  of  the  14
                year policy, which was withdrawn on 21/8/14  is  a  material
                legal error. It is submitted that the Secretary of State was
                under a duty to apply his policy as at the date of  decision
                in 2018, as noted @14 of MO (Date  of  decision:  applicable
                rules) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00057 (which was upheld  by  the
                Court of Appeal in Odelola [2008] EWCA Civ 308 by the  House
                of Lords in Odelola [2009] UKHL 25

                    "The Secretary of State is entitled and  bound  to  make
                    and operate the United Kingdom's immigration policy  and
                    he is entitled to make decisions about particular  cases
                    by reference to the policy in operation at the time  the
                    decision is made".

           23.     It  is  submitted  that  there  were   no   transitional
                provisions when the 2010 - 2014 or July 2017  policies  came
                into effect and therefore no legitimate expectation that the
                Appellant would benefit  from  the  pre-August  2014  policy
                after August 2014. As found @16 of MO:

                    "16.   The appellant can gain  nothing  by  putting  his
                    claim in the language  of  legitimate  expectation.  His
                    only legitimate expectation is to have  his  application
                    decided in accordance with the Rules  at  the  time  the
                    decision is  made.  Any  other  view  would  entail  the
                    conclusion that the Secretary of State's power  to  make
                    policy by changing  the  Rules  from  time  to  time  is
                    hampered or fettered (see In Re Findlay [1985]  AC  318.
                    (It might be thought that R v SSHD ex  parte  Hargreaves
                    [1997] 1 WLR 906 assist the appellant with  its  similar
                    view, expressed in terms of the policy in force  at  the
                    date of the application. It is clear, however,  that  in
                    Hargreaves no point was taken about any interval of time
                    between application and decision. The court's  view  was
                    that the applicant was not entitled to require that  the
                    decision  be  made  by  reference  to  any  pre-existing
                    policy. Lord Woolf MR's summary of  Hargreaves  in  R  v
                    North and East Devon Health Authority ex parte  Coughlan
                    [2001] QB 213 at [75] refers  only  to  the  right  that
                    applications be "considered individually in the light of
                    whatever policy was in force at the time". Hargreaves is
                    not authority for the view that the relevant  policy  is
                    that in force at the time of any application as distinct
                    from that in force at the date of decision.)"

           24.    Equally, the House of Lords made it abundantly  clear  in
                Odelola [2009] UKHL 25 that a  statement  that  governs  the
                exercise of  an  executive  discretion  in  the  absence  of
                transitional provisions has the  effect  from  the  date  in
                which it comes into effect. As noted @39,

                    "39.   Standing back, therefore,  from  the  detail  and
                    addressing,  as  Lord  Mustill  proposed   in   L'Office
                    Cherifien [1994] 1 AC 486, 525H "a  single,  indivisible
                    question,  to  be  answered  largely  as  a  matter   of
                    impression". I have no doubt that  the  changes  in  the
                    immigration  rules,  unless  they   specified   to   the
                    contrary, take effect whenever they say they take effect
                    with regard to all leave applications, those spending no
                    less, than those yet to be made."

           25.    It is submitted, as noted  by  the  FTIJ  @45,  that  the
                reasons contained in the Chapter 55 policy at  the  date  of
                the 2018 decision under appeal "for not to  deprive  someone
                of citizenship" do not bite.  The  policy  was  therefore  a
                correctly applied by the Secretary of State.

             3. Ground 4: Inadequate Reasoning/Material Misdirection of Law

           26.    At paragraph 46 the FTIJ finds  "I  also  agree  with  Mr
                Hodgetts that this is a historic injustice that should  have
                been considered as an additional reason for concluding  that
                the appellant should not be deprived of his citizenship". It
                is submitted that the FTIJ fails to give any reasons or cite
                any  authority  for  his  acceptance  that  a  principle  of
                "historic injustice" applied in this case.
           27.    It is submitted that  if  the  IJ  is  referring  to  the
                Historic Injustice in Gurkha cases, then there is simply  no
                application of such a principle in the instant  appeal.  The
                Gurkha  historic  injustice  principle  arose  where   adult
                dependent relatives of Gurkha veterans were deprive  of  the
                benefit of a later concessionary policy, as noted by the  CA
                in Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 @2.

                    "For many  years,  Gurkha  veterans  were  treated  less
                    favourably    than    other    comparable    non-British
                    Commonwealth  soldiers  serving  in  the  British  Army.
                    Although   Commonwealth   citizens   was   subject    to
                    immigration control, the SSHD had a concessionary policy
                    outside the Rules which allowed such citizens  who  were
                    serving and former members of the British  Armed  Forces
                    to obtain on their discharge indefinite leave  to  enter
                    and remain in the UK. Gurkhas were not included in  this
                    policy."

           28.    At paragraph 3 of Gurung is set out the SSHD  2004  press
                release setting out the reasons for the introduction of  the
                discretionary policy:

                    "I am very keen to ensure that we recognise and the part
                    they have played in protecting us. That is why  we  have
                    put  together  the  best  possible  package  to   enable
                    discharged  Gurkhas  to   apply   for   settlement   and
                    citizenship. I hope that the decision I have made  today
                    will make  our  gratitude  clear.  Those  high  military
                    standards have  been  mirrored  by  their  demeanour  in
                    civilian life. Their families, to  have  shown  devotion
                    and  commitment  by  travelling  across  continents   to
                    support the Brigade."

           29.    It is submitted  that  the  appellant  as  a  person  who
                committed fraud for over a decade to facilitate his stay  in
                the UK and again an unlawful advantage over  genuine  asylum
                seekers and immigrants is incomparable to the  situation  of
                Ghurkha veterans who had given service to the  UK  but  were
                treated  differently  to  other   non-British   Commonwealth
                soldiers.  The  principle  of  historic  injustice  has   no
                application in the instant appeal.
           30.    It is of further note that historic injustice was in  any
                event, a matter for the Article 8 proportionality assessment
                in the Ghurkha case law. Historic injustice is not a  factor
                contained within Chapter 55 policy so  it  cannot  form  any
                part of the review of the discretion held under the  policy.
                Even if the FTIJ was correct to take into  account  historic
                injustice (which is not accepted). It could only be as  part
                of a proportionality assessment. However the FTIJ  fails  to
                have  regard  to  the  Public   Interest   in   Deprivation,
                erroneously  finding  any  countervailing  public   interest
                limited or non-existent:  @40  A's  fraud  was  of  "limited
                relevance" and @47 "immaterial".
           31.    The FTIJ also seeks to play  down  A's  fraud  @44  ,  on
                account of  the  Appellant  only  changing  his  country  of
                nationality (without taking into  account  that  this  fraud
                facilitated grants of leave) and  not  having  any  criminal
                convictions. It is submitted that whilst A has  no  criminal
                convictions. The fraud in question, which the FTIJ found  to
                exist, is an offence under s46 of the BNA 1981 and  s24A  of
                the 1971 Act. It is submitted that A's character and conduct
                carry significant adverse weight as expressed in the  s40(3)
                provisions of the BNA 1981. As noted in BA [2018] UKUT 00085
                @44:

                    "The Tribunal will  be  required  to  place  significant
                    weight on the fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
                    decided, in the public interest, that a person  who  has
                    employed deception etc  to  obtain  British  citizenship
                    should be deprived of that status.  Where  statelessness
                    is not in issue, it is likely to be only in a rare  case
                    that the ECHR  or  some  very  compelling  feature  will
                    require the Tribunal to allow the appeal."


           Further submissions

           32.    It is submitted, in light of Hysaj [2020] UKUT 00128 that
                the Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  are  made  out.
                This is because the 14 year policy was not effective at  the
                date of decision, there was no delay in making the  decision
                to deprive, no legitimate expectation that A could rely upon
                the withdrawn policy at the date of  decision,  no  historic
                injustice in A's inability to avail himself  of  the  policy
                between  November  2013  -August  2014  and  the   Appellant
                suffered no prejudice or unfairness.
           33.    It is submitted that the present case falls on all  fours
                with Hysaj in terms of facts and issues.  The  Appellant  in
                the instant appeal was served with notice  on  21/3/13  that
                his application for citizenship was  considered  a  nullity.
                The nullity decision was made in line with the  precedential
                decisions of  the  Higher  Courts  at  that  time.  However,
                following the Supreme Court's decision in Hysaj on  21/12/17
                - which  clarify  the  law  in  respect  of  nullity  -  the
                Appellant was served with a deprivation notice on  12/10/18.
                In the case of Hysaj [2020] UKUT  00128,  the  same  factual
                matrix arose, Hysaj was served with a  nullity  decision  on
                13/2/13 and following  the  Supreme  Court  ruling,  he  was
                served with a deprivation notice on 3/7/18.
           34.    In Hysaj the Appellant argued at paragraph 46 -  63  that
                there was a delay in serving  a  deprivation  notice,  which
                arose from the Secretary of States erroneous  reliance  upon
                the nullity doctrine. A argued the SOS could not  rely  upon
                case law before the 2017 Supreme  Court  ruling  to  justify
                such delay. At 64 - 67. The Appellant argued that they had a
                legitimate expectation that the  Secretary  of  State  would
                consider deprivation in line  with  the  withdrawn  14  year
                policy. At paragraph 68 - 76 the Appellant argued  that  the
                delay created an historic injustice  as  the  appellant  was
                denied the benefit  of  the  14  year  policy  and  @  77-80
                Appellant argued  that  A  was  treated  unfairly  from  the
                withdrawn 14 year policy. The  UT  dismissed  all  of  these
                arguments and found:

                    Delay (@46-63)


                    @ 61


                    We are satisfied that the adoption of such  an  approach
                    to limit the application of the public interest based on
                    delay alone is unsustainable as it  seeks  to  deny  any
                    true  engagement  with  the  facts   that   arise.   The
                    respondent was clearly  permitted  to  rely  upon  legal
                    advice.  The  starting  point   in   any   consideration
                    undertaken by the respondent as to  whether  to  deprive
                    the appellant of British citizenship  must  be  made  by
                    reference to the rules and policy in force at  the  time
                    the decision was taken, and such rules and  policy  will
                    abide  with  relevant  precedent,  as  understood.   The
                    respondent was entitled to rely upon the then favourable
                    judgment in Kadria from which permission  to  appeal  to
                    the Court of Appeal had been subsequently refused at  an
                    oral hearing, and indeed did so  rely  before  both  the
                    High Court and the Court of Appeal.  Though  Akhtar  and
                    subsequent Court of Appeal judgments that relied upon it
                    cannot, with the benefit of hindsight post- the  Supreme
                    Court judgment in Hysaj, be considered to  have  finally
                    and definitively settled the law the respondent and  her
                    legal advisors were entitled to observe the  application
                    of the doctrine of precedent. The  respondent  needs  to
                    have means of assessing the legality of her actions at a
                    particular time, in order to know what  her  legal  duty
                    is. Rule of law  values  indicate  that  the  respondent
                    should be entitled to take advice and act  in  light  of
                    the circumstances known to her, and  the  state  of  the
                    law, as then known: R. (on  the  application  of  MH)  v
                    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWHC
                    2506 (Admin), per Sales J, at [105]; approved Fardous v.
                    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA
                    Civ 931, at [42] per Lord Thomas CJ. When defending  her
                    decision before the Court of Appeal the  respondent  was
                    reasonably  permitted  to  place   reliance   upon   the
                    principle that the Court of Appeal is obliged to  follow
                    one of its previous decisions unless specific exceptions
                    arise, such as the judgment being per incuriam: Young v.
                    Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd [1946] AC 163.


                    @63


                    "...such delay did not arise from illegality  on  behalf
                    of the respondent nor did it arise from a  dysfunctional
                    system   yielding   unpredictable    and    inconsistent
                    outcomes."


                    Legitimate Expectation (64-67)


                    @66


                    There is no specified period within which an immigration
                    decision, or a decision to deprive, must be made  and  a
                    decision  to  deprive  a   person   of   their   British
                    citizenship, as for any immigration  decision,  must  be
                    made by reference to the rules and policy  in  force  at
                    the time it is  made,  and  not  by  reference  to  some
                    earlier law and policy:  EB  (Kosovo)  v.  Secretary  of
                    State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41;  [2009]  1
                    A.C. 1159, at [13]. The respondent  is  responsible  for
                    deciding and formulating policy as to the practice to be
                    followed in naturalisation and deprivation  matters  and
                    enjoys discretion to reformulate policy, so long as such
                    reformulation is within the constraints  which  the  law
                    imposes."


                    @67


                    "We are satisfied that  the  provisions  in  Chapter  55
                    relied upon by the appellant do not  establish  a  clear
                    and unambiguous promise that by reaching the  fourteenth
                    year of residence a person will not be deprived of their
                    citizenship because it  is  clear  that  the  respondent
                    qualified the identified  exceptions  where  deprivation
                    will not normally occur so as to permit her to weigh the
                    public  interest  in  proceeding  to  deprive  with  the
                    individual   facts   arising.   The   only    legitimate
                    expectation enjoyed by the appellant is  that  his  case
                    would be treated in accordance with the law  and  policy
                    in place at the time the  relevant  decision  was  made.
                    Consequently, the appellant's submission that he enjoyed
                    a legitimate expectation to be treated in  a  particular
                    way under an earlier policy must fail."


                    Historic Injustice (68-76)


                    @74


                    The appellant seeks the intervention of the Tribunal  to
                    disapply the policy existing at the date of the decision
                    and to require the respondent to exercise her discretion
                    in accordance  with  an  earlier  policy.  He  seeks  to
                    disabuse the usual rule that immigration and nationality
                    decisions are made according to the law  and  policy  in
                    force at  the  time  the  decision  is  taken.  We  have
                    explained above that the respondent did  not  unlawfully
                    delay  in  making  her  decision  and  that  though   in
                    hindsight she erred in relying upon the nullity doctrine
                    she was entitled to rely upon legal  advice.  She  could
                    reasonably, and therefore lawfully, rely upon  the  High
                    Court judgment in Kadria, as well as previous  Court  of
                    Appeal precedent as generally understood. Reliance  upon
                    existing case-law cannot be categorised as illegality in
                    this matter. The respondent was under no  obligation  to
                    make a decision between 7 July 2012 and 20 August  2014,
                    when the policy was  withdrawn,  and  if  there  was  an
                    obligation to  make  a  deprivation  decision  within  a
                    reasonable period of time, the failure to do so does not
                    establish an illegal abuse of discretion. Even at  their
                    highest, and being mindful  of  the  significant  public
                    interest  in  deprivation  where  citizenship  has  been
                    obtained by fraud, the  circumstances  arising  in  this
                    matter are not such that illegality was so obvious,  and
                    the remedy so plain, that there  was  only  one  way  in
                    which the respondent could have reasonably exercised her
                    discretion when considering deprivation.


                    @75


                    Though the respondent erred in law by initially deciding
                    that the grant of citizenship to  the  appellant  was  a
                    nullity, the appellant cannot establish that a  decision
                    to deprive under section 40(3) should  have  been  taken
                    under a specific policy within a certain period of time.
                    He is  therefore  unable  to  substantiate  the  alleged
                    prejudice. Rather, he  has  benefited  from  the  delay,
                    being able to continue to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  his
                    fraudulently obtained British citizenship from  2007  to
                    the present time, including his present ability to  work
                    in this country.  We  are  satisfied  that  no  historic
                    injustice arises in  this  matter  and  this  ground  of
                    appeal must fail.


                    Unfairness (77 - 80)


                    @80


                    The substantive unfairness argument is  based  upon  the
                    appellant being treated by the respondent as a 'nullity'
                    case, whilst others were being  dealt  with  differently
                    and, the appellant asserts, more favourably. As we  have
                    already held, the respondent was entitled to  rely  upon
                    legal advice that was based upon an understanding of the
                    law post-Mahmood and the favourable judgment of the High
                    Court  in  Kadria  concerning  the  application  of  the
                    nullity  doctrine  to   Albanian   nationals   who   had
                    identified  themselves  as  'Kosovan'  when  seeking  to
                    secure international protection and again when  applying
                    to naturalise. In all the circumstances  of  this  case,
                    having  already  found  that  the  appellant   was   not
                    subjected to unlawful delay in the consideration of  his
                    matter or that he enjoyed a legitimate  expectation  for
                    his matter to be considered at a certain time and  in  a
                    particular way, we find that there was no unfairness  in
                    the  appellant's  matter  not  being  considered   under
                    Chapter 55 between 7 July 2012 and 20 August  2014.  The
                    appellant is wholly unable  to  establish  that  he  was
                    subjected  to  such   unfairness   as   to   amount   to
                    irrationality.


           Conclusion

           35.     In  light  of  the  above,  the   Secretary   of   State
                respectfully invites the  Tribunal  to  set  aside  the  FTT
                determination.

   17. Mr Hodgetts in his skeleton argument and Rule 24 reply wrote:


                         IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL (IAC)


                                   BETWEEN


            SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT Appellant
                                     and


                           LIRIM KOVACI Respondent
                    ____________________________________
                    SKELETON ARGUMENT FOR THE RESPONDENT
                              AND RULE 24 REPLY
                    ____________________________________


           1.1    Pursuant to directions of the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  22
                October 2020 and the anticipated remote  oral  hearing,  the
                Respondent (appellant before the  FTT)  [hereinafter,  'LK']
                submits:-


           a) that the FTT made no material error of law;
           b) the decision of the FTT should stand;
           c) If, contrary to the above submission the  UT  finds  material
                error of law, it is submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be
                remitted to the FTT to make appropriate findings of fact  as
                necessary  in  relation  to  the  Article  8  ECHR,  and  in
                particular, with regard to  the  holistic  impact  and  best
                interests on LK's children (including  British  child),  the
                extent to which the family can  survive  economically  if  a
                deprivation decision were made including, findings  material
                to the submissions made to the FTT at pages 13 to 15 in  the
                skeleton argument before the FTT. This is  because  the  FTT
                has made no  findings  thereon  or  made  a  decision  under
                Article  8  ECHR  as  to  the  foreseeable  consequences  of
                deprivation. These are material to both the submission as to
                whether the discretion to  deprive  'ought'  to  be  made  2
                and/or to whether the decision to  deprive  is  contrary  to
                Article 8 ECHR and the best interests of LK's children,  one
                of whom is British.


           1.2    The factual background is set out LK's skeleton  argument
                before the FTT and thus is not repeated here.  For  ease  of
                reference, that factual background, is set out in a separate
                document in the appendix to this skeleton


           Responses to  Appellant  SSHD's  grounds/skeleton  by  paragraph
           number


           Preface to Grounds


           1.     Paragraph 14 of SSHD skeleton: It has always been  agreed
                that a condition precedent of the s 40(3) power is made out.
                The question for the Tribunal  was  whether  the  discretion
                should be exercised  differently  (see  BA  (deprivation  of
                citizenship: appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC)) [at 33-36] - it
                has the jurisdiction to exercise its own discretion  on  the
                merits  and/or  whether  there  are  reasonably  foreseeable
                consequences that would render deprivation  disproportionate
                under Article 8(2) ECHR.
           2.     Paragraph 15: What the FTT does at para 46, in accordance
                with  BA,  is  to  find  that  the  discretion  to  deprive,
                exercised in 2018, ought to have been exercised  differently
                due to a number of legally material factors, including:-
                i)     The initial making of an unlawful (nullity)  decision
                    when considering the legal consequences of  the  initial
                    fraud discovered in 2009;
                ii)    The "untimely manner" in which the  initial  decision
                    was made;
                iii)   The "delay" in  remaking  a  decision  following  the
                    withdrawal of the initial nullity decision in May 2014
                iv)    The historic injustice of not applying  the  14  year
                    deprivation   policy   when   considering   the    legal
                    consequences of the initial fraud  at  a  time  when  it
                    should and could have been considered;
           3.     The FTT was correct to  conclude  at  para  48  that  the
                "decision" (assuming that the FTT is here referring  to  the
                decision to deprive made in 2018)  was  "not  in  accordance
                with the law"  -  a  decision  made  without  considering  a
                legally  material  factor  would  be  3   unlawful   in   an
                administrative law grounds; in  this  case,  the  historical
                injustice identified by the FTTJ at para 46.


           Ground 1: Mistake of fact as to withdrawal date


           4.     Paragraph 16: This is immaterial; the FTTJ reasoned  that
                the policy was in place at the date of Tribunal  hearing  in
                May 2014 by which time the appellant had built up  14  years
                residence. The SSHD confirms that the policy  was  withdrawn
                after  this  point,  in  August  2014  rather   than   2017.
                Accordingly, whether  the  policy  was  withdrawn  later  is
                immaterial it was still in place at a point in time when, if
                the SSHD had applied the correct law  when  considering  the
                legal consequences of the fraud on entry, LK would have been
                treated as a British Citizen, who, in May  2014  could  have
                benefited from the application of the presumption  contained
                in the 14 year deprivation policy.
           5.     If, as submitted below, the  correction  of  an  historic
                injustice - the failure to take into account the application
                of 14 year deprivation policy  when  considering  the  legal
                consequences of the fraud on entry in  the  decision  making
                process - was a legally relevant factor in the  exercise  of
                the discretion to deprive in 2018, the FTTJ was  correct  to
                state at para 46 that the respondent did not take that  into
                account in the period of delay from May 2014  onwards  (when
                assessing what the legal consequences of the fraud  were  on
                LK's position)  and  in  exercising  in  the  discretion  to
                deprive - it is the SSHD's case that it  is  not  a  legally
                relevant factor. In fact, LK built up 14 years residence  in
                June 2013. In October 2013, as a legal  concomitant  to  the
                unlawful decision to nullify citizenship, the  SSHD  made  a
                further unlawful decision to revoke ILR which  was  premised
                on the earlier unlawful nullification decision.
           6.     Paragraph 17: There is no material mistake of fact.  When
                considering the legal consequences of the  fraud  which  was
                discovered by the Respondent in 2009, the FTTJ was  entitled
                to  take  into  account  that  the   decision   to   nullify
                citizenship was unlawful. That  was  a  decision  which  was
                maintained when making the October 2013 revocation  decision
                and in the appeal against  that  when  it  went  before  the
                Tribunal in May 2014; from October 2013 and at appeal in May
                2014, the legal consequences of the  discovered  fraud  were
                clearly in issue. At that time, LK had  built  up  14  years
                residence; the only legally applicable decision that R could
                and should have made at that time, was to  accept  that  the
                legal consequences of the fraud were to apply  the  existing
                deprivation policy and draw the Tribunal's attention  to  it
                in May 2014. That was not done -  there  was  no  acceptance
                that  the  decision  to  nullify  was  unlawful  before  the
                Tribunal  in  May  2014  or  that  the  deprivation   policy
                contained a presumption of none-deprivation  once  14  years
                had been accumulated - as it had when the decision to revoke
                ILR was made and also when it came to the FTT .  The  FTTJ's
                reasons are sufficiently clear: see (R (Iran).


           Ground 2:  Alleged  Conflation  of  Issues/Perversity/Inadequate
           Reasons/Failure to Take Material Matters into account


           7.     Paragraph 18: The FTTJ  does  not  conflate  the  nullity
                decision with the deprivation decision. The FTTJ is  clearly
                aware of the distinction between the various  decisions  and
                the determination must be read as a  whole.  Of  course  the
                reason why the FTT has to deal with all of these  decisions,
                is that they were each a result of the SSHD's  consideration
                of the legal consequences of the initial fraud discovered as
                early as  2009  and  intimately  linked  and  had  causative
                effect: i) The 2013 nullity decision arose after  solicitors
                for LK pointed out that  he  had  almost  reached  14  years
                residence in their 2013 letter; the decision to  revoke  ILR
                on 23rd October 2013 [140-144](by which time LK had built up
                14 years residence) arose as a matter of logic,  because  of
                the unlawful decision to nullify Citizenship as a result  of
                the same discovered initial  fraud;  the  2018  decision  to
                deprive Citizenship arose when  the  SSHD  finally  accepted
                that both her earlier decisions made  in  2013  and  October
                2013 (the latter by which time 14 years had already accrued)
                arising  from  the  legal  consequences  of   fraud,   where
                unlawful.
           8.     The FTTJ is manifestly aware of the distinctions  between
                the different decisions and the allegation of conflation  is
                disingenuous.  See:  Para  1  (decision  to  deprivation  of
                citizenship under Section 40 in 2018); para 6 and 9  (noting
                that LK's then Representative raised the issue  of  near  14
                years residence as a reason for not depriving citizenship) ;
                para 10  (nullity  decision  of  21  March  2013);  para  11
                (decision to revoke ILR dated  23  October  2013);  para  13
                (noting the appeal against the decision to  revoke  ILR  was
                conceded by the respondent on  legal  grounds);  para  18-20
                (noting that the nullity  decision  was  accepted  as  being
                unlawful due to Hysaj); para 22  (the  decision  to  deprive
                Citizenship of 12  October  2018  is  clearly  set  out  and
                defined - see also para 1).5
           9.     In light of the clear explanation noted at para 8  above,
                the FTTJ does not conflate or mix up the three decisions  at
                para 43 and 46 save that there is  a  non-material  slip  in
                calling the decision under appeal the "March 2013" decision,
                it was the decision of October 2013. But in the  context  of
                the previous description of the decisions this is clearly  a
                slip as to the month of the revocation of ILR decision.
           10.    One thing is clear, the decision to revoke ILR, which the
                SSHD conceded  was  legally  flawed  at  the  2014  Tribunal
                hearing, was an unlawful decision that considered the  legal
                consequences of the initial fraud - it was made  in  October
                2013, at a time when LK had built up 14 years residence  (he
                arrived in June 1999).
           11.    When the FTTJ is  correct  at  para  46  to  state,  "the
                failure to make a decision until  October  2018,  more  than
                four years after withdrawing his March 2013 decision,  is  a
                relevant matter." This sentence does not in terms state that
                both decisions have the same legal effect. Both the decision
                to nullify in 2013, the decision remove ILR  and  the  final
                decision in 2018 all consider the legal consequences of  the
                initial fraud. Had correct consideration been given to those
                consequences when the SSHD was first considering them, by at
                least October 2013, the 14  year  deprivation  policy  would
                have benefited LK from its presumption. That failure, is  an
                historic injustice which is,  it  is  submitted,  a  legally
                relevant  and  material  factor  in  the  exercise  of   the
                discretion to deprive made in 2018.
           12.    Even if, as submitted at paragraph 18, the SSHD  did  not
                herself "withdraw" the revocation decision, the fact that it
                was conceded that it was  unlawful  (albeit  for  the  wrong
                reason), meant that the October 2013 decision was a decision
                that was yet to be re-made and considered  -  this  was  the
                effect of the order the FTT. The SSHD was thus under a legal
                obligation to reconsider it in a reasonably timely manner as
                a  result  of  the  Tribunal's  decision.  It  was   however
                ultimately withdrawn as a result of Hysaj in 2018.
           13.    In short, the legal consequences  of  the  initial  fraud
                where  considered  by  the  SSHD  in  2009,  and  the  first
                appealable decision on those consequences on  October  2013,
                by 6  which  time  LK  had  built  up  14  years  residence,
                following which the SSHD was obliged to reconsider it.
           14.    The submission that Chapter 55 only bites on  deprivation
                decisions and is not relevant to Article 8 is  misconceived.
                When considering the legal  consequences  flowing  from  the
                fraud, the SSHD acted unlawfully in  nullifying  citizenship
                then, ipso facto, revoking ILR  at  a  time  when  the  only
                lawful decision that could be made was to  consider  whether
                deprivation of Citizenship was appropriate. Of  course,  the
                SSHD was not going  to  go  down  the  deprivation  road  in
                October 2013 as LK's solicitors had already pointed  out  in
                the January 2013 letter in response to the SSHD's letter  of
                2009 that she was considering  deprivation,  that  LK  would
                accrue 14 years residence in June 2013.
           15.    Paragraph 19: For the purposes of argument it  is  agreed
                that nullification does not involve a  discretion.  But  the
                FTTJ does not say that it does. There is  no  conflation  of
                the decision to nullify with the decision to deprive by  the
                FTTJ. However, they are intimately linked as they have  been
                decisions respectively constituting the SSHD's assessment of
                the legal consequences of LK's fraud.
           16.    Paragraph 20: The Chapter 55 discretionary considerations
                were relevant to the position  in  March  2013  and  October
                2013, when the SSHD was considering the  legal  consequences
                of fraud, as the discretion to deprive was the  only  lawful
                route that the SSHD could have taken. By October 2013 the 14
                year deprivation  policy  would  have  to  been  taken  into
                account when considering what lawful options the SSHD had to
                respond to the discovered fraud.
           17.    Paragraph 21: The  SSHD  submits.  "A's  application  for
                naturalisation was deemed a  nullity  by  operation  of  law
                until the SC handed down Hysaj in 2018". This is  wrong.  It
                is accepted that the  SSHD  unwittingly  followed  what  was
                thought to be the correct legal position from the cited case
                law. But the authorities were wrong. The fact that the  SSHD
                acted in good faith, does not preclude a finding that  there
                has been historic injustice - see R (S) v Secretary of State
                for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 546, [2007]  Imm  AR
                781, para 41; that is made out by the illegality per se; the
                SSHD's good faith and honest belief is immaterial to whether
                there has been  historic  injustice,  7  although  it  might
                explain why an unlawful decision was made - although one can
                also draw inferences from the fact that the  SSHD  initially
                considered deprivation, then Solicitors' for LK noted he had
                almost built up 14 years residence. The failure to cite such
                historic  authority  does  not  in  any  way   vitiate   the
                conclusion of historic injustice. See consideration of  what
                constitutes historic injustice and its  legal  relevance  in
                Mousasaoui v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 50 at  paragraphs  12,  27
                and TN and MA [2015]  UKSC  40.  Applying  paragraph  27  in
                Mousasaoui: Here there was historic injustice because:
                i)     There was prior illegality when considering the legal
                    consequences of the  discovered  fraud,  both  in  March
                    2013, and in October 2013 and before the  2014  Tribunal
                    when the appeal was conceded but on erroneous grounds;
                ii)     When  considering  the  legal  consequences  of  the
                    discovered  fraud  in  October  2013,  the  only  lawful
                    decision would have been to consider deprivation and  to
                    apply the 14 year deprivation policy;  to  this  extent,
                    making an unlawful assessment of the legal  consequences
                    of initial fraud prejudiced LK as a policy that ought to
                    have been considered as a legal response, was ignored;
                iii)    The  unlawfulness  of  continuing  to   treat   LK's
                    citizenship  as   a   nullity,   and   the   concomitant
                    unlawfulness of seeking to revoke ILR, impacted on  LK's
                    ability to fight against deprivation - if, which was the
                    only lawful  decision  that  could  have  been  made  in
                    October 2013,  the  SSHD  made  a  deprivation  decision
                    rather  than  the  unlawful  decision  to  maintain  the
                    nullity decision and the concomitant decision to  revoke
                    ILR, LK would have been able to pray in aid the 14  year
                    policy - as did two of the linked successful  appellants
                    joined in Dellialisi - in a timely deprivation appeal
                iv)    There is clearly sufficient causal connection between
                    the illegality and the historic injustice; had the  SSHD
                    not unlawfully considered the incorrect legal route as a
                    response to the consequences of  discovered  fraud,  she
                    would have been 'bound' to consider deprivation  as  the
                    only legal option, and  by  the  October  2013  decision
                    (which  in  effect  maintained  the   unlawful   nullity
                    decision), the applicability of the 14 year  deprivation
                    policy. LK thus plainly suffered prejudice by not  being
                    able to rely on the  said  policy  due  to  the  illegal
                    decision made in October 2013, if Mousassoui is  applied
                    correctly.
           18.     The  SSHD  submission  fails  to  recognise  the   legal
                constituents of historic injustice. Good faith on  the  part
                of the SSHD is immaterial.


           Ground 3 - Material Misdirection of Law


           19.    Paragraphs 22-25: Whilst there is a good  deal  to  agree
                with the premisses of this ground, it is misconceived.
                i)     It is accepted that a legally relevant factor to  the
                    exercise of  discretion  to  deprive  in  2018  was  the
                    application of the SoS's extant Chapter 55 policy as  of
                    that date. However, the  policy  does  not  dictate  all
                    factors to be considered and does not  bind  either  the
                    SSHD or the Tribunal, in exercising that discretion,  so
                    as to exclude historic injustice as a  legally  material
                    factor to be considered.
                ii)    Whilst the SSHD is obliged to consider and apply  the
                    policy, to apply  it  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other
                    factors, and in a too rigid fashion, would be fetter the
                    discretion inherent within Section 40A BNA 1981.
                iii)   Indeed, as the UT  in  BA  holds,  the  Tribunal  can
                    exercise  its  own  discretion  and  has  the  power  to
                    consider  for  itself,  on  the   merits,   whether   an
                    exceptional feature  exists  such  that  the  discretion
                    ought to be exercised differently.
                iv)    But Chapter 55 as it was in 2018, is fairly vague  as
                    to how the discretion should operate in  any  event,  it
                    merely highlights some nonexhaustive categories of  when
                    deprivation  is  not  appropriate  and  highlights  that
                    length of residence in  and  of  itself,  might  not  be
                    sufficient to protect against deprivation.  It  is  does
                    not  dictate  what  happens  when  there  is  a  lengthy
                    residence combined with other features.
                v)     The extant policy in 2018  does  not  exclude  taking
                    into account historic injustice as  a  legally  relevant
                    factor in the exercise of discretion. Indeed, if it  did
                    so, it would be contrary to  Mousasaoui  v  SSHD  [2016]
                    EWCA Civ 50 at paragraphs 12, 27 and TN  and  MA  [2015]
                    UKSC 40 at [42].
                vi)    The Grounds are correct that  following  Odelola  the
                    immigration rules existing at the date  decision  should
                    apply to decisions made by the SSHD. However, whilst the
                    rules are an expression of policy at any one time,  they
                    have taken  on  the  harder  quality  of  law,  and  are
                    generally prescriptive in detail providing, in the main,
                    clearly   defined   circumstances.   They   are   wholly
                    distinguished from 9 policy  which  is  vague  and  non-
                    exhaustive. The discretion in issue was not dictated  by
                    the application of any immigration rule.
                vii)   Moreover, as noted in BA (deprivation of citizenship:
                    appeals) [2018] UKUT 85 (IAC)) [at 33-36]  the  statute
                    (Section 40A BNA 1981) provides that the FTT has its own
                    discretion to exercise and can allow an appeal,  on  its
                    merits, if, due  to  the  existence  of  an  exceptional
                    feature, the discretion ought  to  have  been  exercised
                    differently. Neither the statute creating  jurisdiction,
                    nor the  rather  non  exhaustive  and  vague  policy  in
                    Chapter 55 existing  in  2018,  could  prevent  the  FTT
                    taking into  account,  as  a  legally  relevant  factor,
                    historic injustice.
                viii)  The grounds are wholly misconceived  in  reading  the
                    FTT decision. The Judge was NOT  "applying"  the  policy
                    existing in 2014 to the decision in 2018, but was taking
                    into account, as a legally material factor, the historic
                    injustice that the  Judge  found  had  occurred  on  the
                    facts. This is clear at paragraph 46  of  the  decision.
                    The historic injustice is merely  one  of  a  number  of
                    factors that are taken into account  in  exercising  the
                    discretion inherent in the jurisdiction that Section 40A
                    BNA 1981 provides.
                ix)    The Judge was also mindful of the policy existing  in
                    2018 and also took that into  account  in  her  decision
                    (see paragraphs 42 and 45). The 2018 policy was not,  as
                    the grounds submit, displaced by consideration  of  only
                    the policy  existing  in  2014.  Reading  para  41  with
                    paragraphs 45 and 46, it is plain that the Judge applied
                    the 2018 policy, and in doing so,  found  that  combined
                    with the lengthy residence, there  was  another  feature
                    (the historic injustice) in line with para 55.7.6 of the
                    2018 policy quoted at paragraph 45.
                x)      The  appellant  has  not,  and  does  not,  rely  on
                    legitimate expectation as assumed in the  grounds  -  he
                    has no legitimate expectation that the 2014 policy would
                    apply in 2018 and has never argued that. That concept is
                    irrelevant. The Judge was lawfully entitled to take into
                    account the historic injustice  in  the  exercise  of  a
                    discretion  in  2018;  the  unlawful  response  to   the
                    consequences  of   discovered   fraud   underlying   the
                    decisions of March 2013 and  October  2013  when  had  a
                    lawful response ensued LK could have prayed in  aid  the
                    policy  in  existence  at  that   time.   Although   the
                    requirements of good administration required the SSHD to
                    consider legally applicable policy when considering  the
                    legal consequences of her  response  to  the  discovered
                    fraud (see paragraph Mandalia v. SSHD [2015] UKSC  59  
                    [29].
                xi)    The submission on paragraph 45 of the FTT decision is
                    misconceived. The judge correctly found that none of the
                    3 exceptions to  deprivation  in  the  2018  chapter  55
                    policy apply. This does not mean, as  submitted  in  the
                    grounds,  that  "the  policy  was  therefore   correctly
                    applied by the SSHD". As the FTTJ notes at paragraph 45,
                    the 2018 version of Chapter 55  is  non  exhaustive  and
                    creates a wider discretion to be exercised  than  merely
                    three non-exhaustive categories of none deprivation: The
                    FTTJ was correct  to  note  that  lengthy  residence  in
                    itself might not be normally sufficient on its own.


           Ground 4: Inadequate Reasoning/Material Misdirection of Law


           20.    Paragraph 26 of SSHD submission: The FTT was not  obliged
                to cite any authority on historic injustice. That  authority
                was noted in the  skeleton  before  the  FTT.  The  FTT  was
                correct to find historic injustice - see  above  and  below.
                The Judge gave ample reason for finding  historic  injustice
                when reading the determination as a whole. The  judge  notes
                that the fraud was discovered in 2009 when  the  SSHD  first
                indicated her consideration of deprivation. That  solicitors
                in January 2013 submitted deprivation was not appropriate as
                LK  was  reaching  14  years  residence.  That  an  unlawful
                decision was made to treat Citizenship as a nullity in March
                2013. That an unlawful decision was made to  revoke  ILR  in
                October 2013 (itself premised on the March unlawful  nullity
                decision) and the only lawful avenue to consider  the  legal
                consequences of the discovered fraud, was, when  the  matter
                went to appeal  in  2014,  the  application  of  deprivation
                policy (which was not considered).
           21.    Paragraph 27: The Judge was apprised of  legal  authority
                as to historic injustice in the skeleton argument.  Reliance
                was not placed on Gurung but on those noted above: TN and MA
                [2015] UKSC 40 at [42], Mousasaoui v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 50
                and R ota FT v.  SSHD  (rolling  review;  challenging  leave
                granted) [2017] UKUT 00331  (IAC).  Whilst  not  citing  the
                authority, it is submitted the FTTJ  correctly  applied  the
                legal principles arising therefore as noted above.
           22.     Paragraph  29:  The  grounds  incorrectly  submit   that
                historic injustice can only be prayed in aid in respect of a
                decision taken under Article 8 ECHR. Although it is  correct
                to say that historic  injustice  maybe  a  legally  material
                factor in the assessment of  proportionality  under  Article
                8(2) ECHR, the above noted authorities note that it is  also
                a legally material factor in the exercise of  a  discretion:
                see TN  [42]; see R (S) v 11 Secretary  of  State  for  the
                Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 546, [2007] Imm AR 781, para
                41 and 46


                "However, it was open to  the  court  to  determine  that  a
                legally material factor in the exercise of  that  discretion
                was the correction of injustice. That  proposition  did  not
                require express statutory authority. It was implicit in  the
                principles of fairness and consistency  which  underlay  the
                whole statutory scheme. Further, in  an  extreme  case,  the
                court could hold that the unfairness was so obvious, and the
                remedy so plain, that there was only one way  in  which  the
                Secretary   of   State   could   reasonably   exercise   his
                discretion."


                See FT v. SSHD (rolling review; challenging  leave  granted)
                [2017] UKUT 00331 (IAC)  73, 74.
           23.    The grounds at paragraph 30 are wrong  to  say  that  the
                Judge failed to take into account  the  fraud  as  a  factor
                contrary  to  the  public   interest   in   exercising   the
                discretion. The Judge was entitled at para 40 read  with  47
                and 44, to find that the  lack  of  good  character  was  of
                limited weight in circumstances where the 2014  policy,  had
                it  been  correctly  applied  when  first  considering   the
                consequences of fraud,  was  premised  on  persons  who  had
                gained   advantage    of    Citizenship    by    fraud    or
                misrepresentation  and  where  none  of  the  countervailing
                factors in that policy applied.
           24.    Paragraph 31: The Judge's  conclusion  that  the  lengthy
                residence in addition to the historic  unfairness,  applying
                the 2018 policy, meant that the  discretion  ought  to  have
                been exercised differently, is  consistent  with  BA  [2018]
                UKUT  0085.  -  the  historic  injustice  was   plainly   an
                exceptional or very compelling feature combined with lengthy
                residence, in the context  of  the  2014  policy  which  was
                premised   on   providing   presumptive   protection    from
                deprivation   for   those   who   engaged   in   fraud    or
                misrepresentation. Application of Hysaj [2017]  UKUT  00331:
                Hysaj (Deprivation of Citizenship: Delay) [2020] UKUT  00128
                (IAC)
           25.    Paragraph 32-34: It is assumed that the reference in  the
                grounds to Hysaj [2017] UKUT 00331 is meant as  a  reference
                to Hysaj (Deprivation of  Citizenship:  Delay)  [2020]  UKUT
                00128 (IAC). At the time  of  writing,  whilst  the  UT  has
                refused 12 permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  in
                Hysaj, there is still a pending application  for  permission
                to appeal to the Court of Appeal.
           26.    In sum, LK submits:
                1.     The case can be distinguished on its facts; and/or
                2.     Observations about the non-applicability of  historic
                    injustice in cases where a nullity  decision  was  taken
                    are strictly obiter; and/or
                3.     With the greatest respect, it is wrongly  decided  on
                    whether, in  these  circumstances  historical  injustice
                    arises as a legally material factor  to  be  taken  into
                    account in exercising the current discretion to  deprive
                    of Citizenship and/or in relation to the proportionality
                    balance under Article 8 ECHR.
           27.    The following facts distinguish  LK  from  the  facts  in
                Hysaj
                 I) Hysaj, had committed a serious  criminal  offence  which
                    broke the continuity of his residence - accordingly,  he
                    had not  built  up  14  years  continuous  residence  to
                    qualify  for  presumptive  benefit  under  the  14  year
                    deprivation policy: see para 86  in  Hysaj.  It  follows
                    that since Hysaj could not  pray  in  aid  the  14  year
                    policy in any event, strictly  speaking  the  Tribunal's
                    holding on whether, if he could do so,  there  had  been
                    historic injustice, is strictly obiter  (a  decision  on
                    historic injustice in failing to take account of the  14
                    year deprivation policy was not required to  dispose  of
                    the case)
                II) The serious criminal offence  committed  by  Hysaj,  was
                    another factor which weighed in the balance in favour of
                    deprivation.
               III) Unlike Hysaj LK was subject to a decision to remove  his
                    purported ILR (itself  premised  on  an  assumed  lawful
                    decision to nullify Citizenship) and which  attracted  a
                    right of appeal to the Tribunal: The SSHD  was  thus  at
                    that time, obliged to consider  the  lawfulness  of  her
                    response to the discovery of fraud, on  a  lawful  basis
                    and to draw to the Tribunal's  attention,  all  relevant
                    law and policy. That 2nd decision, was considered  at  a
                    time  when  LK  had  built  up  14   years'   continuous
                    residence.
           28.    Para 61 in Hysaj: It is incontrovertible  that  both  the
                nullity decision in March 2013 and the  decision  to  revoke
                ILR (premised on LK not being British) were unlawful. To the
                extent that the UT reasons that  the  respondent's  unlawful
                decision to nullify is irrelevant to the later  decision  to
                deprive, as the Respondent  was  entitled  to  follow  legal
                precedent, this is contrary to Court of Appeal authority  at
                paragraph 41 in R (S) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                Department [2007] EWCA Civ 546, [2007] Imm AR 781:


                "41. I  also  have  doubts  about  the  weight  put  by  the
                judgments upon the Department's conduct. The court's  proper
                sphere is illegality, not maladministration. If the  earlier
                decisions were unlawful, it matters little whether that  was
                the result of bad faith, bad luck, or sheer  muddle.  It  is
                the unlawfulness, not the cause of it, which  justifies  the
                court's  intervention,  and  provides  the  basis  for   the
                remedy."


           29.    Cause of delay: It is accepted, that the cause of some or
                even a large part of the delay  could  not  be  put  at  the
                SSHD's door, but delay (i.e. the passage of a lengthy period
                of time) there has been; apprised of the fraud in 2009,  the
                SSHD took until March 2013 to make a first decision  on  the
                legal consequences of the fraud  despite  informing  him  on
                30th September 2009 [122-123] LK that  she  was  considering
                depriving him of Citizenship. Whether or  not  witting,  the
                practical consequences of unlawful decision has been a  huge
                period of time when LK was in a limbo legal  situation  from
                2013 to 2018 and to date. The lengthy  passage  of  time  is
                relevant, regardless of the cause. See  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]
                UKHL 41 at paras 14 and 15: the Upper Tribunal is  wrong  to
                imply at para 63, that delay is only relevant  if  it  is  a
                result of a dysfunctional or inconsistent system -  that  is
                only one of the three ways that delay is relevant to  either
                proportionality, or it is  submitted,  to  the  exercise  of
                discretion  to  deprive.  It's  legal   relevance   is   not
                necessarily contingent on fault as paragraphs 14 and  15  in
                EB (Kosovo) make clear. But delay is not something which  LK
                places any significant weight upon albeit relevant.


           Legitimate expectation


           30.    The Tribunal in Hysaj  hold  that  because  there  is  no
                guarantee when a decision is made, there  is  no  legitimate
                expectation that a decision will be made at  any  particular
                time. And that the Respondent can change her policy  at  any
                time. All of that is true. LK does not, and has  not  argued
                that he has a legitimate expectation that  the  2014  policy
                should be applied to the decision made in 2018 or to replace
                it.


           Historic Injustice


           31.    However, what  the  UT  fails  to  address  is  that  the
                decisions to nullify, and to  then  purportedly  revoke  ILR
                (concomitant on nullification), are both decisions  made  as
                legal responses  to  the  discovery  of  fraud:  Whilst  the
                appellant did not have a  legitimate  expectation  that  any
                particular decision would be made at  any  particular  time,
                once a legal decision was made to address the consequence of
                the discovery of fraud, the principle of good administration
                requires the respondent, to  give  legal  responses  to  the
                discovery of fraud which were lawful and in accordance  with
                the law. It is reasonable to assume that but for  the  error
                of  law  in  treating  Citizenship  as  nullity,  which  was
                maintained in further decision in  October  2013,  that  the
                SSHD  would  have  considered  her  discretion  to   deprive
                Citizenship at that time which was the only lawful route  to
                address the legal consequences of the discovery of fraud. If
                so, that could only be considered in line with extant policy
                at that time.
           32.     Thus  once  a  decision  was  made  at  the   time,   it
                necessitated a lawful, rather than  illegal  response  -  at
                that time. A fortiori, when the SSHD  first  indicated  that
                she was considering deprivation, as the legal consequence of
                the discovered fraud, in her letter of September 2009.
           33.    The matter is analogous to the situation in R  v  DDP  ex
                parte Kebeline [2000] 2 A.C. 326 . Here the House  of  Lords
                had to consider whether the discretion exercised by the  DPP
                to give consent to a prosecution, under a law reversing  the
                burden of proof, which was premised in part on the basis of,
                it  was  argued,  flawed  legal  advice,  was   lawful   (in
                accordance with Article 6(2) ECHR), despite  the  fact  that
                the HRA 1998 had yet to come into force and its commencement
                date was  uncertain  [p17].  Their  Lordships  rejected  the
                notion that there was a legitimate expectation that  Article
                6 ECHR had to be considered. However, Lord Bingham,  in  the
                Queens Bench, had  held  that  since  the  DPP  had  already
                addressed his  mind  to  the  question  as  to  whether  the
                intended prosecution would violate Article 6, the court  had
                the power to review the soundness of the legal  advice  upon
                which the discretion was based,  in  assessing  whether  the
                discretion itself was legal flawed (p. 11 per  Lord  Bingham
                in the Queens Bench 15 division). The HL overturned this  as
                JR was not appropriate for arguments that could be  made  in
                the trial.
           34.    In LK's case, the SSHD had already indicated that she was
                addressing her consideration to the  legal  consequences  of
                the discovered fraud,  including  whether  to  exercise  the
                discretion to deprive citizenship (see letter  of  September
                2009)[122-123] and later nullity action,  and  in  light  of
                representations in January 2013 that the 14  year  residence
                mark was close. It follows that the public interest  in  how
                that discretion was exercised  at  that  time,  should  have
                taken into account existing 14 year deprivation policy which
                was a legally  relevant  consideration  in  how  the  public
                interest at that time should be weighed in the  exercise  of
                the discretion as to what were the legal consequences of the
                discovered fraud. Just as the DDP had to consider the  legal
                consequences of K's actions on a lawful basis  once  he  had
                addressed his mind  to  them,  so  too  did  the  SSHD  once
                consideration had been given to the  legal  consequences  of
                LK's fraud.
           35.    It is respectfully submitted that the UT in Hysaj errs in
                law at paragraphs 68-75 in  holding,  obiter,  there  is  no
                historic injustice and by  failing  to  properly  apply  the
                tests  to  ascertain  whether  there   has   been   historic
                injustice, as adumbrated in Mousasaoui v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
                Civ 50 at paragraphs 12, 27and R(S):
                 I) Per R (S) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
                    [2007] EWCA Civ 546, [2007] Imm  AR  781  at  [41],  the
                    cause of illegality,  whether  by  maladministration  or
                    mistake or whatever, is immaterial;
                II) Applying  Mousasaoui  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  50  at
                    paragraphs 12, 27 there was historic injustice  for  the
                    reasons set out at paragraph 17 above (pp. 6- 7)..
           36.    At paragraph 74 the UT reasons that Hysaj was seeking  to
                "disapply" the policy applicable at the  date  of  decision.
                That is not this case  here.  The  argument  put  here,  and
                accepted by the FTTJ, was that applying policy in  place  in
                2018, the length of residence plus  the  historic  injustice
                fell  for  consideration  under  the  2018  policy   -   see
                paragraphs 16 41, 45 and 46 for the FTT decision.  The  2018
                policy still placed weight on lengthy residence albeit  that
                in itself was not (normally) sufficient:-


                55.7.6 Length of residence in the UK alone will not normally
                be a reason not deprive a person of their citizenship."


                As submitted to the FTT, this means that the  policy  allows
                for the length of residence alone to be a sufficient  reason
                for  non-deprivation,  albeit  not  normally.  And  in  this
                particular case, length of residence is now over  21  years.
                That is a significant period of time in policy terms and  is
                expressly recognised as such in para 276ADE(1)(iii). The FTT
                was thus entitled, applying policy in 2018,  to  regard  the
                past historic injustice, as a tipping factor in LK's favour.


           37.    Following TN it is submitted that the  correction  of  an
                historic injustice, was a  legally  material  factor,  taken
                along with the length of residence and taking  into  account
                the  2018  policy,  in  the  exercise  of  the  full  merits
                discretion that the Tribunal has under Section 40A BNA 1981.
                The FTTJ was thus entitled to reach the conclusion  she  did
                for the reasons given.


           Alternative submission if the UT finds material error of law


           38.    The UT will see that before the UT LK argued  that  there
                were a range of factors  that  were  material  to  both  the
                exercise of discretion and to the  proportionality  exercise
                under Article 8 ECHR. These are  set  out  in  the  skeleton
                argument before the FTT  at  pages  13  to  15  a  range  of
                factors, including, inter alia, the foreseeable consequences
                of deprivation, e.g. those which impacted  on  his  economic
                ability  to  sustain  himself  and  his  family,  the   best
                interests of his two children, one of whom is  British,  and
                his prospects of successful reunification  with  his  family
                whilst retaining his strong private  life  recognised  under
                para 276ADE(1)(vi). Since the FTTJ allowed the appeal on the
                principle challenge, in terms of the exercise of discretion,
                no findings of fact  have  been  made  on  these  additional
                factors as no consideration has  been  given  to  Article  8
                ECHR.  Some of these factors also go to the issue of whether
                exceptional features such that the discretion  ought  to  be
                exercised differently. But there are simply no  findings  on
                them
           39.    Accordingly,  it  is  submitted  that  if  the  UT  finds
                material error of law as submitted in the grounds, it  would
                be appropriate to remit to the FTT for a proper fact finding
                exercise  going   to   the   foreseeable   consequences   of
                deprivation and for consideration of Article 8 ECHR.
           40.    Even if Hysaj is correctly decided, it does not preclude,
                in a suitable  case,  that  an  appeal  against  deprivation
                cannot be successful under Article 8 ECHR. It  follows  that
                findings of fact on matters relevant to Article 8 ECHR  need
                to be made.


           Glen Hodgetts 11th November 2020
           Chambers of Glen Hodgetts
           Saint Brandon's House,
           27-29 Great George Street,
           Bristol, BS1 5QT


           Annexe: Factual Background


           Factual Background


           2.1    The Respondent will be referred to as 'LK'. LK,  born  in
                Albania on 6/8/1973 [19; 131;47]1 entered the UK on 25  June
                1999 and claimed asylum on the basis of a claimed but  false
                Kosovan nationality with DOB 26/2/1971.  He  was  granted  4
                years  Exceptional  Leave  to  Remain  and   later   granted
                settlement (ILR) in September  2005.  He  naturalised  as  a
                British  Citizen  on  29th  November  2006  in   the   false
                nationality [112]. [1 Please  note  the  grounds  of  appeal
                incorrectly assert that the date of birth is 26/2/1971 - but
                correctly say that LK gave his true name and date  of  birth
                on arrival; LK has never given a date of 26.2.1971 and  this
                is a typographical error]
           2.2.   In June 2009 the Secretary of State  ['SSHD']  discovered
                that the applicant had falsely claimed  his  nationality  on
                arrival when his wife made an EC application  as  a  spouse.
                The SSHD first wrote to LK on 30th September 2009  [122-123]
                stating  that  he  was  considering  depriving  him  of  his
                nationality.
           2.2.2  Without any decision on whether the  SSHD  was  going  to
                deprive him of Citizenship, and wanting now to give  a  true
                account, LK sent a  chasing  letter  to  the  SSHD  on  20th
                December 2012 [127] and again in January 2013, which set out
                his admission of deception [30-31]
           2.2.3  After a delay of some 4 years since LK was first notified
                of the deprivation issue, in 2013, and after LK had admitted
                his continuing deception made on arrival in 1999,  the  SSHD
                purported to nullify  the  applicant's  British  citizenship
                which would have left intact, his ILR (but the fact that  he
                remained a British Citizen in law) [134-137].
           2.3    On 25th June 2013 LK built up 14 years residence  in  the
                UK. The Secretary  of  State  then  initially  attempted  to
                lawfully revoke the applicant's indefinite leave  to  remain
                ['ILR'] by decision dated 23rd October 2013 [140-144].  That
                decision gave rise to an in country right of appeal pursuant
                to Section  82(2)(f)  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
                Asylum Act 2002 (as it was then prior to the amendments made
                to it by the Immigration Act 2014). At this  time,  on  30th
                January 2014, the Secretary of State served on the applicant
                IS 96 giving him notice of temporary admission and subjected
                him to conditions of residence,  reporting  and  prohibiting
                him from employment [170].
           2.4    However, on appeal against that decision, the First  Tier
                Tribunal [FTT], by determination promulgated 19th May  2014,
                eventually held that the decision  revoking  his  indefinite
                leave to remain was invalid as  it  was  "otherwise  not  in
                accordance with the law" - as conceded by the  Secretary  of
                State at the hearing. Given that  holding,  the  FTT  stated
                that the question as to whether to  revoke  the  applicant's
                ILR was outstanding and "awaiting a lawful decision"  (  see
                paragraphs   6-9   of    the    determination)    [175-176].
                Notwithstanding the FTT decision, (meaning it was thought at
                that time ILR remained in  place),  the  SSHD  continued  to
                impose reporting restrictions on LK - he was  given  limited
                permission to work but was unable 2  i.e.  if  it  had  been
                lawful19 to change employment as he  had  no  proof  of  his
                entitlement to do  so  as  his  passport  and  other  status
                documents had been removed.
           2.5    The SSHD did not appeal the  FTT  decision  but  took  no
                further action until 4th April 2017 when he decided to again
                try to revoke LK's ILR [187]. By Letter Before  Claim  dated
                9th June 2017 [188-193]  LK  challenged  that  decision  for
                failure to consider the ILR revocation policy; the policy is
                entitled "Revocation of Indefinite Leave to Remain'  Version
                4.0 published on 19th October 2015.  The  letter  highlights
                that the policy states that ILR will not normally be revoked
                where the deception in  question  occurred  more  than  five
                years ago whereas in this case, the  deception  occurred  in
                1999 and 2005 (when applying for ILR - ILR  was  granted  on
                10th September 2005).
           2.6    Those JR proceedings  concluded  by  consent,  after  the
                Supreme Court gave judgment in Hysaj and others [2017]  UKSC
                82. In light of the ratio in Hysaj, and the SoS's concession
                in that case, during the course of the  Judicial  Review  LK
                made the submission that the nullity decision taken  against
                him in March 2013  was  unlawful  and  that  he  remained  a
                British Citizen throughout as his was not an 'impersonation'
                case. The SSHD agreed; the JR was  withdrawn  on  the  basis
                that the SSHD accepted that LK was  a  British  Citizen  and
                that the nullity decision taken in 2013  was  unlawful.  See
                letter of 16 March 2013 [196-198] and consent  order  [199].
                The SSHD agreed to pay LK's costs.
           2.7    From the period  during  which  LK  was  challenging  the
                nullity decision of 2013 and subsequent decision  purporting
                to remove ILR made in October 2013, the  deprivation  policy
                in place in Chapter 55 of the Nationality Guidance, as noted
                in Deliallisi (see paragraph 76 of Deliallisi),  would  have
                protected LK from deprivation as  from  June  2013,  LK  had
                built up 14 years residence at that point. In short, but for
                unlawfully pursuing nullity proceedings  and  attempting  to
                revoke  ILR,  the  SSHD  could  not  have  deprived  LK   of
                nationality had she made a lawful  decision  addressing  the
                consequences of his earlier fraud.
           2.8    Despite having unlawfully treated LK as someone  who  did
                not have British Citizenship from 2013 to 2018,  and  having
                illegally subjected him to the  hostile  environment  for  5
                years (prohibition from work, travel without a passport, and
                concomitant  financial  hardship,  making  it  difficult  to
                sustain a livelihood and support his family etc),  including
                subjecting  him  20   unlawfully,   to   monthly   reporting
                conditions, in March 2018 [196-198]  the  SSHD  informed  LK
                that  he  was  considering  depriving  him  of  his  British
                Citizenship.
           2.9    On 6 April 2018 [201-203] solicitors for LK set  out  why
                deprivation would be inappropriate  and  unlawful.  2.10  On
                12th October  2018  [1-13],  the  subject  matter  of  these
                proceedings, the SSHD decided to deprive LK of  his  British
                Citizenship.


           END







Discussion

   18. This case demonstrates  the  confusion  that  existed  prior  to  the
       decision of the Supreme Court in Hysaj [2017] UKSC 2013  in  relation
       to the correct procedure to be followed if  the  Secretary  of  State
       wished to deprive an individual of British citizenship that had  been
       granted to them as a result of fraud. The chronology  shows  that  Mr
       Kovaci,  as  a  result  of  fraudulently  claiming  to  be   Kosovan,
       eventually succeeded in securing British citizenship. The  chronology
       of events is not disputed. As noted in  the  skeleton  arguments  and
       submissions set out above.
   19. Following it being discovered that Mr Kovaci is a national of Albania
       rather than Kosovo, the Secretary of State on 21  March  2013  issued
       him a nullity decision. It is not  disputed  that  the  effect  of  a
       nullity decision is to find that a person was never entitled  to  the
       benefit of the decision/status that has been annulled. In  this  case
       it was clearly the position of the Secretary of State that Mr  Kovaci
       had never been entitled to British citizenship.
   20. The Supreme Court  in  Hysaj  considered  whether  misrepresentations
       about identity submitted in an application  for  British  citizenship
       made the grant of citizenship, a nullity rather than rendering  those
       liable to be deprived of that citizenship under section 40 and 40A of
       the British Nationality  1981.  The  Supreme  Court  acknowledged  in
       Hysaj, as in this appeal, that the Secretary of State  had  issued  a
       nullity  decision  on  the  basis  of  a  binding  Court  of   Appeal
       authorities although found that the decisions  of  the  lower  courts
       were incorrect and were overturned.
   21. Mr Kovaci had been granted four years  Exceptional  Leave  to  Remain
       (ELR) on 28 April 2001 as he had produced  a  psychiatric  report  in
       support of his asylum claim stating that he suffered from PTSD and  a
       severe type of depressive illness as  a  result  of  his  experiences
       during the war in Kosovo. On the basis of the grant of ELR Mr  Kovaci
       withdrew his asylum appeal. It subsequently transpired that Mr Kovaci
       is not Kosovan and as this element of  his  claim  was  false  it  is
       likely any assertions made to the assessing psychiatrist  based  upon
       his experiences as a Kosovan are likely to be false too. Even if  the
       clinical decision was correct it was  the  lack  of  suitable  mental
       health treatment in Kosovo which was the basis for the grant  of  ELR
       which is not relevant as Mr Kovaci is not Kosovan.
   22. Following completion of four years leave to remain under the grant of
       ELR, Mr Kovaci was granted ILR on 10 September 2005 on the  basis  he
       was a Kosovan refugee with mental health related problems that were a
       direct result of the war in his alleged home country of Kosovo.
   23. Mr Kovaci's eligibility for naturalisation under section 6(1) British
       Nationality Act 1981 was approved on the basis he had ILR  which  had
       been acquired as a result of the claim to be in  need  of  protection
       from Kosovo, the mental health issues noted  above,  resulting  in  a
       naturalisation certificate being issued on 29 November 2006.
   24. ILR and citizenship are not the same although are often  confused  in
       some circles as being so. There are fundamental differences  such  as
       the fact that ILR can be lost if a recipient remains out  of  the  UK
       for more than two years following a grant in their favour, whereas  a
       person with British citizenship cannot lose that citizenship  due  to
       time spent outside the UK. ILR is also seen  as  a  steppingstone  to
       British citizenship, not vice versa. Citizenship is  also  for  life,
       gives the holder the right to access a British passport, the right to
       vote, the right to stand  for  public  office,  and  may  in  certain
       circumstances allow for dual citizenship. The  effect  of  Mr  Kovaci
       acquiring British citizenship on 29 November 2006 must mean that  the
       grant of ILR simultaneously lapsed.
   25. The Secretary of States view is clearly  that  the  nullity  decision
       asserting Mr Kovaci was not and had never been entitled to the  grant
       of citizenship meant that the grant of ILR remained in  force.   This
       is demonstrated by the fact that following the nullity decision on 23
       October 2013 a decision was made to revoke the grant of ILR which are
       separate proceedings  as  referred  to  in  the  pleadings,  although
       following the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Hysaj  and  the
       acceptance by the Secretary of State that Mr Kovaci was and  remained
       a British citizen by naturalisation and the decision of 21 March 2013
       was wrong in law, the decision to revoke the grant of ILR appears  to
       have been legally unnecessary, albeit with hindsight, but that is not
       the issue in this appeal.
   26. The decision under appeal before  the  Judge  was  the  Secretary  of
       States decision of 12 October  2018  to  deprive  Mr  Kovaci  of  his
       British citizenship for the reasons stated.
   27. Section 40(3) British Nationality Act 1981 reads:

           (3)    The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
                citizenship status which results from his registration or
                naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
                the registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-


                (a)    fraud,


                (b)    false representation, or


                (c)    concealment of a material fact.

   28. As noted above, the existence of fraud was eventually admitted by  Mr
       Kovaci. The provision is not, however, an absolute provision  stating
       the Secretary of State "may" rather than "must".  That  imports  into
       the section  an  element  of  discretion  to  be  considered  by  the
       decisionmaker. The Secretary  of  State  in  the  deprivation  notice
       specifically refers to the  exercise  of  discretion,  with  specific
       reference  to  consideration  of  Chapter  55  of   the   Nationality
       Instructions which is applicable  to  a  case  of  this  nature,  but
       concludes that having considered all  relevant  matters,  it  is  not
       appropriate to exercise discretion in Mr Kovaci's favour.
   29. In  relation  to  the  dispute  between  the  parties  regarding  the
       applicable policy there is merit in the Secretary of State's argument
       that the 14-year policy relied up by Mr Kovaci was  withdrawn  on  21
       August 2014 and that the First-tier Tribunal finding that it remained
       in effect until 27 July 2017 is a mistake of fact.
   30. The Secretary of State's argument that it is the policy in  force  at
       the date of decision, in this case 12  October  2018,  which  is  the
       applicable policy is supported by a number of authorities.
   31. In R (on the application of Lakaj) [2014] EWHC 4273 it was held  that
       it was a well recognized principle of public law  that  the  decision
       maker was entitled to apply the policy applicable  at  the  time  the
       decision was taken.
   32. In CW (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 915 it was held that the relevant date for  determining  the
       application of the policy was the date  when  the  deportation  order
       came to be made. In this case the policy  in  question,  DP5/96,  had
       long since been revoked.
   33. In R (on the application of Elmi) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
       Department [2010] EWHC 2775 (Admin) Mr Justice Ouseley said  that  it
       was not the law that, where a decision  had  not  been  made  or  was
       required to be re-taken, the law or policy governing the  application
       was fixed at what it was at the time of the application if the law or
       policy had moved on: Odelola  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2009] UKHL 25 and EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for 10
       the Home Department [2009] UKHL 41 considered. When a decision had to
       be taken or re-taken, it should be taken by reference to  the  policy
       or law in force when the decision was  to  be  taken.  There  was  no
       principle that, where there had been unreasonable delay, the decision
       should  be  made  by  reference  to  the  policies  or  circumstances
       prevailing at the time when the decision should have been made.
   34. In Anwar [2016] CSOH 91 Mr  Anwar  applied  for  naturalisation.  The
       Secretary  of  States  policy  concerning  the  assessment  of   good
       character changed after the date on  which  Mr  Anwar  submitted  his
       application, but before that application was determined.  The  policy
       at the date of the application was more favourable  to  his  position
       than the later policy upon which the Secretary  of  State  based  her
       decisions. It was held that Mr Anwar's  only  legitimate  expectation
       was that his particular circumstances would be examined in the  light
       of  the  applicable  policy.  The   relevant   (later)   policy   was
       specifically drawn to Mr Anwar's attention before  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision was made when he  was  invited  to  provide  further
       information (para 55). His JR application was refused.
   35. In this appeal the chronology record that Mr Kovaci was also  invited
       to make further  representations  following  the  withdrawal  of  the
       annulment decision and consideration of deprivation post Hysaj.
   36. In R (On the application of MS) IJR [2015] UKUT 000539  it  was  held
       that in cases where there has been a delay in making a decision on an
       in-time application for extension of  leave  and  where,  during  the
       period of the delay, the applicable policy for excluded  persons  who
       cannot be removed has changed from the DLR policy that was applicable
       to such persons prior to 2 September 2011 to the Restricted Leave  to
       remain policy applicable since 2 September 2011,  an  argument  based
       upon "historic injustice" is not available, applying by  analogy  the
       judgment of the Supreme Court in TN and MA (Afghanistan) v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 40.
   37. It is also relevant in this regard to note that at the  date  of  the
       nullity decision Mr Kovaci had not established 14 years residence  in
       the United Kingdom. So even if a lawful decision  had  been  made  at
       that date, as had always been contemplated, it is not established  Mr
       Kovaci would have been entitled to the benefit of the 14-year  policy
       at that time.
   38. In relation to legitimate expectation issue raised by Mr  Kovaci,  in
       Ex Parte Bibi [2001] EWCA Civ 607 the Court of Appeal said that:  "in
       all legitimate expectation cases, whether substantive or  procedural,
       three practical questions arise. The first question is what  has  the
       public authority, whether by practice or  promise,  committed  itself
       to; the second  question  is  whether  the  authority  has  acted  or
       proposes to act unlawfully in relation to its commitment;  the  third
       is what the court should do about it."
   39. In Nadarajah, Abdi [2005] EWCA Civ 1363  Laws  LJ  in  the  Court  of
       Appeal said "Where a public authority has issued a promise or adopted
       a practice which represents how it proposes to act in a  given  area,
       the law will require the promise or practice to  be  honoured  unless
       there is good reason not to do so. What  is  the  principle  in  this
       proposition?.... It is said to be  grounded  in  fairness....I  would
       prefer to express it rather more broadly as  a  requirement  of  good
       administration,   by   which   public   bodies    ought    to    deal
       straightforwardly and consistently  with  the  public.  ....A  public
       body's promise of practice as to future conduct may only  be  denied,
       and thus the standard I have expressed may only be departed from,  in
       circumstances where to do so is the public body's legal  duty  or  is
       otherwise... a proportionate response (of  which  the  court  is  the
       judge or the last judge) having regard to a legitimate aim pursued by
       a public body  in  the  public  interest.  The  principle  that  good
       administration requires  public  authorities  to  be  held  to  their
       promises would be undermined if the  law  did  not  insist  that  any
       failure  to  refusal  to  comply  is  objectively  justified   as   a
       proportionate measure in the circumstances....  Proportionality  will
       be judges by the respective force of the competing interests  arising
       in a case. Thus where the representation  relied  on  amounts  to  an
       unambiguous promise; where there is detrimental reliance;  where  the
       promise is made  to  an  individual  or  specific  group;  these  are
       instances where the denial of the expectation is harder to justify as
       a proportionate measure. ....On the other hand where the government 5
       decision maker is concerned to raise wide-ranging or macro  political
       issues of policy, the expectation's enforcement in  the  courts  will
       encounter a steeper climb. All these considerations,  whatever  their
       directions, are pointers not rules".
   40. In Mehmood (legitimate  expectation)  [2014]  UKUT  00469  (IAC)  the
       Tribunal held that the first question in  every  case  concerning  an
       alleged  legitimate  expectation  is  whether  the  public  authority
       concerned made an unambiguous representation,  promise  or  assurance
       devoid of any relevant qualification.
   41. In R (on the application of Ooi and Ors) v Secretary of State for the
       Home Department [2007] EWHC 3221 Admin Mitting J said that the common
       law rule of legitimate  expectation  could  not  be  applied  in  the
       claimant's favour  because  their  expectation  that  they  would  be
       granted ILR after four years continuous residence was not secured  in
       an explicit and unequivocal statement.
   42. It is not made out in  this  case  that  there  was  any  unambiguous
       representation,  promise  or  reassurance  devoid  of  any   relevant
       qualification or any statement made by the Secretary  of  State  that
       satisfies the required legal test that  the  decision  will  be  made
       within a specified time period or applying a policy in force  at  the
       date of application or that the decision would not be made other than
       by reference to the policy in force at the date the decision is made.
   43. Mr Kovaci fails to establish that he  had  a  legitimate  expectation
       that he will be able to rely upon the earlier policy when  the  later
       decision was made.
   44. The basis of this claim by Mr Kovaci is had a  lawful  decision  been
       made on 21 March 2013, or within a  reasonable  time  thereafter,  he
       would have retained his citizenship and, therefore,  that  the  later
       actions of the Secretary of State are unfair.
   45. In Marghia (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC) it was  held
       that the common law duty of fairness is essentially about  procedural
       fairness. There is no absolute duty at common law to  make  decisions
       which are substantively "fair". The Court  will  not  interfere  with
       decisions which are objected to as being substantively unfair, except
       the decision in question falls foul of the Wednesbury test i.e.  that
       no reasonable decision-maker or public body  could  have  arrived  at
       such a decision. It is a matter for the Secretary  of  State  whether
       she exercises her residual discretion. The exercise of such  residual
       discretion, which does  not  appear  in  the  Immigration  Rules,  is
       absolutely a matter for the  Secretary  of  State  and  nobody  else,
       including the Tribunal.
   46. It cannot be said to be unfair of the Secretary of State, even if her
       actions were subsequently as a result of a more informed judgement by
       the Supreme Court found to be unlawful, to  have  acted  in  what  he
       believed to have been in a legally correct manner  on  the  basis  of
       binding decisions of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  making  the  nullity
       decision on 21 March 2013.  It has not been made out that  any  delay
       between the making of this decision and the withdrawal of the same on
       27 March 2018, following the handing down of  the  judgement  of  the
       Supreme Court is a period of delay that has been shown to be unlawful
       per se.
   47. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding that the period of any  delay
       of four years is excessive is not made out when the chronology  shows
       the gap between the withdrawal of the decision on 27 March  2018  and
       the date of the decision giving  rise  to  these  proceedings  of  12
       October 2018  was  not  at  all,  manifestly  excessive,  unfair,  or
       unlawful in all the circumstances. The finding of the Judge  in  this
       respect is wrong.
   48. Mr Hodgetts argues that the test for  unfairness  is  established  by
       reference to case law such as the Supreme Court decision in TN and MA
       (Afghanistan) [2015] UKSC 40 at [40] in which is it written:

           "40.   On Rashid's application for judicial review, the Court of
                Appeal held that he was entitled to unconditional  leave  to
                remain in the UK. The  Secretary  of  State  relied  on  the
                Ravichandran principle. The leading judgment  was  given  by
                Pill LJ, with whom May LJ agreed. He based his  decision  on
                the principle that an abuse of power called for the court to
                "intervene  to  give  such  relief  as   it   properly   and
                appropriately Page 15 can" (para 37). He  found  that  there
                was  an  abuse  of  power  because  there  was   conspicuous
                unfairness  in  Rashid's  treatment.  After  "startling  and
                prolonged" failures  of  the  Home  Office  (para  13),  the
                correct policy emerged in the cases of  M  and  A.  Rashid's
                case had been stacked behind them, the issues were identical
                and fairness required that the same treatment  be  given  to
                him as to them. Pill LJ recognised that the court could  not
                declare that Rashid  was  entitled  to  be  granted  refugee
                status, as M and A  had  been,  because  that  is  a  status
                conferred  on  the  basis  of  criteria  prescribed  in   an
                international treaty and should  not  be  conferred  if  the
                criteria are not satisfied at the time of the decision.  But
                he held that the court could and should declare that  Rashid
                was entitled to indefinite leave to remain. This,  he  said,
                provided a remedy for the unfairness and was the appropriate
                response in the circumstances."

   49. In the same case, however, at [72] it was found that the Ravichandran
       principle applies on the hearing of such appeals  without  exception,
       and that Rashid should no longer be followed.
   50. It is also the case that the policy that was  withdrawn  in  2014  is
       discretionary and not absolute. Although  Mr  Hodgetts  refers  to  a
       "presumption" that if a person was able to satisfy the 14 requirement
       their British citizenship would  not  be  taken  away  from  them,  a
       presumption can be rebutted in the appropriate circumstances.
   51. Section 40(3) also contains a discretion and it is not disputed  that
       there was an obligation upon the Secretary of State to exercise  such
       discretion lawfully with proper regard to an  applicable  policy.  It
       was not made out that had such exercise been undertaken in March 2013
       that Mr Kovaci  would  have  succeeded  in  retaining  his  grant  of
       citizenship in any event,  in  light  of  the  strong  public  policy
       considerations in relation to a person who obtained  the  same  as  a
       result of a deliberate fraudulent act.  It is not made out that  this
       is a case in which it was proper to find that Mr  Kovaci  would  have
       been entitled to unconditionally retain his  British  citizenship  on
       the facts, or that the First-tier Tribunal was correct in thinking he
       was by the decision to allow the appeal as a form of  relief  for  an
       early alleged error or breach of obligation.
   52. The task for the Judge was to assess the merits of the appeal at  the
       date of the hearing and it has not been made out that there  was  any
       legal obligation upon the Judge to place Mr Kovaci in the position he
       would have been in had the deprivation  decision  been  taken  on  31
       March 2013, rather than the nullity decision.
   53. In R (on the application of S) v SSHD [2008] EWHC  733  one  claimant
       was from Sierra Leone and two claimed to come from  Afghanistan.  The
       first lost out on an ELR policy because his application was initially
       incorrectly refused on non compliance grounds and the policy  changed
       before it was considered on substantive grounds. The second and third
       lost out because initially the SSHD did not accept they were  Afghans
       and by the time this was established  the  policy  had  changed.   Mr
       Justice Supperstone distinguished Rashid in each case effectively  on
       the ground that there were no legal  errors  and  on  the  facts  the
       decisions were not conspicuously unfair.  On  appeal  in  R  (on  the
       application of S, H and Q) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 334  the  Court  of
       Appeal said that, if the Secretary of State took a decision after the
       policy in question had been withdrawn, then the policy did not  apply
       unless  there  were  exceptional  circumstances.  A  previous  lawful
       failure to apply the policy could  not  give  rise  to  a  subsequent
       intervention by the courts and in those circumstances  the  Secretary
       of State was not bound to grant ILR on the basis that he should  have
       taken it into account after it was withdrawn. The  courts  would  not
       intervene unless the decision  was  conspicuously  unfair  or  unless
       proceedings had been brought promptly following  a  decision  not  to
       grant asylum. The Court of Appeal upheld the decisions.
   54. In R (on the application of Safi) [2015] EWHC 95  when  the  claimant
       applied  for  asylum  in  2002  it  was  not  accepted  he  was  from
       Afghanistan. At that time there was a policy  that  all  unsuccessful
       asylum applicants from Afghanistan were normally entitled  to  for  4
       years ELR. On appeal, after the policy was  withdrawn,  it  was  held
       that he was an Afghan but not at risk. On JR of a subsequent decision
       it was argued that the mistake in failing to apply the policy in 2002
       was something that the Respondent ought to have  weighed  in  balance
       when making the most recent decision. It was  held  that  there  were
       cases in which 'present circumstances' might include a  current  need
       to remedy injustice caused by past illegality.  However,  before  the
       Ravichandran principle that asylum appeals have to be  considered  on
       the basis of the facts and circumstances prevailing at  the  time  of
       the hearing could  be  displaced  or  varied,  it  was  necessary  to
       identify illegality in the original decision caused by a  failure  to
       apply the correct policy  or  other  legal  requirement.  The  second
       decision-maker had the discretion to decide whether to  take  account
       of the alleged injustice caused by illegality in the first  decision.
       In the instant case, the Court was satisfied that the  2002  decision
       was not legally flawed. There was no reason to believe that the case-
       worker who interviewed the Claimant after his arrival did not come to
       a decision on the evidence before him in a fair  minded  manner.  The
       conclusion reached was reasonable in  the  light  of  the  Claimant's
       failure to answer questions about Afghanistan.
   55. In  relation  to  the  historic  injustice  argument  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge found that [46]:

           "46.   I agree with Mr Hodgetts that the appellant  is  entitled
                to rely  on  the  respondent's  failure  to  make  a  lawful
                decision, taking into account the appropriate guidance, in a
                timely manner. The failure to make a decision until  October
                2018, more than four years after withdrawing his March  2013
                decision, is a relevant matter, but the respondent  did  not
                take account of the  guidance  applicable  during  the  long
                period of delay. I also agree with Mr Hodgetts that this  is
                a historic injustice that should  have  been  considered  in
                addition to the long period of residence."

   56. There are a number of problems with these  findings  being  that  the
       Judge fails to explain what guidance it is asserted the Secretary  of
       State should have taken into account when at the  date  the  decision
       under appeal was made the policy the appellant  is  seeking  to  rely
       upon had been withdrawn. It is not made out  that  the  Secretary  of
       State's actions were not conducted in a timely manner in light of the
       developments in the case  law  leading  to  the  hearing  before  the
       Supreme Court. The finding of four years delay is not made out to  be
       factually correct as noted above.  The reference  to  the  respondent
       failing to take account of guidance  applicable  during  the  alleged
       long period of  delay  does  not  specify  which  guidance  is  being
       referred to that would have been relevant following the withdrawal of
       the early guidance. Mr Kovaci's assertion of historic justice is  not
       made out for the reasons set out in the application for permission to
       appeal and the Secretary of State submissions, but also in  light  of
       the  recent  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Patel  (historic
       injustice; NIAA  Part 5A) [2020] UKUT 00351(IAC), the had noted which
       reads:

           A. Historic injustice


           (1) For the future, the expression "historic injustice", as used
           in the immigration context, should be reserved for cases such as
           those concerning certain British Overseas citizens  or  families
           of Gurkha ex-servicemen, which involve a belated recognition  by
           the United Kingdom government that a particular class of persons
           was wrongly treated, in immigration terms, in the past; and that
           this injustice should be recognised in dealing with applications
           made now (eg Patel and Others v Entry Clearance Officer (Mumbai)
           [2010] EWCA Civ 17; AP (India) v Secretary of State for the Home
           Department [2015] EWCA Civ 89).


           (2) The fact that the injustice exists will be  uncontroversial.
           It will be generally recognised. It will apply to  a  particular
           class of persons. Unlike cases of what  might  be  described  as
           "historical injustice", the operation of historic injustice will
           not depend on the particular interaction between the  individual
           member of the class and the Secretary of State. The  effects  of
           historic injustice on the immigration position of the individual
           are likely  to  be  profound,  even  determinative  of  success,
           provided that there  is  nothing  materially  adverse  in  their
           immigration history.


           B. Historical injustice


           (3)  Cases  that  may  be  described  as  involving  "historical
           injustice" are where the individual has suffered as a result  of
           the wrongful operation (or non-operation) by  the  Secretary  of
           State of her  immigration  functions.  Examples  are  where  the
           Secretary of State has failed to give an individual the  benefit
           of  a  relevant  immigration  policy  (eg  AA  (Afghanistan)   v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ  12);
           where  delay  in  reaching  decisions  is  the   result   of   a
           dysfunctional system (eg EB (Kosovo) v Secretary  of  State  for
           the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41); or where the  Secretary  of
           State  forms  a  view  about  an  individual's   activities   or
           behaviour, which leads to an adverse immigration  decision;  but
           where her view turns out to be mistaken (eg Ahsan v Secretary of
           State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  2009).  Each  of
           these failings may have an effect on an individual's  Article  8
           ECHR case; but the ways in which this may happen differ from the
           true "historic injustice" category.


           C. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
           and the weight to be  given  to  the  maintenance  of  effective
           immigration controls


           (4) In all cases where, for whatever reason, the public interest
           in the maintenance of effective immigration controls falls to be
           given less than its ordinary weight, the usual course should  be
           for the judge so to  find  in  terms,  when  addressing  section
           117B(1) of the 2002 Act. The same result  may  be  achieved,  at
           least in some situations, by  qualifying  the  consideration  in
           section 117B(4) that little weight should be given to a  private
           life formed when the person concerned is in the  United  Kingdom
           unlawfully. Judicial fact-finders  should,  however,  avoid  any
           recourse to double-counting, whereby not only is the  weight  to
           be given to effective immigration controls diminished but  also,
           for the same reason, a private life is given  more  weight  than
           would otherwise be possible  by  the  undiluted  application  of
           section 117B(4).


           (5) The weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the
           maintenance of effective immigration controls is unlikely to  be
           reduced because of disappointments or  inadequacies  encountered
           by individuals from teaching institutions or employers.

   57. On the facts this is a case which falls within  those  identified  in
       Category B in relation to any historic justice argument forming  part
       of the article 8 ECHR aspects which the Judge in this matter did  not
       consider.
   58. In relation to the challenge by Mr Kovaci  to  the  decision  of  the
       Upper Tribunal in Hysaj [2020] UKUT 00128 (hereinafter referred to as
       Hysaj(UT) to avoid confusion with the decision of the  Supreme  Court
       of the same name, the fact a party disagrees with or does not like  a
       decision of the Upper Tribunal does not mean it is  wrongly  decided.
       The parties in Hysaj (UT) challenged that decision to  the  Court  of
       Appel and permission was refused. Hysaj (UT)  confirmed  the  correct
       legal approach to such cases and the  decision  relied  upon  by  the
       Judge of Deliallisi  (British  citizen:  deprivation  appeal:  Scope)
       [2013] UKUT 00439(IAC) is an earlier decision.  The  comment  by  the
       Judge at [48] also fails to identify the  foundation  for  the  claim
       that the withdrawal of two other decision fortifies  the  conclusions
       reached in this case, especially when applying the  current  accepted
       legal framework.
   59. The legal principles set out in the judgment  of  Hysaj  (UT)  relied
       upon by the Secretary of State have not been shown to be  unsafe  and
       give  strong  support  to  the  errors  of  law  identified  in   the
       application for permission to appeal.
   60. The Supreme Court  in  Begum  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2021] UKSC 7 at [68] also state:

           "68.    As  explained  at  paras  46-50,  54  and  66-67  above,
                appellate courts and tribunals cannot generally decide how a
                statutory discretion conferred upon  the  primary  decision-
                maker  ought  to  have  been  exercised,  or  exercise   the
                discretion themselves,  in  the  absence  of  any  statutory
                provision authorising them to do so  (such  as  existed,  in
                relation to appeals under section 2 of the 1997  Act,  under
                section 4(1) of the 1997  Act  as  originally  enacted,  and
                under  sections  84-86  of  the  2002  Act  prior  to  their
                amendment in 2014: see paras 34 and 36 above). They  are  in
                general restricted to considering whether the decision-maker
                has acted in a way in  which  no  reasonable  decision-maker
                could have acted, or whether he has taken into account  some
                irrelevant matter or has disregarded something to  which  he
                should have given weight, or has erred on a point of law: an
                issue  which  encompasses  the  consideration   of   factual
                questions, as appears, in the context of statutory  appeals,
                from Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) v Bairstow [1956]  AC  14.
                They must also determine for themselves the compatibility of
                the decision with the  obligations  of  the  decision  maker
                under the Human Rights Act, where such a question arises."

   61. Having considered the merits of the arguments I find the Secretary of
       State has made out her case in establishing legal errors material  to
       the decision of the Judge to allow the appeal. I set the  termination
       of the First-tier Tribunal Judge aside.
   62. In relation to the consequences of that finding, it was submitted  on
       Mr Kovaci's behalf in the skeleton argument and further submissions:

           "Alternative submission if the UT finds material error of law


           38.    The UT will see that before the UT LK argued  that  there
                were a range of factors  that  were  material  to  both  the
                exercise of discretion and to the  proportionality  exercise
                under Article 8 ECHR. These are  set  out  in  the  skeleton
                argument before the FTT  at  pages  13  to  15  a  range  of
                factors, including, inter alia, the foreseeable consequences
                of deprivation, e.g. those which impacted  on  his  economic
                ability  to  sustain  himself  and  his  family,  the   best
                interests of his two children, one of whom is  British,  and
                his prospects of successful reunification  with  his  family
                whilst retaining his strong private  life  recognised  under
                para 276ADE(1)(vi). Since the FTTJ allowed the appeal on the
                principle challenge, in terms of the exercise of discretion,
                no findings of fact  have  been  made  on  these  additional
                factors as no consideration has  been  given  to  Article  8
                ECHR.  Some of these factors also go to the issue of whether
                exceptional features such that the discretion  ought  to  be
                exercised differently. But there are simply no  findings  on
                them


           39.    Accordingly,  it  is  submitted  that  if  the  UT  finds
                material error of law as submitted in the grounds, it  would
                be appropriate to remit to the FTT for a proper fact finding
                exercise  going   to   the   foreseeable   consequences   of
                deprivation and for consideration of Article 8 ECHR.


           40.    Even if Hysaj is correctly decided, it does not preclude,
                in a suitable  case,  that  an  appeal  against  deprivation
                cannot be successful under Article 8 ECHR. It  follows  that
                findings of fact on matters relevant to Article 8 ECHR  need
                to be made."

   63. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mrs Pettersen submitted that  the
       Judge had made no findings in relation to article 8 but that this was
       a deprivation case in which the consequences of the upholding of  the
       deprivation decision would be considered in accordance with article 8
       ECHR on the facts within a short period of time. If  a  decision  was
       taken to remove Mr Kovaci from the United Kingdom, he would  have  an
       in-country right of appeal  against  that  decision,  which  was  the
       correct point in time at which the article 8 aspects  of  the  appeal
       could be argued.  The  suggestion  for  remittal  was  therefore  not
       accepted as being the appropriate way to proceed.
   64. Mr Hodgetts referred to Begum and the fact it was for the Tribunal to
       decide the article 8 aspects of the case for  itself  and  sought  to
       differentiate this matter from the Hysaj (UT) on the facts.
   65. In relation to article 8 ECHR the Upper Tribunal found in Hysaj (UT):

           117.   Significant weight  is  to  be  placed  upon  the  public
           interest in  a  person  who  has  obtained  British  citizenship
           through fraud, false representation or concealment of a material
           fact being deprived of that status and the  Tribunal  is  to  be
           mindful that it is the respondent who is  primarily  responsible
           for  determining  and  safeguarding  the  public   interest   in
           maintaining the integrity of the  rights  flowing  from  British
           citizenship.


           118.   The exercise of discretion is to  be  approached  on  the
           basis that deprivation of citizenship involves interference with
           a right and that any such interference should be no greater than
           is necessary to achieve the legitimate aim of the  interference.
           In this matter, the issue is as to deprivation, and whether  the
           appellant will be deported or removed is not determined  by  the
           deprivation appeal. Upon the conclusion of the  appeal  process,
           he will remain in this country and continue to reside  with  his
           family. The appellant  will  await  a  further  decision  as  to
           whether he is to be deported or be permitted to remain  in  this
           country, and he will enjoy a further  right  of  appeal  to  the
           First-tier Tribunal against a decision to refuse a human  rights
           or protection  claim.  The  children's  best  interests  are  in
           staying in a family unit with their  parents,  which  they  will
           continue to do upon deprivation. That the family unit  may  have
           to move accommodation or enjoy more limited financial  resources
           is not such as to come close to defeating the significant public
           interest  in  the  appellant  being  deprived  of  his   British
           citizenship. The Tribunal held in BA that consequent  to  such
           weight, where statelessness is not in issue it is likely  to  be
           only in a rare case  that  the  ECHR  or  some  very  compelling
           feature will require an appeal to be allowed. The  circumstances
           in such a case would normally be exceptional in nature. We  find
           that the Judge did not apply the  wrong  test  when  considering
           proportionality and article 8. She was employing  exceptionality
           as a predictive device, rather than a threshold test.

   66. The issue of statelessness has not been raised in this appeal and  as
       with the appellant in Hysaj (UT), there is  no  suggestion  that  the
       consequence of the deprivation decision will be other  than  that  Mr
       Kovaci remaining in the United Kingdom with  his  family  awaiting  a
       further decision from the Secretary of  State  as  confirmed  by  Mrs
       Pettersen. It is not made out the best interests of any children  are
       other than to remain in the family unit with the parents  which  they
       can continue to do upon deprivation and nor  was  it  made  out  that
       there will be any impact  upon  any  accommodation  or  the  economic
       arrangements for the family such as to warrant an early consideration
       of these issues on the facts.
   67. It is  noted  that  it  was  also  found  in  Hysaj  (UT)  that  upon
       deprivation of British citizenship there is no automatic  revival  of
       previously  held  indefinite  leave  to  remain   status   which   is
       determinative of this issue too.
   68. I find in addition to accepting  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
       erred in law as it is not established on the evidence that  there  is
       arguable legal error established in the decision of the Secretary  of
       States decision to deprive Mr Kovaci of his  British  citizenship  on
       the facts as found, the article 8 issues  will  be  considered  at  a
       later date. On the basis of the matters relevant to the challenge  at
       this point in time the only decision reasonably open to a Tribunal is
       for the appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  deprivation  of
       citizenship decision to be dismissed. The decision is not  irrational
       or outside the range of those reasonably open to the  decision  maker
       on the facts or in law. I therefore substitute a decision to  dismiss
       the appeal.

Decision

   69. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred  in  law  and  that  decision
       shall be set aside.
   70. I substitute a decision to dismiss the appeal.

  Anonymity.

   71. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 29 April 2021
