
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DC/00020/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2017                              |On 4 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C MARTIN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                            rahdakrishan veeraiah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhotra, instructed by Chris & Co Solicitors

                          MEMORANDUM AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Turnock  promulgated  on  21  November  2016,
    allowing the respondent's appeal against a decision made on 2 September
    2016 to make an order depriving him of his British Citizenship pursuant
    to section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981.


 2. The Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 14  December  2000  and
    claimed asylum. That application was refused on 28  February  2001.  No
    appeal was lodged against that decision.


 3. The respondent's case is that he was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain
    ("ILR") on 30 April 2004. He later  applied  for  naturalisation  as  a
    British Citizen which was granted on 30 January 2008.


 4. On 21 August 2014, the Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  the  respondent
    stating that she was conducting a review of older cases,  stating  that
    her records showed he had been granted ILR on 25 February 2003 and that
    there was no evidence of his status letter; she also requested a  copy.
    The respondent eventually replied that he no longer had a copy of  that
    letter; it had been stolen in a burglary at his house on 24 June 2013.



 5. On 2 September 2016, the Secretary of State wrote  to  the  respondent,
    stating that she was satisfied  that  he  had  obtained  his  grant  of
    British Citizenship fraudulently, and that he should be deprived of his
    citizenship [3]. The reasons given are that: -



   i) The caseworker who had issued the alleged grant of ILR, K  Sannagouder
      had been investigated and arrested following suspicions raised that he
      was manipulating computer and paper records within  the  Home  Office;
      that he had committed suicide [6];


  ii) The Home Office systems showed a conspicuous lack of evidence that  he
      had applied for further lave after his asylum claim had been  refused,
      noting in particular that no  attempt  had  been  made  to  query  the
      outcome of his asylum claim, even though there had been no activity on
      his case until 5 January 2007 when  Mr  Sannagouder  had  altered  the
      record,  computer system audits  showing he had backdated entries made
      on that date [7]; and, that Mr Sannagouder had  apparently  known  the
      respondent's address at Albany Road 6 months before  he  had  notified
      the Home Office of this on 27 July 2007;



 iii)  The  responses  to  the   Secretary   of   State's   enquiries   were
      unsatisfactory, it being reasonable to assume he would have chased the
      decision on his asylum claim, yet had not done so [9];



  iv) The Secretary of State was satisfied that he was aware that he had not
      been granted ILR by the Home Office; and;



   v) His citizenship had been obtained by misrepresentation in that he  had
      claimed to have ILR when he could not reasonably believe  this  to  be
      the case [10]



   6. The judge noted [27]  the  respondent's  evidence  that  he  had  been
      granted ILR on 30 April 2004, a copy of that letter being produced  in
      the bundle provided by the Secretary of State. He also noted [37]  and
      [38] that the Secretary of State had  produced  screen  shots  of  the
      respondent's records from the Home Office computer,  that  [37]  there
      had been no witness statement explaining their significance. He found,
      however that the screenshots were not self-explanatory.


   7. The judge found that:



   i) The entries on the record showing that  the  respondent's  appeal  had
      been allowed on 20 June 2001 and that he had subsequently been granted
      ILR on 25 February 2003 in consequence were clearly not correct as  no
      appeal had been lodged [39];


  ii) It was unclear why the records were being altered in 2007, long  after
      the letters in 2003 and 2004 were issued, it being possible that there
      were errors on the part of the Home Office  or  deliberate  fraud,  in
      which case it would need to be proven that the respondent was aware of
      this [44];



 iii) The letters sent to the respondent on 15 January 2004 was addressed to
      the address in Albany Road, indicating that address had been  notified
      to the respondent before 5 January 2007 [49];



  iv) While there were unexplained aspects of the case, and  the  chronology
      was puzzling, there was  no  evidence  from  the  Secretary  of  State
      challenging the authenticity of letters apparently sent by  her;  and,
      that the application in 2007 (for  transfer  of  the  ILR  stamp)  was
      presumably checked and found to be in order [53];



   v) It had not been shown that any fraud or deception on the part  of  the
      respondent was involved.


   8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds that
      the judge had erred in failing to have regard to material matters, and
      had reached a decision which was arguably perverse: -


   i) In attaching weight to the  date  of  the  letters  of  the  allegedly
      fraudulent letters  of  25  February  2003  and  30  April  2004,  the
      suspicion being  that  they  had  been  manufactured  in  2007  by  Mr
      Sannagouda, the  judge  thus  not  understanding  the  nature  of  the
      allegation;


  ii) By indicating at [37] that he did not understand the  case,  and  that
      the Presenting Officer would have been in a position  to  explain  the
      CID printouts, and the evidence he did not understand;



 iii) The apparent grant of ILR out of the blue (and when it had been agreed
      that there had been no appeal of the refusal of  asylum)  should  have
      been a significant indicator that it had not been  genuinely  granted,
      given the involvement in the case of a known corrupt official.






   9. On 12 January 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  J  Gillespie  granted
      permission on all grounds.


  10. The appeal then came before the President of the Upper Tribunal on  14
      March 2017 when it became apparent that it was unclear what  documents
      had been put before the First-tier Tribunal. Directions were given for
      further documents to be provided which was  done.    The  matter  then
      came before us by way of a transfer order

The Law



  11. The Secretary of State's power to revoke citizenship  is  set  out  in
      section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981: -

      40 Deprivation of citizenship

      (1) In this section a reference to a person's "citizenship status" is
      a reference to his status as-

       (a) a British citizen,

          (b) a British overseas territories citizen,

          (c) a British Overseas citizen,

          (d) a British National (Overseas),

          (e) a British protected person, or

          (f) a British subject.

      (2) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
      citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
      deprivation is conducive to the public good.

      (3) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a person of a
      citizenship status which results from his registration or
      naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
      registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-

           (a) fraud,

           (b) false representation, or

           (c) concealment of a material fact.


  12. The Secretary of State's case as set out  in  the  refusal  letter  is
      unclear, as Mr Deller  accepted,  it  does  not  with  any  sufficient
      clarity set out the nature of  the  allegation  or  the  Secretary  of
      State's case.


  13. There are two letters which, on their face, state that  ILR  is  being
      granted to the respondent; one is dated 25 February 2003, the other is
      dated 30 April 2004. It appears from the stamp on the former  that  it
      was this letter which was presented to Secretary of State in order  to
      obtain naturalisation.



  14. As was accepted by Mr Deller, the judge bore in mind that  the  burden
      of proof was on the  Secretary  of  State  and,  taking  that  at  its
      highest, concluded that it was not made out on the evidence presented.
       Mr Deller did not, in the event, seek to persuade us to the contrary;
      it is not at all clear from the screenshots  provided  what  they  are
      supposed to show, nor is it evident that the copies presented  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal were properly legible.



  15. In all the  circumstances,  and  given  Mr  Deller's  concessions,  we
      consider that the judge was entitled to find  that  the  Secretary  of
      State had not made out her case. That is  not  a  conclusion  that  we
      reach with any enthusiasm whatsoever.


  16. It is surprising that in this case, where some six years  had  elapsed
      between the uncovering of Mr Sannagouder's activities and the  initial
      request made to the respondent, that the Secretary of  State  did  not
      adduce  evidence  in  the  form  of  report  into   the   caseworker's
      activities, nor any witness statement from an official explaining  the
      relevance of the screenshots, how they were obtained,  the  nature  of
      any audit trail of entries or any other basis on  which  it  had  been
      determined that the grant letters were false, not least as  both  bore
      numbers IND stamps.

      SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS



   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law and we uphold it.


 Signed:                                Date:  27 April 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
