
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00018/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 September 2015                 |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     YAs
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Seddon, Counsel instructed by Powell Spencer &
                    Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in Pakistan on 26 December 1983.  On 30  October
    2013 he was issued with a certificate of naturalisation  as  a  British
    citizen.  He had come to the UK in 2001.

 2. On 2 July 2013 he was  convicted  of  two  offences  of  conspiracy  to
    defraud for which he was, ultimately, sentenced to  a  total  of  three
    years' imprisonment.

 3. After his conviction, but before sentence, on 10 September 2013 he made
    an  application  for  naturalisation  as  a   British   citizen,   that
    application being successful.  However, on 13 May 2014  the  respondent
    made a decision to deprive  the  appellant  of  his  citizenship  under
    Section 40(3)(a) of the British Nationality Act 1981. That decision was
    on the basis that he had obtained it fraudulently, having  declared  on
    his application that he had not been convicted of any criminal  offence
    in the UK.

 4. The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Russell on 28 January 2015 whereby the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt granted permission to appeal  on  the
    basis  that  the  First-tier  Judge  was  arguably   wrong   to   avoid
    consideration of the consequences of potential removal from the  UK  in
    consequence of the deprivation  of  citizenship,  taking  into  account
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  However, in granting  permission  he  concluded
    that  the  First-tier  Judge's  assessment  of  whether  the  appellant
    obtained his citizenship by fraud contained no arguable error of law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At [20] the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Deliallisi  (British
    citizen:  deprivation  appeal:  Scope)  [2013]  UKUT  00439  (IAC)  was
    referred to.  The First-tier Judge concluded that he had  to  determine
    whether the basis of the  decision  to  deprive  was  correct,  whether
    discretion should have been exercised differently because Article 8  of
    the ECHR was engaged, whether discretion  should  have  been  exercised
    differently because EU rights are engaged,  whether  discretion  should
    have been exercised differently for any other  reason,  "including  the
    reasonably foreseeable consequences of the deprivation of citizenship",
    and lastly whether discretion should have been exercised differently on
    policy grounds

 7. The judge identified that the burden of proof is on the  respondent  to
    make out her case in support of the decision to deprive of citizenship,
    citing the  decision  in  Re  B  (children)  [2008]  UKHL  35.   Having
    considered  the  evidence,  he  concluded  that  the   respondent   had
    established  to  the  required  standard   that   the   appellant   had
    fraudulently obtained naturalisation as a British citizen  by  claiming
    to have no criminal convictions.  The judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    explanation for the non-disclosure on the application form.

 8. In relation to Article 8 of the ECHR the judge accepted the  undisputed
    evidence that the appellant is married to a British  citizen  and  that
    they have three children, two  of  whom  are  the  appellant's  natural
    children.  He noted that one of the children, S, suffers from  a  range
    of disorders associated with epilepsy, and requires  a  great  deal  of
    care.  He stated at [37] that:

         "I was left in no doubt as the impact on her Mother  of  constantly
         caring for her.  The appellant's  evidence  is  that  he  was  very
         involved in the development of care plans for  S  and  his  absence
         from the home has caused direct physical harm to the child."

 9. After further consideration of the evidence, at [40] he concluded  that
    the evidence in relation to the other two children was "very thin".  He
    similarly stated that it was unclear to him what impact the absence  of
    the appellant is having in their lives.

10. At [41] he stated that he had not heard or seen any evidence as to  the
    effect of deprivation  on  the  appellant's  family  or  private  life,
    bearing in mind that the appellant  lived,  studied,  worked,  married,
    formed a family and travelled outside the UK without  being  a  British
    citizen or having the right of abode.  He concluded that  the  skeleton
    argument submitted on behalf of the appellant and  the  submissions  do
    not address the issue of the effect of deprivation on  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights, other than pointing  to  the  reasonably  foreseeable
    consequences of deprivation.

11. He made findings at [42] to  the  following  effect,  namely  that  the
    appellant has formed a family life with his wife and three children  in
    the UK, as well  as  a  private  life  through  his  work  and  outside
    activities.   There  was  no  evidence  that  the  deprivation  of  the
    appellant's citizenship "in  and  of  itself,  alters  the  appellant's
    family or private life".  Thus, at [43] he concluded that the  fact  of
    deprivation  of  the  appellant's  citizenship  does  not  engage   the
    operation of Article 8.

12.  Under  a  section  headed   "Relevance   of   reasonably   foreseeable
    consequences of deprivation" it was concluded that it is  a  reasonably
    foreseeable consequence of depriving the appellant of citizenship  that
    he becomes liable to deportation owing to his conviction  and  sentence
    to three years'  imprisonment.   At  [55]  it  was  concluded  that  no
    deportation order had been made "although it is reasonably  foreseeable
    that one will be  made  as  the  appellant  falls  into  the  automatic
    deportation provisions of the 2007 Act".

13. At [56] the judge stated as follows:

         "In the absence of any assessment of the relevance of art.8 ECHR to
         the appellant's case by the Home Secretary, and  the  corresponding
         absence  of  countervailing  evidence  of  the  effect  of   family
         separation or relocation to  Pakistan  on  the  appellant  and  his
         family, I find that it would be wrong, even dangerous,  to  proceed
         to make an  assessment  as  to  whether  the  appellant  should  be
         excepted from deportation, nor do I believe I have the authority to
         do so in the absence of an 'immigration decision'."

    Submissions

14. In advance of the hearing, notification was given to the Upper Tribunal
    that there would be an application for evidence to be admitted but  not
    to be disclosed to the appellant, pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Mr Walker indicated that  there
    was material that he wished to put before me  pending  a  consideration
    'in chambers' of the material.   Mr  Seddon  indicated  that  he  would
    object to the admission of such evidence.

15.  In  the  event,  the  application  under  rule  14  was  not  actually
    substantively advanced or considered in the light of the development of
    the other arguments set out below.

16. In relation to Article 8, in summary it was submitted on behalf of  the
    appellant that in accordance with the decision in Deliallisi the First-
    tier Tribunal was obliged to consider the Article 8 consequences of the
    decision to deprive the appellant of his citizenship, on the premise of
    the appellant being removed from the UK.  Mr Walker on the  other  hand
    relied  upon  the  decision  in  Arusha  &  Demushi   (deprivation   of
    citizenship - the delay) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC).   It  was  submitted  on
    behalf of the respondent that the issue of deprivation  of  citizenship
    was separate from that of removal and there is as yet  no  decision  on
    the appellant's removal.  The only Article 8 consideration would be  in
    relation to the consequences  of  deprivation  of  citizenship  itself,
    rather than with reference to any prospective removal.

    Conclusions

17. At [22] the First-tier Judge referred to what he described  as  Chapter
    55 of the Nationality Instructions, said to have been last  updated  on
    21 August 2014.  It was noted that the guidance sets out factors to  be
    considered when  deciding  whether  or  not  to  deprive  a  person  of
    citizenship, and  including  whether  deprivation  is  a  proportionate
    interference with a person's Convention or EU rights. Neither party was
    able to put before me a copy of  that  guidance  although  it  was  not
    disputed that the judge's summary of its content was accurate.  It  was
    not disputed on behalf of the respondent that Article 8  considerations
    are relevant to the question of deprivation of citizenship, although it
    was not accepted that potential removal was a matter that needed to  be
    included in such consideration.

18. The guidance is in fact referred to in the respondent's bundle at G1 in
    a document entitled "Referral of case  for  approval  of  decision  for
    deprivation of British citizenship under  s.40(3)  British  Nationality
    Act 1981".  In the version of the guidance that is presently  available
    on the Home Office website, and therefore in the public domain,  it  is
    not apparent that the passages quoted in the document  at  G1  are  any
    different from the guidance that is  on  the  website  although  it  is
    described as having been updated on 10 September 2015.

19. It is to be noted what is said at 55.7.11.6 as follows:

         "The caseworker should consider the impact of  deprivation  on  the
         individual's rights under the European Convention on  Human  Rights
         (ECHR).  In particular  you  should  consider  whether  deprivation
         would interfere with the person's private and family life  and,  if
         so, whether such action would nevertheless  be  proportionate.   In
         some cases it might be appropriate to remove citizenship but  allow
         the person to remain in the UK.  In such cases you should  consider
         granting leave in accordance with guidance on  family  and  private
         life." (My emphasis).

20. In a letter to  the  appellant  dated  14  April  2014  at  C1  of  the
    respondent's bundle, after reciting the background to  the  appellant's
    obtaining of citizenship, it states that if the appellant  is  deprived
    of his British citizen status he would lose any Right of Abode  in  the
    UK "and so may be liable to be removed from the United  Kingdom".   The
    letter requires the appellant to provide information in  mitigation  of
    the allegation, on personal or family life, compassionate circumstances
    and human rights, asking the appellant to provide details of any  human
    rights issues that he may wish to be taken into account.  The appellant
    replied on 24 April 2014 setting out his history,  mitigating  factors,
    personal  and  family  life,  compassionate  circumstances  and  lastly
    referring to his human rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  letter
    refers to the issue of his and/or his family being  required  to  leave
    the UK.

21. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent before me that the decision
    to deprive of citizenship dated 13 May 2014 makes no reference  to  any
    human rights  considerations  being  taken  into  account.   Mr  Walker
    indicated that he could only assume that  such  consideration  was  not
    apparently given because there was no removal decision.

22. At [34] of the  determination  the  First-tier  Judge  noted  that  the
    respondent had not herself considered the relevance of Article 8 of the
    ECHR, EU law, policy or the consequence of deprivation "notwithstanding
    a requirement to do so and that her own policy states that such factors
    will be considered" referring to the guidance he had earlier quoted.

23. At [58] it is again stated that the respondent's policy is that  before
    depriving someone  of  their  nationality  she  will  consider  whether
    deprivation engages obligations under the Human Rights Convention or EU
    law and that there is no  reference  to  these  considerations  in  the
    respondent's decision.  It is also stated in the  same  paragraph  that
    the respondent is required to consider the consequences of  deprivation
    "which in this case include the  deportation  of  the  appellant".   He
    concluded that there is no evidence that she had  turned  her  mind  to
    those  consequences  or   taken   into   account   her   'section   55'
    responsibilities.

24. I am satisfied that the First-tier Judge erred in law in failing either
    to decide that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the
    law for having failed to take into account Article 8 considerations  in
    the deprivation of citizenship, or failing to go on himself to consider
    those consequences.  As I have indicated, at [20] the  judge  concluded
    that in the light of the decision in  Deliallisi  he  had  to  consider
    whether the discretion of the respondent  should  have  been  exercised
    differently,  including  in  terms  of   the   reasonably   foreseeable
    consequences of the deprivation of citizenship.

25. The judge himself did not go on to deal with that question.  At [55] he
    concluded that it was "clearly important" that the respondent  conducts
    the assessment of whether  the  appellant's  deportation  would  breach
    Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   At  [56]  he  decided  that  it  would  be
    inappropriate for him to make any assessment of Article 8 in  terms  of
    family separation or relocation to Pakistan by the  appellant.   In  my
    judgement the First-tier Judge erred in law in not concluding that  the
    decision of the respondent was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  for
    having failed to take into account  Article  8  considerations  on  the
    deprivation of citizenship, and in failing to undertake the  assessment
    himself.

26. On a minimum basis, the respondent was at least  required  to  consider
    Article 8 of the ECHR in terms of the deprivation  of  citizenship  and
    its implications for Article 8 on its  own  terms,  regardless  of  any
    further consideration of the consequences of deprivation by  reason  of
    potential removal.

27. In the circumstances, those are reasons alone for me to  conclude  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is to be  set  aside,  for  the
    decision to be re-made.  As I indicated to the parties, I was minded to
    find in the  re-making  of  the  decision  that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent was not in accordance with the law for failing to take  into
    account guidance in relation to Article  8  but  also  in  terms  of  a
    consideration of the consequences of removal  in  accordance  with  the
    decision in Deliallisi.

28. I do not accept, as advanced on behalf  of  the  respondent,  that  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Arusha & Demushi is authority for the
    proposition that there is no need for the respondent  to  consider  the
    hypothetical prospect of removal.  As submitted by Mr Seddon, there was
    no argument on that  point  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Arusha  &
    Demushi, which simply quoted the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The First-tier Tribunal's findings do not amount to a decision  by  the
    Upper  Tribunal  after  any  argument.   Furthermore,  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision on that point was obiter because its  decision  was
    in fact that there was no fraud perpetrated by the  appellant  in  that
    case.

29. In addition, it is now clear from the decision in Deliallisi  that  the
    Tribunal  is  required  to   determine   the   reasonably   foreseeable
    consequences of deprivation, which may, depending on the facts, include
    removal  (see  [54]-[56]).    Indeed,   that   consideration   of   the
    consequences of removal is of potential relevance is indicated  in  the
    respondent's own guidance at 55.7.11.6 which, aside from  stating  that
    the caseworker  should  consider  the  impact  of  deprivation  on  the
    individual's human rights, including private and family life, it states
    that it might in some cases be appropriate to  remove  citizenship  but
    allow the person to remain in the UK.  That  clearly  in  my  judgement
    indicates that the potential for removal is a factor to be  considered.
    Furthermore, on the facts of this appellant's case, in the light of his
    convictions the potential for removal is undoubtedly a very live issue.



30. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
    and that the error of law is such as to require the decision to be  set
    aside.  In the circumstances, it is not necessary for  me  to  consider
    the remainder of the appellant's grounds. It is to  be  noted  however,
    that permission having been  refused  in  relation  to  the  First-tier
    Judge's assessment of whether the appellant obtained his citizenship by
    fraud, that aspect of the First-tier judge's decision stands.

31. I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  re-make  the
    decision, allowing the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's
    decision is not in accordance with the law and  a  lawful  decision  is
    therefore awaited.  That decision must take into account Article  8  of
    the ECHR with reference to the appellant and his family, but  also  the
    reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation, including  removal,
    in accordance with the decision in Deliallisi.

    Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside and
    the decision re-made, allowing the appeal to the  limited  extent  that
    the respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law such that a
    lawful decision is awaited.

    Costs

33. The application made on behalf of the appellant in respect of costs  is
    to be the subject of a separate written decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

In order to preserve the anonymity of the  children  referred  to  in  these
proceedings, unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  12/11/15
