
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00138/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th August 2021                  |On 01 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                  B A-Z M A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain, instructed by Allied Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Iraqi and of Kurdish ethnicity. On 15th
      January 2009 he was issued with a certificate of naturalisation  as  a
      British citizen. The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  of
      4th December 2019 to deprive the appellant of his British citizenship.
       His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands  for
      reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 18th March 2020.


The background


   2. The appellant arrived in the UK and presented himself  at  the  asylum
      screening unit on 25th  November  2002.   On  6th  December  2002,  he
      completed a Statement of Evidence Form and attached to it, a statement
      made by him.  He was interviewed by the respondent  on  23rd  December
      2002.  At each stage, the appellant confirmed his  name,  and  claimed
      that  he  was  born  on  1st  July  1984  in  Rahimawa,  Kirkuk.   The
      appellant's claim for international  protection  was  refused  by  the
      respondent for reasons set out a decision  dated  16th  January  2003.
      The respondent considered the claim made by the appellant and did  not
      believe that the appellant would have been asked to join the  Fedayeen
      Saddam.  Nevertheless, on 16th January 2003 in a separate letter,  the
      appellant was also informed that ".. It  has  been  decided,  however,
      that it would be right, because of  the  particular  circumstances  of
      your case, to grant you exceptional leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom until 16th January 2007...".


   3. Thereafter, in December 2006  the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite
      leave to remain. He was granted indefinite leave to remain on 13th May
      2007. On 9th June 2008 the appellant made an application to naturalise
      as a British citizen.  He was naturalised as a British citizen on 15th
      January 2009. Again, in  each  of  those  applications  the  appellant
      confirmed his name, and he maintained that he was  born  on  1st  July
      1984 in Rahimawa, Kirkuk.


   4. Subsequently, in 2017 the appellant applied for  a  passport  for  his
      daughter, who I refer to as [R].  In support of that application,  the
      appellant provided an Iraqi ID Card and a copy of the "1957 Register",
      relating to him, his wife, and their daughter.   Those  documents  too
      purported to show that the appellant was born  on  1st  July  1984  in
      Kirkuk.  However  those  documents  were  examined  and  found  to  be
      counterfeit.


   5. In April 2019, the appellant made an application to HM Passport Office
      to replace  a  passport  that  had  been  lost  or  stolen.  He  again
      maintained that he was born on 1st July 1984 in Kirkuk.  In support of
      that application the appellant provided an Iraqi ID Card,  a  marriage
      certificate, and another copy of the "1957 Register".  Those documents
      state the appellant's date of birth to be 11th October  1982  and  his
      place  of  birth  to  be  Erbil.   As  a  result  of  the  conflicting
      information, the appellant was interviewed under caution on 23rd  July
      2019.


   6. Following  that  interview,  the  respondent  sent  a  letter  to  the
      appellant dated 3rd September 2019.  The respondent said:


         "You claimed to have been  born  in  Kirkuk,  Iraq,  on  01/07/1984
         however an admission from you, as well as  documents  submitted  in
         support of your passport application, confirm you are actually born
         in Erbil on 11/10/1982.


         This letter informs you that the Secretary of State is, as a result
         of this information, considering  depriving  you  of  your  British
         citizen status under section 40(3) of the British  Nationality  Act
         1981 (as amended by the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002) ..."


   7.  The  appellant's   representatives,   UK   &   Co   Solicitors   made
      representations to the respondent under cover of a letter  dated  20th
      September 2019.  They confirmed the appellant's name and that  he  was
      born on 11th October 1982.  As to the appellant's place of birth, they
      said:


         "It is submitted that our client's place of birth is  Erbil,  Iraq.
         Please find  enclosed  herewith  our  clients  Iraqi  passport  and
         national ID card.  It is shown from our  client's  Iraqi  documents
         that he is originally from Kirkuk because his family civil register
         office are all shown to be from Kirkuk.  The applicant was truthful
         by telling he was originally from Kirkuk, and his recent changes of
         his register office showing otherwise but this  should  not  affect
         British citizenship...."


   8. The  appellant's  representatives  claimed  the  appellant  has  never
      provided a different name and when he arrived in the UK, he was afraid
      that he might be identified if returned to Iraqi. They explained  that
      on the basis of advice he received from friends during his journey  to
      the UK, the appellant changed his date of birth so that he  would  not
      be recognised by the Iraqi intelligence agencies and their agents, and
      so as to protect himself in the event of removal to Iraq.


   9. In her decision of 4th December  2019,  the  respondent  informed  the
      appellant that she has decided the appellant's British citizenship was
      obtained fraudulently and he should be deprived  of  that  citizenship
      for the reasons set out in the letter.  At paragraphs [8] to [34], the
      respondent sets out the background to her decision.   The  basis  upon
      which the appellant had been granted exceptional leave  to  remain  in
      January 2003, is explained in paragraph [23]:


         "... on 16 January 2003, you  were  granted  Exceptional  Leave  to
         Remain (ELR)  based  on  your  particular  circumstances  until  16
         January 2007. (Annex G1 to G3).  The caseworker's decision to grant
         you with this status was based on the policy in place at that  time
         (Annex H1 - H5) and because of their belief that you were  from  an
         area of Iraq which was controlled  by  Saddam  Hussein.  (annex  H2
         paragraph 3.6) The coexistent Home Office Policy, deemed the return
         of an individual to any area of Iraq which was judged to  be  under
         the control of the ruling Ba'athist regime unacceptable.  You  were
         granted ELR under the identity of [B A-Z M A] born in Kirkuk  on  1
         July 1984"


  10. At paragraphs [36] and [37] of her decision the respondent said:


         "36. Consideration has been given to the fact you changed your date
         of birth when entering the country, however as you did not  benefit
         from any grant of leave because of this, it is considered that this
         was not  material  to  the  acquisition  of  citizenship  and  thus
         disregarded.


         37.  Consideration has also been given to the fact that you changed
         your place of birth from Erbil to Kirkuk.  You are granted  ELR  in
         line with the previously  mentioned  Iraq  country  policy  on  the
         understanding that you were an ethnic Kurd born in the  government-
         controlled area (GCI) of Iraq (Kirkuk) and you feared  persecution,
         when in fact you were  born  in  Erbil  which  is  in  the  Kurdish
         autonomous zone (KAZ).  The grant of ELR then allowed you  to  gain
         sufficient length of  residency  to  apply  for  ILR  and  then  to
         naturalise. As you falsely presented to the Home  Office  as  being
         from government controlled area (GCI), the decision  to  grant  you
         ELR was incorrectly made on this basis  on  account  of  the  false
         information which you have provided during the asylum  process.  It
         is considered  that  had  the  caseworker  known  at  the  time  of
         application that you were from the KAZ area of Iraq  the  grant  of
         ELR would not have been applicable to  your  circumstances  and  as
         such the application would have been declined.  This  is  therefore
         considered a material fact in your application...."


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands


  11. The background is briefly summarised by Judge Rowlands  in  paragraphs
      [2] and [3] of his decision.  The appellant gave evidence as  set  out
      in paragraphs [4] to [7].  The appellant adopted his witness statement
      dated 10th February 2020.  Judge Rowlands does not repeat the  content
      of that statement in the decision, but it is useful to record that  at
      paragraph [1] of his statement, the appellant maintained that  he  was
      born in Kirkuk.  He claimed he ".. moved to  Erbil  when  [he]  was  a
      child and [his] birth was registered in Erbil, in Iraq..".  He claimed
      that his last address in  Iraq  was  "..in  Rahimawa,  Kirkuk..".   He
      claims in paragraph [2], that he is "..originally from  Kirkuk.."  and
      he was told they had moved to Erbil when he was "..one or  more  years
      and because [his] father had been in Peshmerga Army against the  Iraqi
      regime, the family did not  register  [him]  in  Kirkuk  because  they
      feared  [they  would]  be  persecuted  because   of   [his]   father's
      involvement...".   At paragraph [3] of  his  statement  the  appellant
      claimed:


         "When I  was  five,  my  father  returned  because  the  government
         announced or declared public forgiveness to all  opposition  except
         former PUK General Secretary Jalal Talabani.  Therefore, my  father
         returned home and then moved back to Kirkuk.   I  then  started  my
         primary and  secondary  schools.  I  have  previously  provided  my
         father's ID card and  my  wife's  that  all  show  their  place  of
         registration...."

  12. It is immediately apparent that the appellant's claim in  his  witness
      statement that he was  born  in  Kirkuk  and  moved  to  Erbil  before
      returning to Kirkuk is at odds with the representations  made  by  his
      representatives in their letter dated 20th September 2019, that I have
      referred to  in  paragraph  [7]  above.  Judge  Rowlands  records  the
      submissions made at paragraphs [11]  to  [14]  of  his  decision.   At
      paragraphs [12] and [13] he recorded:


         "12. He had also claimed to have been born  in  Kirkuk  and  before
         leaving he had been living  there.   Having  claimed  this  in  his
         screening interview he confirmed it as  (sic)  his  SEF,  his  full
         interview and in his application for indefinite leave to remain. It
         wasn't until 2019 that he provided documents  showing  his  correct
         date of birth and, more importantly, his place of  birth  as  being
         Erbil.  It later turned out that, he claims that  he  was  actually
         born in Kirkuk but had moved to Erbil at an early stage  and  lived
         there.

         13.  As a result of this information, the appellant was interviewed
         under caution on 23rd July 2019.  In  that  interview  he  admitted
         that he was aware that the  documents  he  had  obtained,  for  the
         purposes of his daughters application in 2017, were documents which
         he knew were not reliable. He said that he had told the company his
         problem and they produced relevant documents.  He  said  he  hadn't
         told the truth about his identity and home  background  because  he
         was scared for his life and didn't want to be sent  back  to  Iraq.
         The fact that he produced false documents in his  daughter's  claim
         is not relevant to this appeal but the fact that he  knew  that  he
         had been naturalised with a fake ID and information concerning  his
         home address, even at that time, is. He confirmed that he was  born
         in Kirkuk, but had been brought up in Erbil from a very early age."



  13. Judge Rowlands set out his findings and conclusions at paragraphs [15]
      to [19] of his decision.  Judge Rowlands referred to the  respondent's
      nationality instructions  at  paragraph  [17]  of  his  decision,  and
      concluded, at [18], that the  appellant  should  be  deprived  of  his
      British citizenship. He confirmed that in reaching his decision he had
      taken into account the status of the appellant's daughter, noting that
      deprivation of the citizenship  granted  to  him,  would  not  have  a
      negative impact upon her.  Judge Rowlands concluded, at [19], that the
      decision to deprive the appellant of British citizenship would not  be
      contrary to the appellant's  human  rights.   He  noted  there  is  no
      removal decision, and that if the respondent decides to  proceed  with
      removal, it will be open to the appellant to appeal that  decision  as
      being contrary to his Article 8 right to a family and private life.


The appeal before me


  14. The appellant relies upon two grounds of appeal that are  set  out  in
      the grounds of appeal dated 23rd  June  2020.   First,  the  appellant
      claims Judge Rowlands failed to adequately  consider  the  appellant's
      entitlement to 4 years exceptional leave  to  remain  based  upon  the
      respondent's policy in 2003, that the respondent  would  not  rely  on
      internal flight to  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Zone  ("KAZ")  from  the
      government-controlled area of Iraq  as  a  reason  to  refuse  asylum.
      Simply put, the appellant claims that regardless  of  any  conclusions
      reached by the respondent and the First-tier Tribunal as to  where  he
      was born, whether that was Kirkuk or Erbil, the  appellant's  evidence
      was that he moved to Kirkuk (a government-controlled area of Iraq)  as
      a young child at the age  of  five.   He  claims  Judge  Rowlands  was
      therefore required to have regard to the respondent's policy and  make
      a finding as to whether the appellant had lived in Kirkuk prior to his
      departure from Iraq.  If it is accepted that the appellant had, as  he
      claims, lived  in  Kirkuk  prior  to  his  departure  from  Iraq,  the
      appellant would have qualified for a grant of four  years  exceptional
      leave to remain in 2003 in any event.  Second,  the  appellant  claims
      Judge Rowlands erred in his approach to  the  best  interests  of  the
      appellant's daughter under s55 and as to his assessment of the Article
      8 claim made by the appellant.  It is said that Judge Rowlands  failed
      to appreciate or have regard to the fact that the child is  a  British
      citizen by operation of law (s2(1) British Nationality Act  1981)  and
      Judge Rowlands failed to have any proper regard to  her  rights  as  a
      British citizen and how she would be affected by  the  deprivation  of
      her father's citizenship.  The appellant claims the  strength  of  his
      human rights claim and the impact upon a relevant child was in the end
      relevant to the legality of the deprivation  measure  pursued  by  the
      respondent.


  15. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara  on
      20th July 2020.  She said:


         "It is, at least, arguable that the respondent ought to have  drawn
         the judge's attention to the policy which the grounds state was  in
         place at the time the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
         November 2002 and which it is argued he would have  benefited  from
         in view of him being born in Kirkuk and residing there  immediately
         before he left for the UK"


  16. Before me, Mr Hussain adopted the written submissions settled  by  him
      dated 23rd August 2021. He submits the appellant had  claimed  in  his
      evidence that prior to leaving Afghanistan, he had lived in Kirkuk,  a
      government-controlled area.  The respondent did not reject that  claim
      in her decision of 4th December 2019.  He submits  the  focus  of  the
      respondent was upon the discrepancies in the documents as to where the
      appellant was born.   He submits that even if the appellant  had  lied
      about where was born, it does not follow that that he  had  also  lied
      about his claim that he had lived in Kirkuk immediately prior  to  his
      departure from Afghanistan.


  17. Mr Hussain refers to the decision of Mr Justice Davis in R (Rashid)  v
      SSHD [2004] EWHC 2465 in which the Administrative Court considered   a
      general policy operated by the respondent since at least October  2000
      that internal relocation to the former KAZ from government  controlled
      Iraq ,would not be advanced as a reason to refuse a claim for  refugee
      status, so long as when the individual came to the UK, they came  from
      (Mr Ahmed's emphasis) the part of Iraq controlled by the former  Baath
      party.   Mr Ahmed submits that  like  the  applicant  in  Rashid,  the
      appellant had lived a government-controlled area (Kirkuk) prior to his
      arrival in the UK, having spent a short period of time in  Erbil  many
      years before.  He submits the appellant, like the applicant in Rashid,
      was entitled to claim that if the respondent had applied the policy to
      the appellant at the time of  his  original  asylum  application,  the
      appellant would, in any event, have been granted refugee  status,  and
      so a finding that the appellant was born in Erbil was  not  sufficient
      to establish that the grant of British  citizenship  was  obtained  by
      means of fraud or a false representation.


  18. Mr Hussain also drew my  attention  to  the  decision  of  Mr  Justice
      Collins in R (A): (H) & (HA) v SSHD [2006] EWHC 526 in which the Court
      considered the effect of the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  R
      (Rashid) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 744.  Each of  the  claimants  was  of
      Kurdish ethnicity and had lived in a government-controlled  area.   Mr
      Justice Collins held there  had  been  systemic  failures  as  to  the
      application of the respondent's policy which  not  only  affected  the
      decisions but also led to the appellate authority  being  misled  such
      that the claimants were deprived  of  the  chance  of  having  a  fair
      decision not only from the respondent but also  from  the  independent
      appellate body.   He held that the  claimants  [A]  and  [H]  must  be
      granted ILR and [AH] should have been granted 4 years ELR in July 2001
      when his claim was refused.  Mr Hussain submits the appellant is in  a
      similar position to [AH].  The claim  made  by  [AH]  for  asylum  was
      refused  because  it  was  not  credible  and  not  because  he  could
      internally relocate to the Kurdish Autonomous Zone. Therefore, at  the
      time of the initial decision [AH]  should  have  received  four  years
      exceptional leave to remain in line with the practice for claims  made
      by those from the government-controlled area of Iraq, at that time.


  19. Finally, Mr Hussain submits the question for the  First-tier  Tribunal
      was whether the appellant had acted "dishonestly" when he  claimed  he
      was born in Kirkuk, having regard, subjectively, to the  actual  state
      of the appellant's individual knowledge or belief as to the facts,  as
      set  out  in  Ivy  v  Genting  Casinos  (UK)  Ltd  [2017]   UKSC   67.
      Alternatively, even if the appellant was dishonest regarding his place
      of birth, the Tribunal must be satisfied that the dishonest  assertion
      in his application  for  asylum,  settlement  and  naturalisation  was
      material to the grant of exceptional leave to remain, indefinite leave
      to remain, and then British citizenship.


  20. In response to the claim made in the respondent's Rule 24  reply  that
      the appellant had been represented at the hearing of his  appeal,  and
      that it did not form any part of  his  appeal  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal that the appellant would in any event  have  been  granted  4
      years ELR upon a proper application of the respondent's policy at  the
      time of the respondent's decision in January 2003, Mr Hussein  submits
      that it was  the  respondent's  policy  and  the  respondent  was,  in
      fairness, better placed  than  anyone  to  bring  a  policy  that  was
      relevant, to the attention of the First-tier Tribunal.


  21. In reply, Mr  Bates  submits  the  respondent's  policy  was  properly
      referred to by the respondent in her decision of  4th  December  2019.
      The respondent explained, at paragraph [23] of her decision, that  the
      appellant was granted exceptional leave to  remain  in  January  2003,
      based on the policy in place at that time and the  caseworkers  belief
      that the appellant was from a government-controlled area of Iraq.  The
      respondent said:


         "... The coexistent Home Office policy, deemed  the  return  of  an
         individual to any area of Iraq which was judged  to  be  under  the
         control of the ruling Ba'athist regime unacceptable..."


  22. Here, the respondent did not accept  the  appellant  was  entitled  to
      refugee status but nevertheless the appellant was granted 4 years ELR.
       Such a grant would not have been made if the appellant had come  from
      the Kurdish Autonomous Zone.  Mr Bates submits the respondent's policy
      was not only referred to in the respondent's decision, but a  copy  of
      the respondent's 'Iraq Policy Bulletin 1/2009 (issued 12 January 2009)
      was included as 'Annex H' of the respondent's  bundle.   That  Country
      Policy Bulletin addresses the decisions of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Rashid, and the decision of Mr Justice Collins in R (A): (H)  &  (AH).
      Both the appellant and the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  were  therefore
      aware of the policy and the litigation around it.   Mr  Bates  submits
      the entire thrust of the grounds of appeal are that the respondent had
      not provided the policy, but that is clearly  inaccurate.  He  submits
      the appellant now seeks to impugn the decision of  Judge  Rowlands  on
      the basis of a claim that was not made before the First-tier  Tribunal
      and the Judge cannot be criticised for failing to deal  with  a  claim
      that was not advanced before him.   Mr  Bates  submits  the  remaining
      grounds relied upon by the appellant  are  even  weaker.   He  submits
      Judge Rowlands had regard to the best  interests  of  the  appellant's
      child and it was open to the Judge  to  conclude  that  depriving  the
      appellant of his British citizenship would have no negative impact  on
      her.  Any  entitlement  she  has  to  British  citizenship  arises  by
      operation  of  law  and  depriving  the  appellant  of   his   British
      citizenship  will  not  impact  upon  her   entitlement   to   British
      citizenship.   Mr  Bates  submits  the  respondent  confirmed  in  her
      decision of 4th December 2019 that a  deprivation  decision  does  not
      itself preclude an individual from remaining in the UK.  He submits it
      was open to Judge Rowlands to  conclude  that  in  the  absence  of  a
      removal decision, the decision to deprive the appellant of his British
      citizenship is not contrary to his human rights,  noting  as  he  did,
      that if the respondent decides to remove him, the appellant may appeal
      on the basis of his right to remain on Article 8 grounds.


Discussion


  23. Section 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981  provides  that  the
      respondent may by order deprive a person of a citizenship status which
      results from his registration or naturalisation if  the  Secretary  of
      State  is  satisfied  that  the  registration  or  naturalisation  was
      obtained by means of - (a) fraud, (b)  false  representation,  or  (c)
      concealment  of  a  material  fact.   On  appeal,  the  Tribunal  must
      establish whether one or more of the  means  described  in  subsection
      3(a), (b) and (c) were used  by  the  appellant  in  order  to  obtain
      British citizenship.


  24. Neither party has adduced the written text of the  policy  adopted  by
      the respondent in 2002/3 when the appellant made his claim for  asylum
      and when the respondent reached the decision to refuse the  claim  for
      asylum but to grant the appellant  four  years  exceptional  leave  to
      remain.  From the authorities relied upon by  Mr  Hussain  it  appears
      that even within the ranks of those whose job it was to apply  it,  it
      was  not  universally  known.  Its  content  is  referred  to  in  the
      authorities that I was referred to,  and  in  the  respondent's  'Iraq
      Policy Bulletin 1/2009 (issued 12 January 2009) that was  included  as
      'Annex H' of the respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.


  25. It is clear that  since  1991,  the  respondent  has  adopted  various
      policies to address claims made for international protection by  those
      from Iraq.  From October 2000 failed asylum seekers from a government-
      controlled area of Iraq were  to  be  granted  four  years'  ELR.   It
      appears the policy was amended, in relation to failed  asylum  seekers
      from government-controlled areas of Iraq, in  that  with  effect  from
      20th February 2003 they were to be granted only  six  months'  ELR  in
      light of the uncertainty  about  conditions  in  Iraq  caused  by  the
      prospect of imminent military action against Iraq.


  26. Regardless of whether the matters referred to in the grounds of appeal
      now advanced  by  the  appellant  were  matters  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was invited to consider, in my judgement, the difficulty  for
      the appellant is that his  grounds  of  appeal  and  submissions  made
      before me, all proceed upon the premise that even if he  was  born  in
      Erbil, it is accepted that he had, as he claims, lived in Kirkuk  from
      a young age, and he had therefore lived  in  a  government  controlled
      area of Iraq prior to his departure from Iraq and at the time  of  his
      arrival in the UK.  To use the words of Mr Hussain, the appellant  was
      therefore 'from' a government-controlled area of Iraq,  and  he  would
      therefore, in any event, have benefited from  the  grant  of  4  years
      exceptional leave to remain.


  27. However, that is to misunderstand the findings and conclusions reached
      by  Judge  Rowlands.   There  were  plainly  inconsistencies  in   the
      appellant's evidence as to where  he  was  born  and  his  account  of
      events.  At paragraphs [11] to [13] of his  decision,  Judge  Rowlands
      refers to the evidence as highlighted in  the  submissions  made.   At
      paragraph [15] of his decision, Judge Rowlands said


         "I have considered all of the evidence in the case  including  that
         which I have not specifically referred to and reach  the  following
         conclusion. I am satisfied that the  appellant  did  make  a  false
         representation not just once, but on each occasion thereafter where
         he continued to maintain that the facts that  he  had  put  forward
         were correct. I am also satisfied that he did  so  deliberately  to
         avoid, as he says himself, being removed from  the  United  Kingdom
         and returned to Iraq. I am satisfied that he knew that if  he  told
         the truth i.e. that he was from a Kurdish controlled area which  he
         could have returned to safely he would not have been granted  leave
         twice and subsequently naturalisation. I am satisfied that the fact
         that he came from a Kurdish controlled safe area would have made  a
         difference.  I am satisfied that he knew she should  have  admitted
         to this earlier and that he took advice knowing that  there  was  a
         problem."


  28. Judge Rowland was satisfied  that  the  appellant  did  make  a  false
      representation on several occasions and did so deliberately to  avoid,
      as he said himself, being removed from the United Kingdom and returned
      to Iraq. Judge Rowlands describes in that paragraph, the truth  being;
      the appellant was from (my emphasis) a Kurdish controlled  area  which
      he could have returned to safely.  Judge Rowlands states that  he  was
      satisfied that; "... The fact  that  he  came  from  (my  emphasis)  a
      Kurdish controlled safe  area  would  have  made  a  difference.".   I
      emphasise the use of  the  word  "from"  by  Judge  Rowlands  in  that
      paragraph, because it addresses the submission made by Mr Hussain that
      the relevant policy did not require consideration of whether  internal
      relocation was reasonable, so long as when the individual came to  the
      UK, they came "from" the part of Iraq controlled by the  former  Baath
      party.  Properly read, Judge Rowlands considered the  evidence  before
      the Tribunal and not only rejected the appellant's claim as set out in
      his witness statement dated 10th February 2020 that  he  was  born  in
      Kirkuk, but also rejected the  claim  that  the  appellant  came  from
      Kirkuk.  Judge Rowlands expressly states that he  was  satisfied  that
      the appellant came from (my emphasis) a Kurdish controlled safe  area.
      Judge Rowlands did not therefore focus solely upon where the appellant
      was born and in reaching his decision he  had  proper  regard  to  the
      appellant's subjective and actual knowledge at the time  he  made  the
      false representations.


  29. I reject the claim made by Mr Hussain that the appellant's position is
      analogous to the position of Mr Rashid in R (Rashid)  v  SSHD  and  of
      [AH] in R (A): (H) & (HA) v SSHD.  In Rashid, the claimant was born in
      Arbil, in northern Iraq in July 1983, which  had  subsequently  become
      part of the KAZ.  In 1987, at the age of four, he moved to Makhmur  in
      southern Iraq, an area under the control of the Baath regime.  In  her
      decision refusing his asylum claim, the respondent had  accepted  that
      the  claimant  would  have  protection  concerns  in  the  area  still
      controlled by the Baath regime, but went on to  say  that  there  were
      areas in the Kurdish Autonomous Zone where he would not have  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution and it would be reasonable to  expect  him
      to go there.  On appeal, the  Adjudicator  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant had given a  credible  account  of  why  he  left  Iraq  and
      concluded that in any event, he would be removed to the KAZ,  and  his
      removal there would not  be  unduly  harsh.   The  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal refused permission to appeal on the basis that  although  the
      Adjudicator had not given a reasoned explanation for his finding  that
      the claimant had no fear even in his home area,  that  was  immaterial
      because it was open to the Adjudicator to find that it  would  not  be
      unduly harsh for the appellant to internally relocate to the KAZ.   At
      paragraph [20] of his judgment Mr Justice Davis referred to an extract
      from the respondent's decision stating that from October  2000,  there
      was in existence within the Home Office a general policy that internal
      relocation to the former KAZ from government-controlled Iraq would not
      be advanced as a reason to refuse a claim for  refugee  status.   That
      was on the basis of the stance adopted by the Kurdish  authorities  of
      not admitting to  their  territory,  those  who  were  not  previously
      resident in  that  area  because  of  a  lack  of  infrastructure  and
      resources.  In Rashid, there was therefore no doubt that the  claimant
      was from a government-controlled  area  and  in  accordance  with  the
      respondent's policy,  which  had  not  been  consistently  applied  by
      caseworkers and presenting officers, the claimant had found himself in
      the position he was in, because of the wrongful failure on the part of
      the respondent to apply the policy to  him  as  it  should  have  been
      applied at the time of his initial application.  Similarly,  [AH]  was
      from a government-controlled area of Iraq and it was the  respondent's
      unlawful failure  to  apply  a  relevant  policy  that  applied,  that
      justified the intervention of the court.,


  30. Here, Judge Rowlands, having heard evidence from the  appellant  found
      that the truth is that the appellant was  from  a  Kurdish  controlled
      area and that the fact that he came from  a  Kurdish  controlled  safe
      area, would have made a difference to the determination of his  claim.
      It is not suggested by the appellant that there was a policy in  force
      in January 2003 that an individual who had  come  to  the  UK  from  a
      Kurdish  controlled  area  would  have  been  granted  4  years'   ELR
      regardless of the outcome of his claim for asylum.  In fact, the 'Iraq
      Policy Bulletin 1/2009 (issued 12 January 2009) that I was referred to
      and which was before First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands states:


         "3.6 Although there was no country specific blanket ELR  policy  it
         was accepted practice that all asylum seekers who were accepted  as
         being Iraqi nationals, but who were found not to be refugees,  from
         April 1991 to 20 October  2000,  would  be  granted  4  years'  ELR
         arising from factors such as the severe penalties imposed on  those
         who had left Iraq illegally. From 20 October 2000, in light of  the
         improved conditions in KAZ, only claimants  who  were  accepted  to
         have come from GCI were granted 4 years' ELR. (my emphasis)  On  20
         February 2003 this changed to 6months' ELR in view of the uncertain
         situation surrounding Iraq, in particular the prospect of  imminent
         military  action  against  Iraq.   On   20   March   2003   initial
         consideration  of  all  Iraqi  asylum  applications  was  suspended
         following the commencement of military action in  Iraq.   Decision-
         making on Iraqi asylum claims resumed on 16 June 2003,  since  when
         all Iraqi
         asylum applications, regardless of where the  claimant  originated,
         have been considered on their individual merits.


  31. Therefore, since 20th October 2000, only those who  were  accepted  to
      have come from the government-controlled area of Iraq were  granted  4
      years' ELR. The grant of four years  ELR  made  to  the  appellant  in
      January 2003 was made  upon  a  proper  application  of  that  policy.
      However, on the findings made by Judge Rowlands,  the  respondent  was
      not someone who came from the government-controlled area of Iraq,  and
      it follows that it was open to Judge Rowlands  to  conclude  that  the
      fact that the appellant came from  a  Kurdish  controlled  safe  area,
      would have made a difference.  Properly read, in my judgment,  it  was
      open to Judge Rowlands  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  should  be
      deprived  of  the  British  citizenship  which   resulted   from   his
      naturalisation for the reasons given in his decision.


  32. In reaching his decision, I  am  satisfied  that  Judge  Rowlands  had
      adequate regard to the best interests of the appellant's daughter, who
      it seems, at the time of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      was living in Iraq.  It appears  that  since  the  decision  of  Judge
      Rowlands promulgated on 10th March  2020,  the  appellant's  daughter,
      [R], who was born in Erbil on 21st May 2012, has been  issued  with  a
      passport as a British Citizen.  The deprivation of British citizenship
      has not prevented the appellant's daughter securing a  passport  as  a
      British citizen.   That  however  is  a  matter  that  post-dates  the
      decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  is  a  factor  that  the
      respondent will no doubt have regard to, when she  reaches  a  further
      decision as to whether to pursue removal of the appellant to  Iraq  or
      to grant the appellant some other form of leave to remain.


  33. In Aziz v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1884, Sales LJ (with whom  Sir  Terence
      Etherton MR and Sir Stephen Richards agreed) said,  at  [25]  to  [28]
      that, at least in the usual case, the issues of whether the  appellant
      should be deprived of his or her citizenship and whether  they  should
      be removed are  distinct,  and  that  it  was  neither  necessary  nor
      appropriate for a Tribunal considering  the  deprivation  question  to
      conduct a  "proleptic  assessment"  of  the  likelihood  of  a  lawful
      removal.


  34. As Judge Rowlands said at paragraph [19] of his decision, in so far as
      the human rights claim is concerned,  if  the  respondent  decides  to
      remove the appellant, it will be open to the appellant to  claim  that
      his removal would be contrary to Article 8.


  35. An appellate  court  should  resist  the  temptation  to  subvert  the
      principle that they should not substitute their own  analysis  of  the
      evidence for that of the Judge by  a  narrow  textual  analysis  which
      enables it to claim that the Judge below misdirected  themselves.   It
      is not a counsel of perfection. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not
      an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to
      see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits.


  36. Having carefully considered the decision of Judge Rowlands I am  quite
      satisfied that the appeal was dismissed after the Judge had  carefully
      considered all the evidence before him.  In my judgement, the findings
      made by Judge Rowlands, albeit brief, were findings that were properly
      open to him on the evidence before  the  Tribunal.  The  findings  and
      conclusions reached cannot be  said  to  be  perverse,  irrational  or
      findings that were not supported by the  evidence.   There  is  in  my
      judgement no material error of law capable of affecting the outcome.


  37. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


  38. The appeal is dismissed, and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Rowlands stands.

Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         25th August 2021
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


