

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/00435/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 1 December 2017                     |           On 9 January 2018         |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                      mrs nolwazi pearl pearfidia zwane
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  On  21  June  2016,  the   appellant   applied   through   her   legal
    representatives for a residence card as confirmation of  her  right  to
    reside in the UK.  She relied on her marriage to Mr  Adrian  Hriban,  a
    Romanian national, whom she had married on 14 July 2011.  Evidence  was
    produced to show that Mr Hriban was employed  by  a  company  called  [
                   ].  On  4  January  2017,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application.  Two reasons were given for the decision.

 2. Firstly, the respondent considered that the appellant's marriage to  Mr
    Hriban was a marriage of convenience and  therefore  fell  outside  the
    definition of family  member  provided  for  in  Regulation  2  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The  respondent
    relied on records of  a  so-called  "pastoral  visit"  to  the  claimed
    matrimonial  home  in  [                             ]   conducted   by
    Immigration Officers on 16 August 2011.  Mr Hriban was not there at the
    time of the visit and, after interviewing the appellant and telephoning
    Mr Hriban,  the  officers  concluded  that  the  relationship  was  not
    genuine.

 3. Secondly, the respondent considered the appellant had failed to provide
    sufficient evidence to demonstrate that  Mr  Hriban  was  a  "qualified
    person" so as to fall within the definition of 'worker' in Regulation 6
    of the EEA Regulations.

 4. The appellant appealed and requested that her appeal be decided on  the
    papers.  The First-tier Tribunal upheld the decision of the  respondent
    on both points.  The appellant applied for permission to appeal raising
    three grounds.

 5. Ground 1 argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  misdirected
    himself by placing the burden of proof of showing the marriage was  not
    one of convenience on the appellant.  Ground 2 argued  that  the  judge
    had erred by drawing an adverse inference from the fact  the  appellant
    requested a paper hearing.  Ground 3 effectively argued the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not engaged fully with  the  evidence  regarding  Mr
    Hriban's employment.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in relation to the first ground  but  it  was  left  open
    whether permission was granted on all grounds  and  I  therefore  heard
    submissions on all three.

 6. Mr Ume-Ezeoke who appeared  for  the  appellant  relied  on  all  three
    grounds.  He submitted that paragraphs 9 and 10 of the decision contain
    a correct exposition of the approach to be applied but he  argued  that
    at paragraph 16 the judge did not follow that approach.  In relation to
    the other grounds his  submissions  essentially  followed  the  written
    grounds seeking permission to appeal.

 7. Ms Everett for the respondent resisted all of those submissions  and  I
    do not need to set out what she said here.  Having carefully  read  the
    decision and considered the submissions made to  me  I  have  concluded
    that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law and  shall  stand.   The  appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.  My reasons are as follows.

 8. In Sadovska & Another v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 54 the Supreme Court upheld an appeal against the  decision
    in which the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  held  that  the  burden  of
    proof was on the appellant to establish that  their  proposed  marriage
    was not a marriage of convenience.  The Supreme  Court  made  it  clear
    that the burden of establishing that the proposed marriage was  one  of
    convenience fell on the Secretary of State and remitted the case for  a
    full hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Supreme  Court  also
    explained that  the  objective  of  obtaining  a  right  of  entry  and
    residence must be the predominant purpose for the marriage to be one of
    convenience and the marriage could not be considered to be  a  marriage
    of convenience simply because it brought an immigration advantage.

 9. In this case the judge did not refer  to  the  case  of  Sadovska.   He
    relied on the case which is also  relied  on  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  namely  Papajorgji  (EEA
    spouse - marriage of convenience) [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC),  in  which  the
    Upper Tribunal held that there was  no  burden  at  the  outset  of  an
    application on a claimant to demonstrate that  a  marriage  was  not  a
    marriage  of  convenience.   The  earlier  case  of  IS  (marriages  of
    convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31 only established that there was  an
    evidential burden  on  the  claimant  to  address  evidence  justifying
    reasonable suspicion that the marriage had been entered  into  for  the
    predominant purpose of securing residence rights.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    made it clear throughout the decision that they did  not  accept  there
    was a burden as such on the appellant and at paragraph 39 stated:

         "In summary our understanding is that where the issue is raised  in
         an appeal the question for the judge will therefore be in the light
         of  the  totality  of  the  information  before  me  including  the
         assessment of the claimant's answers and any  information  provided
         am I satisfied that it is more probable than not this is a marriage
         of convenience?"

10. The grounds draw attention to the judge's self direction  in  paragraph
    10 of his decision.  In that paragraph, he cited IS  as  authority  for
    the proposition that the burden of proving that a marriage is  not  one
    of convenience lies on the appellant.  I note that permission to appeal
    was granted because, in the view of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  it
    was arguable there was an error of law as to the nature  and  incidence
    of  the  burden  of  proof  concerning  the  issue  of  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

11. However, in my judgment, paragraph  10  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision has been misconstrued.  If IS had been cited as authority  for
    the proposition that the burden of proving that the  marriage  was  not
    one of convenience rested on the appellant throughout then  this  would
    have been a clear misdirection in law.   However,  a  full  reading  of
    paragraphs 9 and 10 of the decision shows that the First-tier  Tribunal
    clearly understood there was no burden at the outset of an  application
    on  a  claimant  to  demonstrate  that  a  marriage  was  not  one   of
    convenience.  IS established only that there is an evidential burden on
    the claimant to address evidence justifying reasonable  suspicion  that
    the marriage had been entered  into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of
    securing residence rights.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  quoted  from
    Papajorgji in relying on IS in paragraph 10 of his decision.  The judge
    reminded himself that not every applicant  needed  to  prove  that  her
    marriage was not one of convenience and there was only a need to do  so
    where there were factors which supported suspicions for  believing  the
    marriage to be one of convenience.  I did not understand Mr  Ume-Ezeoke
    to disagree with this analysis.

12. In paragraph 13 the judge explained that  the  respondent  had  adduced
    sufficient evidence to discharge  the  evidential  burden  on  her  for
    believing that the marriage was one of convenience.  In other words the
    discrepant answers provided at the interview together with the  absence
    of physical evidence of a cohabiting couple raised reasonable suspicion
    that the marriage, when it was entered into, was  one  of  convenience.
    At that point, there was an  evidential  burden  on  the  appellant  to
    address the evidence giving rise to reasonable suspicion and the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled to  consider  that  she  had
    failed to address the issues  adequately  and  this  was  explained  in
    paragraph 16 of the decision.  I do not agree with Mr  Ume-Ezeoke  that
    paragraph 16 can be read  as  meaning  the  judge  improperly  directed
    himself that the burden was on the appellant.

13. I do not propose to spend much time on the second  and  third  grounds.
    In short, I would say  I  disagree  that  the  judge  drew  an  adverse
    inference from  the  fact  the  appellant  chose  to  have  her  appeal
    determined on the papers.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  pointed  out
    that this deprived her of the opportunity of producing further evidence
    but he did not carry that over into an adverse inference.  There was no
    requirement on him to adjourn the case.  Any error with regard  to  the
    judge's consideration of the evidence purporting to show that Mr Hriban
    was exercising treaty rights is immaterial because there was  no  error
    in the primary finding that the marriage was one of convenience when it
    was entered into.

14. For these reasons I uphold the First-tier Tribunal decision and dismiss
    the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
the appeal is confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 5 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom

