
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00705/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2017                           |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             mrs immacon marquez
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Krushner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr J Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 7 February 2017, at Taylor  House,  the  appellant  appeared  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Coll  to  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision refusing to issue her with a residence card in recognition  of
    a right to reside in the United Kingdom  as  the  family  member  of  a
    qualified person.  The  judge's  decision,  in  which  the  appeal  was
    dismissed, was promulgated on 27 February 2017.

2.   The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Landes  on  6  September  2017.   The  judge  makes
    various points in the grant, paragraph 2 of which reads:

         "It is arguable as set out at paragraph 2 grounds  that  the  judge
         erred so far as the burden  of  proof  was  concerned.   The  judge
         placed the burden on the appellant at [2]  and  her  expression  at
         [79]  "establishing  that  the  marriage  is  not  a  marriage   of
         convenience" also suggests that she considered that the burden  was
         on the appellant.  I recognise that at  [90]  the  judge  made  the
         positive finding that this was a marriage of convenience and made a
         number of significant credibility findings  against  the  appellant
         and sponsor.  However if, as I find, it is arguable that the  judge
         applied the wrong burden of proof, I consider it must  be  arguable
         that the error was a material one in the sense it may have affected
         the result."

3.   At paragraph 2 of the decision under challenge Judge  Coll  writes  the
    following:

         "As to this decision, Section 86 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") provides that I must allow the
         appeal insofar as I think that the decision  against  which  it  is
         brought  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  (including   the
         Immigration Rules) or that a discretion  exercised  in  making  the
         decision should have been exercised differently.   I  may  consider
         evidence  about  any  matter  which  I  consider  relevant  to  the
         substance of the decision, including evidence concerning  a  matter
         arising after the date of the  decision.   The  onus  of  proof  in
         establishing these matters lies upon the appellant.   The  standard
         of proof is that of the balance of probabilities, as it is also for
         any related Human Rights issues, save  in  relation  to  issues  of
         removal, where it is that of reasonable likelihood  or  real  risk:
         Box [2002] UKIAT 02212."


4.   It is not disputed before the Upper Tribunal that that legal  direction
    is wrong in law.  It is wrong  for  two  prime  reasons.   Firstly,  as
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in ZH Afghanistan [2009] EWCA Civ 1061
    EU matters are  governed  by  the  2006  Regulations  and  not  by  the
    Immigration Rules.  This is a European matter.

5.   The second point, as we were reminded by Blake J, is  in  the  case  of
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse: marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38.
     Although neither the Directive nor the  Regulations  define  it  as  a
    matter of ordinary parlance and past experiences of the UK  Immigration
    Rules and case law, a marriage of convenience  in  this  context  is  a
    marriage contracted  for  the  sole  or  decisive  purpose  of  gaining
    admission to the host state.  A  durable  marriage  with  children  and
    cohabitation is quite inconsistent with such  a  definition.   In  Rosa
    [2016] EWCA Civ 14, it was held that the legal burden of  proving  this
    issue was upon the Secretary of State.  It was required to  prove  that
    an otherwise valid marriage was a marriage  of  convenience  so  as  to
    justify the refusal of a residence card under the EEA Regulations.  The
    legal burden of proof in relation to a marriage lay on the Secretary of
    State but if she adduced sufficient evidence capable of pointing to the
    conclusion that the marriage was  one  of  convenience  the  evidential
    burden shifted to the applicant.  It is  therefore  not  as  simple  as
    saying that in paragraph 2 the judge set out the wrong burden of  proof
    and that is the end of the matter.

6.   Although I accept that paragraph 2 does suggest an error of law, as  it
    is quite clearly on the face of it a 'cut and paste' paragraph,  it  is
    necessary to read  the  decision  as  a  whole  to  establish  whether,
    notwithstanding the content of paragraph 2, the approach adopted by the
    judge does indicate that  the  judge  in  fact  followed  the  guidance
    supported by the Court of Appeal in Rosa.  The starting point therefore
    has to be the impugned decision, the decision under challenge to refuse
    to issue the appellant with a residence card.  The  judge  was  clearly
    aware of that decision and makes specific  reference  to  it.   If  one
    reads the reasons for refusal it is clear that  in  that  document  the
    Secretary of State does  give  sufficient  reasoning  and  evidence  to
    discharge the evidential burden.  There is reference to  the  visit  by
    the  Immigration  Officer,  curtailment  of  leave  as  a  result,  and
    subsequent notice of marriage.  There is reference to the EEA  national
    sponsor being very vague in answers that he  gave  approximately  about
    the date of the marriage and it was  concluded  by  the  decision-maker
    that it was abundantly clear from the details outlined in  the  reasons
    for refusal that the appellant  herself  had  fatally  and  irreparably
    damaged the credibility of her claim to be in  a  genuine  relationship
    with the EEA national.

7.   So far as the legal burden lay upon the  Secretary  of  State,  it  was
    clear the evidence  before  the  judge  showed  that  she  had  adduced
    evidence capable of pointing to a conclusion that the marriage was  one
    of convenience.  The burden therefore passed to the  appellant  and  if
    one reads the decision under challenge, as  Mr  Krushner  submitted  in
    arguing an error of law has been made was required,  the  bulk  of  the
    documents bar the introductory paragraphs  really  do  focus  upon  the
    evidence that was given by the appellant and her team in support of the
    appeal.   There  is  mention  of  nine  separate  elements  within  the
    determination that troubled the judge.  The  conclusion  of  the  judge
    having looked at that evidence is that the evidence of both the husband
    and wife, the  appellant  and  the  EEA  national  was  permeated  with
    'inconsistency and implausibility'.  In fact, at paragraph 65 the judge
    states, "save only for the fact  that  as  evidenced  by  the  marriage
    certificate whose authenticity is  not  specifically  challenged,  they
    went through a ceremony of marriage I accept none of their evidence".

8.   The reasons start at paragraph 67, the first of which is 67 to 69,  the
    second at paragraphs 70 to 71, the third reason at paragraphs 72 to 77,
    the fourth reason at 78 to 79, the fifth reason in paragraph 80  alone,
    the sixth reason  in  paragraphs  81  to  83,  the  seventy  reason  in
    paragraphs 84 to 88, the eighth reason in paragraph 89,  the  ninth  in
    paragraphs 92 and 93, leading to the conclusion in 94.  In paragraph 90
    the judge did find based on the lack of credibility, in  particular  of
    the wife and husband and the lack of substantiating evidence, that this
    is a marriage of convenience.  The judge clearly did not accept on  the
    basis  of  the  information  made  available  that  the  appellant  had
    discharged the evidential burden that had shifted to her following  the
    reasons for refusal.

9.   In paragraph 94 the judge wrote as follows:

         "In conclusion, I find, on the  overwhelming  evidence  before  me,
         that this is a marriage of convenience.  The evidence points  to  a
         friendship between the wife and the mother-in-law and  an  amicable
         relationship between the wife and the husband such  that  he  could
         have been willing to enter into the marriage to assist  his  mother
         and thereby the wife.  Everything (lack of photographic records  of
         the relationship, lack of knowledge  and  use  of  the  joint  bank
         account, lack of knowledge of the husband about  the  wedding  date
         and the wife's previous accommodation,  the  bedroom  arrangements,
         and the inconsistencies between the wife and the husband  in  their
         testimony) points to a marriage of convenience."


10.  In relation to specific points that have been  raised  by  Mr  Krushner
    this morning I deal with those by making  a  finding  of  fact  in  the
    following terms.   Firstly,  that  the  judge  clearly  considered  the
    evidence that had been made  available  with  the  required  degree  of
    anxious scrutiny and, secondly,  that  the  judge  has  given  adequate
    reasons in support of the findings made.  I do not  find  it  has  been
    made out that there is any element of irrationality  or  perversity  in
    the judge's conclusions.  As a result of there having been the required
    degree of anxious scrutiny and adequate reasons, the weight to be given
    to the evidence was a matter for the judge.  On the submissions made it
    has not been made out that the weight given by the judge to points,  in
    particular the visit by the Immigration Officer, has fallen outside the
    range of that the judge was  entitled  to  give  when  considering  the
    evidence as a whole.

11.  It has been submitted that some of the findings of  the  judge  may  be
    classed as being speculative when perhaps speaking of  an  individuals'
    reactions to various points.  There may be some merit in Mr  Krushner's
    submissions so far as some of those points are concerned but I  do  not
    accept that he has established that even if that amounts to error  that
    it amounts to material  error  impacting  upon  the  conclusions,  when
    considering the evidence as  a  whole.   Had  it  been  found  that  Mr
    Krushner's submissions in relation to the primary point relating to the
    application of the burden of proof had been made out, or was  arguable,
    then a different conclusion may have been reached.  I do not accept  it
    has been made out before me that when one  reads  this  decision  as  a
    whole the judge did misdirect herself in law in a  manner  material  to
    the decision to find this is a marriage of convenience and therefore to
    dismiss the appeal.  For that reason, I find no  arguable  legal  error
    made out material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  which  shall
    therefore stand.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision. The determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
