
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/00736/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 October 2017                          | On 16 October 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                             mr marcus sarkodie
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Awal, Counsel instructed by Mahmood & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lodge,  which  bears
    the date 13 March 2016, although the  date  of  promulgation  does  not
    appearing on the face of the copy in the  file.   The  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Ghana, born on 16 May 1986, who challenges  the  refusal  of
    the Secretary of  State  to  provide  him  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is
    unfortunate the appeal before Judge Lodge was  decided  on  the  papers
    with  no  representation  either  from  the  appellant  or   from   the
    respondent.

2.   Central to the judge's determination was a factual matter,  namely  the
    validity of the claimed proxy-marriage  between  the  appellant  and  a
    Dutch national.  It is a trite principle of private  international  law
    the lawfulness of certain events, such as marriage, is to be judged  by
    the law  of  the  jurisdiction  where  the  event  takes  place.   That
    uncontentious statement was affirmed recently in the appeal  of  Albert
    Awuku v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ  178
    which  in  paragraph  17  makes  direct  reference  to  the  lex   loci
    celebrationis concerning the local law where a marriage is  celebrated.



3.   The judge made findings which on the  face  of  the  determination  are
    unimpeachable  and  those  findings  were  based   upon   the   judge's
    understanding of Ghanaian law.  For convenience I read  them  into  the
    record:

         "8.  I have before me a Ghanaian marriage certificate which  states
             that the Appellant was married to his EEA national  spouse  in
             Ghana on 4th  April  2013.   Looking  at  Ghanaian  law  under
             Section 3(1) PNDC (Provisional National Defence  Council)  Law
             112 Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985 the
             registration of a marriage must  be  accompanied  by  a  valid
             statutory declaration and both parties to the marriage must be
             either Ghanaian citizens or must demonstrate their parents are
             or were Ghanaian citizens.


         9.   The Appellant has supplied a copy  of  his  passport  and  his
             birth certificate.  I have not, however,  been  supplied  with
             evidence that  his  partner  is  a  Ghanaian  or  of  Ghanaian
             descent.   All  I  have  is  a  provisional  licence  and  its
             counterpart.  I am satisfied on the evidence the Appellant has
             not established that his  EEA  spouse  is  either  a  Ghanaian
             national or that she has familial links to Ghana.


         10.  Moving on, the Appellant states that he was represented at the
             customary marriage by his father Joseph Kwado Annor.  I have a
             birth  certificate  showing  that   individual   to   be   the
             Appellant's father.  The  EEA  spouse  was  represented  by  a
             friend Kwaku Achemapong.   She  is  no  relation  to  the  EEA
             Sponsor and accordingly under Ghanaian law unable to represent
             the Appellant's spouse.


         11.  The marriage certificate has been stamped by a person claiming
             to be a registrar.  The Respondent contends that  no  evidence
             has been produced to confirm that George Kom is  a  registrar.
             In fact there is a document that purports to be a  High  Court
             document confirming George Kom is a registrar.   I  have  only
             copies of the document and not the original.  I am  not  in  a
             position to verify the document's legitimacy.  However on  the
             basis that I find the  Sponsor  has  not  established  she  is
             Ghanaian and that her friend Kwaku Achemapong is not  entitled
             to represent her I find that I cannot be  satisfied  that  the
             claimed customary marriage is in accordance with Ghanaian law.
              It is therefore necessary for  me  to  consider  whether  the
             marriage stamp [sic] has been signed and  properly  authorised
             by the registrar."


     I suspect that is a typographical mistake  as  it  should  be  marriage
    certificate, not marriage stamp.

4.   Mr Tarlow, who acts for the Secretary of State, tells me he unaware  of
    what material may have been before the judge which led him to summarise
    Ghanaian law in the way he did.  When I asked Mr Awal what material the
    appellant had placed before the First-tier Tribunal, he  conceded  that
    no expert evidence had been  submitted  concerning  Ghanaian  customary
    law.

5.   The fallback position which Mr Awal eventually  adopted  was  that  the
    copy marriage certificate should be treated as valid  and  conclusively
    determinative of the issue of validity under local law.  Because it  is
    not an original, nor a duly authenticated copy  of  the  original,  its
    claimed content cannot be dispositive of this appeal.  Nonetheless, the
    approach of the judge in the court below did amount to a material error
    of law because the judge's understanding of Ghanaian customary law  was
    apparently not based on evidence before the Tribunal but  derived  from
    some other, unspecified, source.

6.   It may be that the copy marriage certificate is valid, and that a  duly
    authenticated version might prove dispositive of the matter in dispute.
    I cannot make that determination in the  absence  of  evidence  of,  or
    agreement between the parties as to, Ghanaian customary.    The  matter
    needs to be set aside and remitted in its totality for  it  to  be  re-
    heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   The second issue which the judge had to determine, in the  alternative,
    was whether there was a durable relationship.  Contrary to a misleading
    paragraph in Mr Awal's skeleton argument, the judge below did not  find
    that the couple were living together or cohabiting.   He  merely  found
    that they were both living at the same address. He concluded  that  the
    existence of a durable relationship had not been proved.

8.   These two issues cannot sensibly be separated. It would  be  artificial
    to preserve certain facts and not  others.  The  entire  appeal  to  be
    decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

   1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
      set aside.

   2) The matter is remitted to be heard afresh by a judge other than First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Lodge.

   3) No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Mark Hill QC               Date         13 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
