
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00019/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th January 2018                      |On 07th February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                MANGAL SINGH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  India  seeking  to  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent made on 15th  December  2015  to  refuse  to
    issue an EEA residence card under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   It was  the  case  of  the  appellant  that  he  met  the  criteria  of
    Regulation 10(5)(a) seeking the grant of such a  certificate  upon  his
    divorce from his wife who was an EEA national.

3.   The immigration history of the appellant is somewhat  complex,  as  can
    be seen from the reasons for refusal letter.  Essentially  it  was  the
    position of the respondent in  that  decision  that  the  marriage  was
    undertaken purely to facilitate the application to remain.  It was  the
    view of the caseworker that it was a marriage  of  convenience  and  on
    that basis the application which had been made on  9th  June  2015  was
    refused.

4.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard  on  9th  March
    2017 and was dismissed.

5.    The  Judge  dismissed  the  suggestion  that  it  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience, finding that it had indeed lasted  three  years  and  that
    appellant and his ex-wife had resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at
    least one year during the marriage.  It was accepted on  the  basis  of
    documents provided that the appellant was, at the date of decision,  in
    employment, self-employment or economically self-sufficient.

6.   The Judge did not find, however, that there was any  evidence  that  at
    the time of the divorce his ex-wife was exercising treaty rights and on
    that basis the appeal was dismissed.

7.   Challenge has been made to that  decision,  essentially  on  the  basis
    that that particular ingredient was never in  issue  and  that  it  was
    wrong of the Judge to have placed it in issue, and  secondly  that  the
    Judge failed to acknowledge the fact that it would have been easier for
    the respondent to have obtained  such  evidence  from  HMRC  given  the
    practical difficulties faced by the appellant in  obtaining  employment
    documents from his wife.  It is common ground that  the  appellant  has
    indeed obtained from HMRC the necessary evidence but that had not  been
    obtained at the time of the decision.   Permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted, and on that basis the matter  comes  before
    me to determine that issue.  Mr Khan,  who  represents  the  appellant,
    represented him at the hearing before Judge Howard.

8.   The refusal letter is a detailed one that is focused  essentially  upon
    the issue of whether or not the marriage is one of convenience.

9.   A significant passage in that decision was as follows:-


         "Despite both you and Bozena admitting to not living together since
         at least May 2009, you have  provided  joint  bank  statements  and
         joint Council Tax letters in order to deceive the  Department  into
         believing that you  have  resided  with  Bozena,  after  2009.   It
         appears that once you married Bozena in India, in  2009,  you  have
         ceased to live with each other".


    Though the Judge seems to have found as a fact that the  appellant  and
    the sponsor had lived  together  for  the  requisite  year  it  is  not
    entirely  clear  whether  the  Judge  applied  consideration  to   that
    particular passage.  However, no counter  appeal  has  been  lodged  in
    relation to that aspect.


10.  In any event the documents submitted by the appellant are  noted,  some
    referring to Bozena but the majority referring to the  appellant.   The
    Respondent's decision is altogether silent upon the issue as to whether
    or not Bozena was in fact exercising treaty rights at the time  of  the
    divorce.

11.  Mr Khan submits  that  because  the  decision  was  silent  it  was  an
    implicit acceptance of that ingredient.  For my part  I  find  that  to
    lack merit but more  particularly  that  was  an  argument,  which  was
    advanced before the Judge and the Judge also rejected that argument  at
    paragraph 21 in the following terms:-


         "The evidence of his ex-wife exercising Treaty rights at  the  time
         of the divorce is absent.  In submissions Mr Khan  argued  that  it
         was accepted by the respondent that this was the  case.   I  cannot
         find such a concession in the refusal letter".


12.  Part of  the  difficulties  of  course  for  the  Judge  was  that  the
    respondent was unrepresented at that hearing.  I note nothing, however,
    by way  of  correspondence  between  those  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and the respondent on that issue.

13.   The burden is upon the appellant to produce the  evidence  in  support
    of his claim.  That evidence may have come from documents  supplied  by
    his ex-wife or indeed from statements  from  HMRC.   It  is  abundantly
    clear that in this case it was the appellant, through  his  solicitors,
    who obtained confirmation from HMRC evidencing his ex-wife's  continued
    income since 2012.   No  reason  had  been  advanced  as  to  why  that
    application to HMRC could not have been made earlier on behalf  of  the
    appellant.  There is no indication as to  what  difficulties,  if  any,
    were  placed  in  the  position  of  the  appellant  in   getting   the
    information.

14.  It is generally accepted that, if  for  various  reasons  an  appellant
    faces difficulties in obtaining the  necessary  information,  the  good
    offices of the respondent can be sought to approach HMRC to help obtain
    that evidence.  As I have indicated there is no  suggestion  that  that
    was any request made to  the  respondent  in  this  case  nor  has  any
    difficulty in obtaining the evidence been mentioned to  the  respondent
    or indeed  to  the  Judge  at  the  hearing.   There  is  no  automatic
    obligation upon the respondent to  obtain  that  evidence.   In  common
    sense it is  for  the  appellant  at  the  very  least  to  notify  the
    respondent of the difficulties and request some assistance but that was
    not done either before the hearing nor indeed were any difficulties  in
    obtaining that evidence made clear to the Judge.

15.  In all the circumstances I do not find there to be any error of law  in
    the approach taken by the Judge.  It was for the appellant  to  produce
    that evidence to seek assistance in order to do  so  should  that  have
    been required.

16.  Mr  Khan  invites  me  to  adjourn  the  hearing  in  order  for  those
    instructing him to correspond with the respondent given the details  of
    the HMRC to see if the matter can be resolved.  I see no  proper  basis
    to adjourn this hearing.  An adjournment is normally for the purpose of
    clarifying an issue that is relevant to the outcome of the appeal.   It
    is not necessary in this case as I have  concluded  that  there  is  no
    error of law in the determination of the Judge.

17.  The appellant's solicitors now armed with the financial details can  of
    course raise that matter with  the  respondent  in  the  light  of  the
    decision that has been made and the determination  upon.  It  does  not
    require any further involvement with this Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

18.  The appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    original decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  upheld,  namely
    that the appellant's appeal in connection with the refusal  of  an  EEA
    certificate is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 5th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
