
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00114/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12 January 2018                       |On 21 February 2018                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                             Mr Uktam Nuritdinov
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Taroni of Counsel, instructed by Richmond
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan born on 29 December 1989.   On
    6 May 2015 the appellant made an application for a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the UK  under  European  Community
    law as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

 2. The appellant married the sponsor, Viktorija  Mudosaite,  a  Lithuanian
    national born on 15 March 1992, on 26 September 2013 in  the  UK.   The
    appellant was issued with a residence card on the basis of his marriage
    to the sponsor which was valid from 20 January 2014  until  20  January
    2019.   The  residence  card  took  the  form  of  a  vignette  in  the
    appellant's previous passport.  On 6 May 2015  the  appellant  made  an
    application for a further residence card on the same  basis,  i.e.  his
    marriage to the sponsor.  The application was made within the  validity
    period of the previous residence card because of the expiry and need to
    renew his passport on which it was documented.

    The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. On 15 December 2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  issue  the
    appellant with a residence card. The appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 26 April 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  M
    A Khan dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The Tribunal found  that  the
    appellant had failed to provide good reasons for his failure to  attend
    two interviews, on 23 October 2015 and 26 November 2015.  The  Tribunal
    found that the appellant had entered into  a  marriage  of  convenience
    with an EEA national in order to obtain a residence card under the  EEA
    Regulations 2006.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and on 6 November 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ford granted the appellant permission to appeal.

    The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6. The grounds for permission to appeal in brief set out that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge applied  the  wrong  provision  because  Regulation
    20(b) does not apply to the appellant and that  there  is  in  fact  no
    Regulation 20(b) under the EEA Regulations.  It is submitted that  this
    provision applies only to applications in relation to derivative rights
    of residence, not applicable to a spouse.  The second ground of  appeal
    sets out that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  reasons  for  not
    attending the interview, which was due to a debilitating eye condition,
    and failed to apply the correct  test  in  accordance  with  Regulation
    22(4) of the EEA Regulations.  A third ground of  appeal  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider the issue of  marriage  of
    convenience appropriately and failed to consider the evidence that  the
    appellant was  previously  granted  a  residence  card,  the  appellant
    attended the hearing with his  sponsor,  they  gave  mostly  consistent
    answers in examination, and that the relationship continued from 2013.

 7. At the  hearing  the  appellant's  representative  indicated  that  the
    appellant was no longer relying on the ground of appeal that Regulation
    20B was incorrectly considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  oral
    submissions Mrs Taroni relied upon her  skeleton  argument,  which  she
    amplified in the course of the hearing.  She submitted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had misdirected himself for the following reasons:

 i) The First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself as to the  burden  of
    proof in allegations  of  marriage  of  convenience  and  examined  the
    durability of  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor's  relationship.   She
    submitted that, as set out in the case  of  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
    marriage of convenience) Greece  [2012]  UKUT  00038  (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal made it clear that there is no burden on the  claimant  in  an
    application for a residence document to establish that they are  not  a
    party to a  marriage  of  convenience  unless  the  circumstances  give
    reasonable grounds for suspecting that this was the case.

ii) There is no requirement for any corroborating evidence with  regard  to
    the appellant and the sponsor's marriage.  Family members do  not  need
    to satisfy the conditions in Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations.  The
    spouse of an EEA national is not required to prove he is in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national.  The judge erred by considering  the
    durability of the relationship.

iii) The lack of joint  utility  bills  or  bank  statements  is  neither  a
    requirement for an application for  a  residence  card  as  the  family
    member of an EEA national nor indicative that the marriage was  entered
    into for the sole or  predominant  purpose  of  circumventing  domestic
    immigration laws.  Spouses are not even required to be cohabiting to be
    family members in accordance with the judgment in C-267/83 -  Diatta  v
    Land Berlin.

iv) In this case it was only the subsistence of the relationship  that  was
    erroneously disputed and not the cohabitation.  There is no requirement
    for specified evidence and adverse inferences cannot be drawn from  its
    absence.  The dispute as to the subsistence  of  the  relationship  was
    raised on the basis of nothing other than the absence of  documents  in
    the joint names of the appellant and the sponsor despite the fact  that
    documents  were  submitted  confirming  that  they  continue  to   live
    together.

 8. It was submitted that if the  only  reason  for  the  refusal  was  the
    failure to attend the interviews the respondents  acted  in  breach  of
    Regulation  20(B)(5).   It  was  only  the  purported  failure  of  the
    appellant to submit  specified  evidence  indicating  his  marriage  or
    relationship  as  subsisting  that  was  the  sole  reason  to   invoke
    Regulation 20B and seek verification of his eligibility.  The appellant
    had submitted a valid marriage certificate and  documents  proving  his
    cohabiting with the sponsor.  The appellant had previously been  issued
    with a residence card on the basis of his marriage  to  the  sponsor  a
    little more than a year before the present application.  The  appellant
    and the sponsor both speak Russian and are of similar ages.   Documents
    in joint names would have added nothing to his application and are  not
    required  by  law.   His  invitation  to  attend  an  interview   under
    Regulation 20B was  systematic  and  thus  unlawful.   The  reason  for
    refusal disclosed no reasonable grounds for suspecting the  appellant's
    marriage is one of  convenience  and  therefore  the  respondent  acted
    unlawfully in refusing to issue the residence card.  The judge did  not
    consider whether or not this  evidence  was  reasonable  and  therefore
    erred in consideration of the appellant's case  applying  an  incorrect
    burden of proof as in the absence of a reasonable suspicion  there  was
    not an evidential burden on the appellant to address those suspicions.

 9. With regard to Regulation 20B non-attendance at the interviews does not
    discharge the burden on the respondent to demonstrate  that  there  are
    reasonable suspicions that the marriage was one of convenience.  If the
    respondent has not satisfied the evidential/initial burden  that  there
    are suspicions that this was a marriage of convenience then 20B is  not
    relevant.   The  judge  failed  to  consider  appropriately  and  apply
    Regulation 20B(5) and (6).

10. Mrs Taroni submitted that the judge failed  to  adequately  assess  the
    evidence regarding the failure of  the  appellant  to  attend  the  two
    interviews.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  provided  no
    evidence that he was unfit to  attend  the  two  interviews.   This  is
    irrational on the basis of the evidence that was before the judge.  The
    January 2016 medical evidence confirmed  his  diagnosis  with  vitreous
    floaters.  Evidence was submitted in October 2015 of a referral for  an
    appointment and therefore this was corroborative that he was  suffering
    from that condition in October and  November.   In  any  event,  it  is
    submitted that the invitations to the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  to
    attend interviews were in breach of Regulation 20B(5) and (6)  and  the
    decision should not have been solely  dependent  on  their  failure  to
    attend the interview even in the absence of good reasons.

11. The judge failed to consider and reach  conclusions  on  the  issue  of
    whether the marriage was one of convenience.  It is submitted that  the
    judge failed to consider that the respondent's grounds  for  suspecting
    that the appellant and the sponsor's marriage was  one  of  convenience
    were unreasonable.  No further grounds were raised at the  hearing  and
    no evidence was adduced to support the suspicion.  The  judge  made  no
    positive findings but merely tested the  appellant  and  the  sponsor's
    evidence.  The judge failed to consider the length of the appellant and
    sponsor's marriage and the fact that it had previously been  recognised
    as genuine.  The application for the residence  card  from  20  January
    2014 following his marriage to the sponsor was made prior to the expiry
    of his leave as a Tier 4 Student, which was granted until  28  February
    2015.  It was evident that he applied for his initial residence card by
    reason of his marriage to the  sponsor,  not  to  regularise  his  stay
    because that was not required at that time.

12. It was submitted that the appellant  and  the  sponsor's  evidence  was
    entirely consistent as is  evident  from  the  Record  of  Proceedings.
    Their evidence regarding the mundane details of the  day  was  entirely
    consistent.  The judge  has  not  set  out  where  their  evidence  was
    inconsistent and has not referred to any  specific  findings  on  where
    their evidence diverged.

13. Mr Walker acknowledged that the appellant had been in contact with  the
    Home Office and had given reasons and evidence  that  he  had  attended
    hospital as to why he was unable to attend the interviews.  He accepted
    that this validated why he did  not  attend.   He  accepted  that  this
    amounted to an error of  law  by  the  judge  in  failing  to  consider
    properly that evidence.  He accepted that the utility bills showed  the
    name of both the appellant and the sponsor at  both  of  the  addresses
    that they had  cohabited  in.   Mr  Walker  conceded  that  there  were
    material errors of law by the judge in this case.

14. In light of the concession by the Home Office's representative I do not
    intend to go through in any  detail  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than to indicate that I accept Mrs Taroni's  submissions
    that the judge erred in the approach to this appeal overall.  The judge
    did not consider adequately  the  evidence  that  was  before  him  and
    proceeded erroneously on the basis that the evidence was sufficient  to
    give rise to a suspicion  that  this  was  a  marriage  of  convenience
    without considering the EEA Regulations and what the requirements  were
    for the appellant when making the application.  This then  led  to  the
    further error in considering Regulation 20B and its application in this
    case. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a  material
    error of law. I set aside that decision pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

    Re-making the decision

15. I proceeded to remake the decision on the papers  before  me.   In  the
    bundle of documents submitted with the  appellant's  application  there
    are a number of documents that adequately  demonstrate  that  both  the
    appellant and the sponsor lived together at [ ]  Great  Cambridge  Road
    from 2013 to 2014.  Some of those documents were  in  joint  names  and
    some were in single names but demonstrating they were  both  living  at
    that address.  There are then documents  in  joint  names  showing  the
    appellant and the sponsor residing at [ ] Mare Street.  The sole reason
    that the respondent raised a  suspicion  that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor were not in a subsisting  relationship  was  a  lack  of  joint
    documents.  The appellant was not required to  provide  such  evidence,
    however, the evidence was provided set out both long-term  cohabitation
    from 2013 and that that cohabitation continued when both parties  moved
    residency to a new address and there were further  documents  in  joint
    names at the new address.  Therefore it is clear that  the  appellant's
    marriage was not a marriage of convenience.

16. I accept the submission that if the marriage is not one of  convenience
    Regulation 20B, i.e. verification that the right is genuine,  does  not
    arise.  In any event, in this case, as conceded  by  the  Home  Office,
    good reasons were given  for  failure  to  attend  the  interviews  and
    therefore Regulation  20B(4)  does  not  apply  so  as  to  enable  the
    Secretary of State to draw factual  inferences  about  the  appellant's
    entitlement to a right of residence.

17. The appeal of  the  appellant  against  the  respondent's  decision  is
    allowed

    Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 13 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
