


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00052/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 27th September 2017                   |On: 28th September 2017          |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     A U
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmad, Counsel instructed by United Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1988.   He appeals with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge JWH  Law)  to
    dismiss his appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant
    him with a residence permit under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ('the Regs').


 2. The reason that the Respondent gave for refusing to issue  a  residence
    permit is set out in her letter dated  the  10th  December  2015  ('the
    refusal letter'). The Respondent noted that the Appellant is married to
    an EEA (Latvian) national [AZ].  She noted that he had previously  made
    an application for permission to reside as [AZ]'s spouse. The  two  had
    been  interviewed  in  connection  with  that  application   but   upon
    consideration of the answers provided at  interview  the  Secretary  of
    State was satisfied that this was a marriage  of  convenience  and  the
    application was accordingly refused, by way of letter served on the 3rd
    December 2014. Although there  was  a  right  of  appeal  against  that
    decision the Appellant did not avail himself of  that  opportunity.  He
    instead made a new application. A further  interview  took  place.  The
    Secretary of State maintained her position that this was a marriage  of
    convenience and refused a permit. Again,  no  appeal  was  lodged.  The
    Appellant instead made a third application,  on  the  22nd  June  2015.
    The Secretary of State considered that the Appellant had submitted  the
    same material that he had previously relied upon, and that this was not
    sufficient to demonstrate that this was in fact a genuine marriage. The
    interviews  had  resulted  in  numerous   conflicting   responses   and
    demonstrated that the two had a lack  of  basic  knowledge  about  each
    other.


 3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal  in  May  2017  the
    Appellant and his wife both gave oral  evidence.    Having  heard  that
    evidence the Tribunal accepted that they lived together, and were in  a
    sexual relationship.   It accepted that they  had  been  able  to  give
    consistent answers to some of the questions that that had been asked at
    interview, and that the odd inconsistent answer is not  necessarily  an
    indicator of a sham. It accepted that [AZ] had  been  pregnant  in  the
    preceding year but had unfortunately lost the  baby.  However,  looking
    back at the answers that were given at the interviews the Tribunal  was
    driven to the conclusion that this was a marriage entered into for  the
    purpose of obtaining the Appellant permission to reside in the  UK:  it
    was, at its inception, a marriage of convenience. The fact that it  had
    later evolved into an actual relationship could not  change  that.  The
    Tribunal relied on the dicta to that effect  in  Rosa  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14.

 4. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in:

           a) Failed to give sufficient reasons for finding this  to  be  a
              marriage of convenience;


           b) Failing  to  take  into  account  the  "voluminous"  evidence
              produced on appeal of a close relationship;

           c)  Unreasonably  concluding  that  this  was  a   marriage   of
              convenience;

           d) Making errors of fact such that the reasoning was impaired.


      Discussion and Findings

 5. Under Regulation 7(1)(a) of the  Regs  a  spouse  of  a  qualified  EEA
    national is defined as a 'family member'.  Although  neither  Directive
    nor Regulations specifically exclude a  marriage  of  convenience  from
    that definition Article 35 of the Directive reads as follows:


      "Abuse of rights
        Member States may adopt the necessary measures to refuse, terminate
        or withdraw any right conferred by this Directive in  the  case  of
        abuse of rights or fraud, such as marriages  of  convenience.   Any
        such measure shall be proportionate and subject to  the  procedural
        safeguards provided for in Articles 30 and 31."

      Preamble 28 is as follows:

            "To guard against abuse of rights or  fraud,  notably  marriages
        of convenience or any other form of  relationships  contracted  for
        the sole purpose  of  enjoying  the  right  of  free  movement  and
        residence, Member States should have the possibility to  adopt  the
        necessary measures."



 6. It is clear from this that the Secretary of State would be entitled  to
    refuse to grant a residence permit to a  'spouse'  whose  marriage  had
    been contracted with the purpose of abusing the rights granted  by  the
    Directive.


 7. The question raised in this appeal  is  whether  the  findings  of  the
    Tribunal about the current state of [AU]'s relationship should have led
    the Tribunal to inevitably, or at least on balance, conclude that  this
    was a marriage contracted for genuine purposes.

 8. There was no dispute as to the approach to be taken. The Respondent had
    produced interview records from 2014 and 2015 which  demonstrated  that
    [AU] and [AZ]  had  given  markedly  inconsistent  answers  when  asked
    questions about their lives and their personal  history.  The  marriage
    itself had taken place  in  June  2014  and  the  first  interviews  in
    November of that year. Apart from documentary evidence that they  lived
    at the same  address  during  that  period,  the  interviews  were  the
    evidence closest in time  to  the  date  of  marriage.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal found, and this decision cannot sensibly be  challenged,  that
    the interview records  were  sufficient  to  discharge  the  evidential
    burden upon the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

 9. The Tribunal went on to properly direct itself  that  suspicion  having
    been aroused, the burden lay on the Appellant to establish that he  was
    entitled to benefit from the free movement rights that he asserted. The
    Tribunal carefully considered that evidence and made positive  findings
    of  fact  that  a)  this  is  currently  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship, and has been for at least the past year and  b)  that  it
    was not a genuine relationship at the time of the marriage. I asked  Mr
    Ahmad to take me  to  the  "voluminous"  evidence  said  to  have  been
    overlooked by the Tribunal. He acknowledged that this material  was  in
    the most part relatively recent. The only evidence dating from the time
    of the marriage was the interview records, and post  establishing  that
    the two lived at the  same  address.  There  were  no  statements  from
    friends or family, nor even  any  statements  from  the  two  witnesses
    themselves.  There was, in short, no evidence at all to  weigh  against
    the interview records.

10.  In  its  final  reckoning  the  Tribunal  looked  carefully   at   the
    discrepancies highlighted by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. It rejected the contention that they were all relevant, but
    found that some were so striking, and about matters so  fundamental  to
    the claimed relationship, that they could  not  be  reconciled  with  a
    finding that these two people were in a  genuine  relationship  at  the
    time of the interviews.

11. The Judge was, I find, quite right to draw a  distinction  between  the
    state of affairs at the date of the appeal before him, and the position
    at the date of marriage. He cites the judgement of Richards LJ in Rosa:
    "the focus in relation to a marriage of convenience should  be  on  the
    intention of the parties at the time the  marriage  was  entered  into,
    whereas the question of whether a marriage  is  'subsisting'  looks  to
    whether the marital relationship is a continuing one".   Although  this
    authority is not cited in the determination, that  is  consistent  with
    the position of the Upper Tribunal in  IS  (marriages  of  convenience)
    Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031:

        26. Mr. O'Callaghan suggested to us  that  a  marriage  that  was  a
            marriage of convenience at his inception might become a marriage
            that was not one of convenience in due course.  We do not  think
            that that issue strictly arises on the  facts  of  this  appeal,
            because the Immigration Judge was not  prepared  to  accept  the
            evidence of the relationship at any stage.  For the avoidance of
            doubt we  should  indicate  that  we  reject  Mr.  O'Callaghan's
            submission.  The relationship which gives  rise  to  any  rights
            under EU law and  the  Regulations  is  the  marriage,  formerly
            valid, and entered into at a specific time and place.  It is the
            ceremony and the act which count for these purposes  and  it  is
            the ceremony and the act which, in the circumstances  that  give
            rise to it, amount to  or  do  not  amount  to  a  "marriage  of
            convenience".  If the question had arisen on the facts  of  this
            case we  should  have  held  that  the  development  of  a  real
            relationship after the marriage  would  not  have  assisted  the
            appellant in his claim based on the marriage itself.


27. I am satisfied that the Tribunal in this  case  gave  consideration  to
    whether present circumstances could shed light on those that existed at
    the time of the marriage. I am satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  properly
    directed itself to the correct approach to such allegations, in respect
    of the  standard  and  burden  of  proof.  There  was  in  my  view  no
    irrationality  in  the  Tribunal  concluding  that  circumstances   had
    changed. Indeed, looking at the discrepancies  identified  -  going  to
    matters such as when the couple met, when their  relationship  started,
    when they started living together, when he proposed, whether there  was
    a wedding ring, what they  knew  about  each  other's  backgrounds  and
    whether she had adopted an Islamic name - were so fundamental  that  it
    would have been difficult for a  properly  directed  Tribunal  to  have
    found otherwise.




      Decisions


28. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and it is upheld.


29. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                   [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                 27th September 2017










