
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA 00920 2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2019                             |On 5 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  anais [m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a national of Rwanda against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to dismiss her appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse her a residence card as confirmation of her  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.

 2. Throughout these proceedings it has been her case that she is  entitled
    to such a residence card because she has resided in the United  Kingdom
    with her father for a continuous period of five years when he had  been
    exercising treaty rights.  The waters have been muddied  because  of  a
    change in  circumstances,  particularly  because  the  relevant  period
    included times when the claimant was a student and times when  she  was
    not a student but living in the  family  home,  and  it  is  not  clear
    exactly what the First-tier Tribunal Judge intended to consider.

 3. I have been helped very considerably by Mr Duffy who has assisted me by
    listening patiently as I have asked questions of the  appellant  in  an
    effort to distil the points that I thought important and  his  chipping
    in uninvited but exceedingly aptly to draw attention to relevant points
    on the way.

 4. I should make it plain that the Appellant is a  highly  educated  woman
    whose conduct before me  was  entirely  obliging  and  I  mean  her  no
    discourtesy when I say that the appeal touches on a potentially complex
    area of law with difficult facts. The  need  to  ask  questions  slowly
    might be more a reflection of me than her.  I think we have  got  there
    in the end.

 5. The critical point is that in order to succeed  the  appellant  had  to
    show that she was a family member of an EEA national  and  had  resided
    with the EEA national in the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of
    five years during the time that the EEA national was exercising  treaty
    rights.  There is some confusion about whether  the  EEA  national  was
    exercising treaty rights throughout the time that he has  been  present
    in the United Kingdom.  There is a short period of time when  there  is
    no direct evidence of economic activity and it may be that he  was  not
    exercising treaty rights in  that  time  or  it  may  be  that  he  was
    exercising treaty rights because he was taking steps to prepare to  set
    up a business.  This does  not  matter  because  it  is  plain  that  a
    business that was contemplated was set up  and  there  have  been  five
    years of residence  with  the  EEA  national  since  the  business  was
    established.

 6.  The  difficulty  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   appears,
    understandably, to have taken an overly  literal  construction  of  the
    requirements of Rule 15(1)(b) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 which say that the right will be acquired  by  a
    person "who has resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA national  in
    accordance with these Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years".  For some of the time relied on the  appellant  was  a  student
    and, as might be expected, was not actually living in the  family  home
    for much of the year; she was living in  university  accommodation  for
    which her father paid.  This is not "living  with"  in  the  colloquial
    sense but I am quite satisfied that it is, or at least is  capable  of,
    being within the meaning of "residing with" for  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulation.

 7. The point here is not a question of who lives under a  particular  roof
    but whether the person is dependent on the EEA national, and it is  not
    unusual for young people who are in the eyes of the law fully adult and
    mature to be dependent in many ways on their parents as  they  complete
    their education.

 8. I am satisfied that it was accepted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    that the Appellant was "living with" her father in this sense. This  is
    what the Judge found at paragraph 20 of the Decision and Reasons and Mr
    Duffy, helpfully and realistically, made  it  plain  that  he  was  not
    trying to suggest that any other interpretation should be given to that
    paragraph.

 9. I am satisfied having heard the submissions of both  parties  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected herself  and  applied  the  wrong
    test and that if she had applied the right test to those  findings  she
    would have allowed the appeal.

10. I therefore find the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

    Notice of Decision

11. I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  I  substitute  a
    decision allowing the appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State.  This appeal is therefore allowed.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 18 January 2018                |



