
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00103/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2017                            |On 25 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                        MOHAMMAD TAGHI JAHANGIRI MAJD
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Ata of Ata & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 19 January 1942, whose
      wife and children are Swedish nationals living in the UK.


   2. The appellant applied for admission to the UK under the Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("2006 Regulations") as a
      family member of his wife. The application was refused and the
      appellant appealed. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Shergill who, in a decision promulgated on 6 June 2016, dismissed the
      appeal. The appellant now appeals against that decision.


   3. The factual background to this appeal is that the appellant is elderly
      and in poor health. He lives alone in a small village in Iran without
      any family or close friends to support him. His family (comprising of
      his wife, four children and grandchildren) all live in the UK and want
      their father/husband/grandfather to be able to join them in order that
      they can provide him with the support and assistance he needs. The
      appellant is financially self sufficient and is not in receipt of
      financial support or regular payments from his wife or children.


   Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


   4. Although the appellant initially applied for admission to the UK as a
      family member of his wife, at the First-tier Tribunal it was proposed
      that one of appellant's daughters would be his sponsor and the hearing
      proceeded on that basis.


   5. The judge directed himself that the task before him was to determine
      whether the appellant was genuinely dependent on his daughter, who he
      accepted was a qualified person under Regulation 6 of the 2006
      Regulations.


   6. At paragraph 11 the judge stated that dependency was a purely factual
      test. He cited Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT 00314,
      emphasising the passages therein that refer to the need for "an
      examination of all the factual circumstances" and a "case-by-case"
      analysis.


   7. At paragraph 21 the judge stated: that:


         "The problem that the appellant faces is that the state of the law
         with regards to dependency all has some connection to that
         dependency being at the very least in part financially based under
         Regulation 7."


   8. In paragraph 23 the judge stated that he needed "to look, at least in
      part, at financial issues when assessing dependency." He added:


         "I would also stress that the quality of the evidence before me in
         relation to medical issues is low and that would undermine physical
         and social conditions being assessed properly in any event".


   9. The judge then found that the appellant did not meet the dependency
      requirement under the 2006 Regulations.


  10. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge erred in law by dismissing
      the appeal solely on the basis that the appellant was not financially
      dependent on the sponsor. The contention made in the grounds, and
      argued by Mr Ata at the hearing, is that a family member can be
      dependent on an EEA national within the meaning of the 2006
      Regulations even if that dependency does not take the form of
      financial dependency. Mr Ata argued that the EEA Regulations do not
      state that "financial dependence" is required and would have done so
      if the meaning was limited in this way. He referred to the case of
      Secretary of State for the Home Department v Islam & Anor [2012] EUECJ
      C-83/11  where there is a reference to "economic or physical
      dependence," (emphasis added) which he argued indicates dependence
      could exist even without economic support.


  11. A further argument made in the grounds and by Mr Ata is that the judge
      failed to make clear findings about the non-financial dependency of
      the appellant, in view of his age, medical difficulties and care
      needs.


  12. Mr Nath's response was to highlight and draw my attention to the
      paragraphs in the decision where the judge has considered the
      appellant's age and vulnerable condition (paragraph 16), emotional and
      physical issues (paragraph 17) and health condition (paragraph 18). Mr
      Nath argued that the judge had included within the decision sufficient
      information about the factual matrix and, having directed himself
      properly as to the law, reached a reasoned decision.


  13. Neither party was able to draw my attention to any cases which have
      addressed the question of whether dependency can exist where the
      dependent person has no financial dependence on the sponsor. Nor could
      either party identify any cases where a person found to be dependent
      under the 2006 Regulations had not been financially dependent on the
      sponsor.


   Consideration


  14. The issue in dispute before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the
      sponsor's father can be regarded as her direct dependent relative in
      the ascending line within the meaning of Regulation 7(1)(c) of the
      2006 Regulations.


  15. Mr Ata criticises the judge's comment, at paragraph 21, that the state
      of law connects dependency to being in part based on a financial test.
      If, by this statement, the judge was implying there is a legal rather
      than factual test as to dependency I would accept there is an error
      (although not a material one, for the reasons given below). However,
      the judge's comment at paragraph 21, read in context, is in my view no
      more than an observation that in the reported cases where dependency
      has been found there has been a financial aspect.


  16. I am satisfied that the judge approached the case in the correct way.
      He identified the relevant case law, notably Reyes, and made clear
      that the applicable test, and the test being applied to determine if
      the appellant was dependent on the sponsor, was a purely factual one.
      The judge then proceeded to apply the test, finding there to be an
      absence of financial dependency or evidence to support a finding of
      dependency in other ways.


  17. The appellant is unwell, elderly and living alone. The quality of his
      life would no doubt improve if he were able to live with his family in
      the UK (or, indeed, if they travelled to Iran to be with him). It may
      be that were the appellant and his daughter to live in the same
      country (whether that be Iran, Sweden or the UK) he would become
      dependent on her as a consequence of the physical, emotional and
      social support she may provide. However, the test under Regulation
      7(1)(c) is not whether the appellant would be dependent on the sponsor
      if they lived in the same country. Rather, it is whether, as a matter
      of fact, he is dependent on her.


  18. It is clear from an examination of the factual circumstances that the
      appellant is not dependent on his daughter (or other family in the
      UK). They do not support him financially. Nor do they support him
      physically or in day to day activities. Although they would no doubt
      like to provide such support, the fact that they live in a different
      country (and do not visit him regularly) means that as a practical
      matter they are unable to, and therefore as a matter of fact do not,
      support the appellant in such a way that he can be described as being
      dependent on them. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge has not
      made an error of law.


Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
   material error of law and shall stand.

B. The appeal is dismissed.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 24 January 2017               |


