
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/00076/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24th October 2018                    |On 7th November 2018                |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                   AMTUL HAFEEZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Np appearance and no representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. The Appellant appeals with
       permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge T.
        Jones) who, in a determination promulgated on 21 August 2017,
       concluded that there was no jurisdiction to determine the appeal and
       found that there was no valid appeal before the Tribunal. At the
       hearing before Judge Jones, the Appellant appeared but was not
       represented and was accompanied by her EEA sponsor who was her son.

    2. The appeal was listed before the Upper Tribunal on 20 September 2018
       for a hearing on 24 October 2018. On the day before the hearing
       there was an application for an adjournment of the hearing on the
       basis that the sponsor was not able to attend the hearing due to
       illness and that the Appellant was not able to attend on her own.
       The application was put before the Upper Tribunal designated lawyer
       who considered the application in the light of the documents and
       refused an adjournment stating that as the issue was a legal one, it
       could be considered in the absence of the sponsor. It was also
       stated that the Appellant could take steps to attend the hearing.

    3. At the hearing on 24 October 2018 there was no appearance or
       representation behalf of the Appellant. There was a further letter
       sent to the Tribunal making reference to the previous application
       for an adjournment which had been refused. The letter, which was
       dated 23 October 2018, stated that he had been prepared and ready
       and waiting for the hearing but could not attend because he had some
       serious health problems. He also stated that his mother would not be
       able to travel on her own. There was also reference within that
       letter to the decision letter and in particular concerning the issue
       of passport in which it was stated "her passport was already held by
       the Home Office in connection with her old application that was not
       returned, the same was explained in the application that the
       passport was held by the Home Office."

    4. No documentation had been provided in support of the adjournment
       application. However, as this was an issue of law which related to
       the validity of the application, and that the sponsor had provided a
       letter in which he had made reference to the issue of the passport
       which was relevant to the issue of validity, in my judgement, the
       appeal could proceed in the absence of the Appellant and the
       sponsor.

    5. There was a rule 24 response on behalf of the Respondent which
       stated that the judge had directed himself appropriately and even if
       the judge did have jurisdiction, he was bound to dismiss the appeal
       given the lack of a valid passport.

    6. I have therefore considered the issue raised on the facts of the
       appeal which relate to the validity of the appeal.

    7. On 16 June 2016 the Appellant applied for a residence card as a
       confirmation of a right of residence in the United Kingdom as a
       dependent family member of an EEA national, her son and her sponsor.
       It was refused in a decision letter of 19 December 2016 on the basis
       that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate that she was genuinely
       dependent upon her EEA family member; it was also stated in the
       notice of immigration decision "you have applied for a residence
       card as confirmation of a right of residence as the family member of
       an EEA national however you failed to provide a valid passport
       issued in your name."

    8. Accompanying the notice of immigration decision was a "reasons for
       refusal letter" also dated 19 December 2016. It was noted in that
       decision letter that the Appellant had provided evidence to show
       that the sponsor was currently exercising treaty rights in the UK to
       employment and thus the Respondent was satisfied that the sponsor
       was qualified person. It was further noted that "along with your
       application you submitted evidence of identity, relationship and
       evidence that your EEA national sponsor is exercising free movement
       rights." It went on to state "in line with Regulation 7(1) (c) of
       the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 to be
       treated as a family member of an EEA national you must be,
       "dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his
       spouse or civil partner." You have failed to provide sufficient
       evidence to show that you are currently dependent on your EEA
       national sponsor." The refusal letter went on to state that whilst
       the Appellant claimed to be dependent on the sponsor for everyday
       needs and healthcare, and provided payslips and other documents
       addressed to the sponsor dated February 2016 and June 2016 and
       medical letters, the Appellant had failed to provide sufficient
       evidence to show that she was currently residing with her sponsor as
       his dependent. The application was therefore refused under
       Regulation 7(1) (c). It was also stated that because the Appellant
       had failed to provide a valid passport for herself as required by
       Regulation 17 (1)(a) of the EEA regulations 2000 nor had she
       provided evidence to show that she attempted to obtain a valid
       passport and had been unable to do so, the application was refused
       on this basis also.

    9. Both the notice of immigration decision and the accompanying reasons
       for refusal letter both made reference to the Appellant being
       entitled to appeal against the decision under Regulation 26 of the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

   10. The Appellant issued grounds of appeal on 28 December 2016. The
       appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Jones) on 25 July
       2017. He noted that the Appellant had appeared along with the
       sponsor but was not represented. There was a presenting officer on
       behalf of the Respondent. At paragraph 4 of the decision, the judge
       made reference to the decision letter and the validity of the
       appeal. He recorded the sponsor's explanation that the Home Office
       had the passport. It appears that following further enquiries made
       that the presenting officer explained that the passport had expired
       before the application was submitted. The sponsor's reply was
       recorded at paragraph 4 also stating that he was either unaware of
       the requirement or took the view that the Home Office should accept
       this since they were holding onto what appeared to be in fact an
       expired passport. At paragraph 5, the judge invited the sponsor to
       take legal advice but he did not wish to do so. The judge then
       explained that there was no valid appeal.

   11. The conclusions of the FTTJ were set out at briefly at paragraph 6.
       The judge found that in light of Regulation 26 (3) (a) there was no
       valid appeal because there was no valid passport produced with the
       application and that any passport said to be in existence had
       expired and could not be a valid passport for the purposes of
       Regulation 17(1) (a).

   12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on the basis
       that during the enquiries that were made the passport of the
       Appellant had been submitted with the application but it was expired
       and that since the original passport was with the Home Office, the
       Appellant could not renew her passport. There were other grounds
       that related to the issue of dependency and Article 8 of the ECHR.

   13. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 21 March
       2018 the following reasons:-

       "It is arguable that the refusal letter is an appealable decision
       and that the Appellant had a right of appeal under Regulation 26.
       The Respondent in that letter stated that evidence of identity had
       been submitted. It can be inferred from the decision that it was
       accepted as giving rise to a right of appeal under Regulation 26 (3)
       (a) which makes reference to a passport as opposed to a valid
       passport."

   14. I have considered the relevant Regulations and in particular
       Regulation 26 (3). The wording of the paragraph makes reference to a
       "passport" and does not make reference to a "valid passport". On the
       evidence which was before the Tribunal it was the sponsor's account
       that a passport had been provided but that it had expired; a valid
       passport could not be provided as at the passport itself was with
       the Home Office. This was directly relevant to what was in the
       decision letter where it was stated that she had not provided
       evidence to show that she attempted to obtain a valid passport and
       had been unable to do so.

   15. Reading the decision letter itself (and also the accompanying
       reasons for refusal letter) both made reference to the Appellant,
       along with the application of having submitted evidence of identity
       and her relationship and both documents also made reference to the
       right of appeal under Regulation 26. I agree with the grant of
       permission by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam that it can be inferred
       from those documents that the documentation that was provided was
       accepted as giving rise to a right of appeal under Regulation 26.
       The First-tier Tribunal judge did not consider that when reaching
       the conclusion that this was not a valid appeal.

   16. Furthermore, Regulation 17 which refers to a "valid passport"
       governs the grant of applications. Regulation 26, which covers the
       right of appeal, only refers to a "passport". It seems to me that it
       is possible to construe the use of the word "valid" in this context
       to mean "current". I have therefore considered why, if there is a
       difference between the two Regulations; one requiring a "valid
       passport" and the other requiring a "passport", that is the
       position.

   17. The Regulations are to be interpreted in accordance with the
       Directive. This requires the Member States to ensure that those
       concerned have an effective remedy to challenge decisions; in this
       context under Regulation 26 which confers a right of appeal to the
       First-tier Tribunal. The purpose of the requirement under Regulation
       26 to provide a passport (rather than a "valid passport") is to
       establish a person's identity for the purposes of an appeal. The
       decision letter does appear to accept that evidence of identity had
       in fact been provided but in any event the position is that the
       Appellant had produced a passport even if it was an expired one
       rather than a current passport. This was directly relevant to the
       issue set out in the decision letter where it had been stated that
       she had not provided evidence to show that she attempted to obtain a
       valid passport and had been unable to do so. According to the
       sponsor's evidence she had done so.  None of those considerations
       had been considered by the FTTJ in his decision. In those
       circumstances the Appellant had therefore met the requirements under
       Regulation 26 for a right of appeal and a valid appeal before the
       First-tier Tribunal.


   18. I am therefore satisfied that there has been a material error of law
       which has led to the Tribunal not deciding  the  disputed  facts  in
       this appeal or the merits of the appeal because the  FTTJ  had  only
       considered the issue of validity.


   19. I therefore set aside the decision of the judge. I have  taken  into
       account paragraph 7.2 of the practice statements for the Immigration
       and Asylum of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal  which
       recognises that it may not be possible for the Upper Tribunal  shall
       proceed to remake the decision when it is  satisfied  that  (a)  the
       effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunities that  party's
       case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or  (b)
       the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which is necessary
       in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is  such  that,
       having regard to the overriding objective ,  it  is  appropriate  to
       remit the case of the First-tier Tribunal.


   20.  Having exercised my discretion  and  by  considering  the  practice
       statement, the case falls within (a) given that the appeal was  only
       considered on the issue of validity.  Also  the  Appellant  and  the
       Sponsor have not been able to attend the hearing and  have  not  had
       the opportunity to give any evidence or for the  Respondent  to  ask
       any  relevant  questions.   I  am  therefore  satisfied   that   the
       appropriate course is to remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal
       for a fresh oral hearing. It should be listed on  a  date  that  the
       Sponsor and the Appellant can attend.


Decision:


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law; the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  shall
    be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  oral
    hearing.

Signed                              Date: 25/10/2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds





