
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00439/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th February 2018                    |On 09th March 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Miss Ariana Ricardina De Sa Nogueira Nunes
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Ariana Ricardina De Sa Nogueira Nunes in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Secretary of State is the Appellant before me and  Miss  Nunes  the
    Respondent.  For ease of reference I am going to refer to  the  parties
    as they were known at the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission granted  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of Judge Kaler, who in a determination
    promulgated on 7th April 2017 allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    the 12th December 2016 decision to refuse the  Appellant's  application
    for a permanent residence card under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.

 3. The judge found that the Appellant qualifies for a permanent  residence
    card on the  basis  that  she  was  residing  in  accordance  with  the
    regulations because she was exercising treaty rights as  a  student  in
    the UK for five years between 2009 and 2014.  The application is on the
    ground that the judge erred in law due to failure to  consider  whether
    the Appellant met Regulation 4 of the EEA Regulations, which defines  a
    student as a person who has comprehensive sickness insurance in the  UK
    and sufficient resources of her own so as not to be  a  burden  on  the
    social assistance system of the UK during the period of residence.   In
    the event the Appellant had failed to bring forward any evidence as  to
    the position in respect of comprehensive sickness insurance or to  show
    sufficient resources. There was no evidential  basis  for  the  judge's
    conclusions.

 4. Before me the Appellant recognised the difficulty  that  she  faced  in
    challenging  these  grounds  but  indicated  that  she  had  additional
    evidence that she wanted to bring forward to deal with the  point  that
    had not been covered in the fact-finding exercise by the judge  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The  judge  was  not  assisted  in  reaching  his
    conclusions by the fact that the matter proceeded on the papers and the
    documentation before him was somewhat restricted.   The  Appellant  had
    made an application for a renewal of a  permanent  residence  card  and
    therefore had only completed the parts of the application form relevant
    to that application and there was nothing in the evidence going to  the
    rest of Regulation 4.

 5. I was not in a position to remake the decision given the  gaps  in  the
    evidence and in  light  of  the  fact  finding  exercise  required  the
    appellant and Ms Ahmed were in agreement  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the FT-T.

    Notice of Decision

 6. I find the judge has fallen into legal error when considering the issue
    of residence in accordance with the regulations because  only  part  of
    the regulations has been considered.  I set the decision aside.

 7. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.
[pic]
Signed                              Date 08 March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


