
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00164/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2019                           |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                             DAVID OWUSU TABIRI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa, counsel instructed by Fortwell
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson, promulgated on 29  November  2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro on 27 December 2018.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor  during  2001.
    According to the  Secretary  of  State's  summary  of  his  immigration
    history, he extended his leave  until  28  May  2003.  Thereafter,  the
    appellant made several unsuccessful applications for a  residence  card
    and leave to remain on human rights grounds. On 6 July 2017, he  sought
    a residence card as confirmation that he  was  a  family  member  of  a
    European Economic Area or Swiss national exercising  Treaty  rights  in
    the United  Kingdom.  The  appellant  submitted  a  customary  marriage
    certificate which stated that he had married his spouse in Ghana on  28
    August 2016 by proxy.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application by  way  of  a  decision
    dated 29 November 2017.  The  respondent  considered  the  case  of  NA
    (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009 as
    well as Ghanaian law regarding customary marriage and noted that it was
    necessary for both  parties  to  a  customary  marriage  to  be  either
    Ghanaian citizens or  have  parents  who  are  Ghanaian  citizens.  The
    appellant had provided no evidence that his  sponsor  was  of  Ghanaian
    descent and the birth certificate he had provided as  evidence  of  his
    own Ghanaian ancestry was not accepted as  valid  because  it  was  not
    issued within twelve months of his  birth  as  required  by  the  Ghana
    Registration of Births and Deaths Act 1965 (Act  301).  The  respondent
    did not, therefore,  accept  the  legal  validity  of  the  appellant's
    marriage. In addition, it was not accepted that the  signatory  to  the
    marriage certificate had the authority to confirm  the  facts  attested
    to.  Nor  had  the  appellant  submitted  a  statutory  declaration  to
    accompany the customary marriage certificate. The  Secretary  of  State
    was not satisfied that the appellant's claimed marriage was  registered
    in  accordance  with  the  Ghanaian  Customary  Marriage  and   Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985. The respondent  noted  that  the  sponsor  was
    studying in the United Kingdom however, it was noted that  he  had  not
    declared that she had sufficient resources as required by Regulation  4
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  and  nor
    was there evidence showing this. The respondent  also  noted  that  the
    evidence of the sponsor's employment related to 2016, that Manpower had
    confirmed that she no longer worked for the employer and there  was  no
    current evidence that she was a worker.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  and  his
    sponsor gave evidence. The judge noted that while the appellant did not
    accept that it was necessary for both parties to a  Ghanaian  customary
    marriage to be of Ghanaian citizenship or parentage, no expert or other
    evidence was relied upon to the contrary. The judge  noted  that  there
    was no evidence as to the citizenship  of  the  sponsor's  parents.  He
    considered the letter from the Ghana High Commission but preferred  the
    evidence referred to in the decision letter.

 6. The judge also considered whether the appellant was the durable partner
    of the sponsor but owing to inconsistencies in the evidence,  concluded
    that he could not.

 7. Lastly, the judge noted that the  sponsor  had  produced  an  offer  of
    employment to commence on  the  day  after  the  hearing  but  was  not
    employed on the date of the hearing.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal argued firstly, that the judge erred  in  failing
    to consider issues which it was conceded were not  raised  before  him.
    Reference was made to an unreported case where the same expert referred
    to in NA had stated that only one of the parties and not both needed to
    be of Ghanaian descent. Secondly, it was said that the judge  erred  in
    finding that there was a requirement for the parties  to  reside  in  a
    common family home, PM (EEA - spouse -  residing  with)  Turkey  [2011]
    UKUT 89 considered. Lastly, it was  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in
    considering only the evidence of  the  job  offer  and  had  failed  to
    consider that the sponsor's previous employment had ended in July  2018
    or whether she could be considered a worker.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

The hearing

10. In relation to the  first  ground,  Mr  Amunwa  drew  my  attention  to
    unreported Upper Tribunal cases regarding  whether  a  valid  customary
    marriage could take place  between  a  Ghanaian  and  non-Ghanaian.  He
    placed particular reliance on that of Amoako (IA/23315/2012). Mr Amunwa
    argued that the practice of the Upper Tribunal had been to depart  from
    the principles in NA; that NA should be treated with caution given what
    said about the expert in Amoako. He submitted that the evidence  before
    the judge satisfied the correct  requirements  in  Ghanaian  law.   The
    consideration of the evidence regarding the parentage of the parties to
    the marriage was inadequate. The judge had a letter from  the  Ghanaian
    embassy which confirmed that the correct documentation and  signatories
    had been obtained, but  its  significance  was  dismissed.   There  was
    sufficient evidence that the appellant  and  his  sponsor  were  either
    Ghanaian or their parents were.

11. In relation to the second ground, Mr Amunwa drew my  attention  to  the
    lack of clear findings as to the category of qualified person the judge
    believed the sponsor to be. There was reference to her student  finance
    and employment records, with the judge  stating  that  she  was  not  a
    worker nor jobseeker. There were no  findings  about  her  studies.  He
    argued that the judge was wrong to argue that the  sponsor  was  not  a
    jobseeker given that she had a job starting the day after the hearing.

12. On third ground, Mr Amunwa argued that the  judge's  criticism  of  the
    evidence of cohabitation did not refer  to  the  evidence  and  it  was
    unclear what the discrepancies were.

13. For the respondent, Mr Bramble agreed that the judge erred as contended
    in the first ground and that this error was potentially material.  This
    was dependent upon whether the sponsor could meet the  requirements  of
    Regulation 6, that is whether the sponsor was exercising Treaty  rights
    at the date of hearing.

14. Mr Bramble submitted that the sponsor was starting employment the  next
    day after the hearing and last worked on 7 July 2018.  He  argued  that
    she was not a worker but was  in  between  jobs.  He  argued  that  the
    sponsor could not meet the  requirements  of  Regulation  6(2)  because
    there was no  evidence  that  she  had  registered  as  unemployed.  He
    wondered aloud whether the  sponsor  was  a  student  with  appropriate
    insurance. He  concluded  that  the  first  error  was  immaterial.  In
    relation to the third ground, he argued that the  goalposts  had  moved
    from the original  grounds  which  referenced  Diatta  v  Land  Berlin.
    Nonetheless, he submitted that the  judge's  findings  on  cohabitation
    were sufficient.

15. In response, Mr Amunwa said that he read Regulation 6  differently  and
    that  it  was  6(1)  that  was  relevant.  The  sponsor  satisfied  the
    conditions in that she was already resident in the United Kingdom,  had
    been working, was seeking work and had provided evidence that  she  was
    had a genuine chance of being engaged. Alternatively, the sponsor was a
    worker at the date of the hearing because she had signed a contract  of
    employment on 8 November 2018 and was due  to  report  to  work  on  20
    November 2018.

Decision on error of law

16. It was common ground that the judge's reliance on  NA  amounted  to  an
    error of law given  what  was  said  in  Amoako  regarding  the  expert
    evidence having changed on the nationality requirements for parties  to
    a customary marriage in Ghana. Furthermore, in McCabe v McCabe [1994] 1
    FLR 410, the Court of Appeal found there be a valid customary  marriage
    between an Irish and a Ghanaian national. It  further  transpires  from
    Amoako and a further unreported  case  of  Agyei  (EA/12991/2016)  that
    there exists a UKBA document which states that  at  least  one  of  the
    parties to a Ghanaian customary marriage must be a  Ghanaian  national.
    Clearly that is not the same as requiring both parties to  be  Ghanaian
    nationals or of Ghanaian parentage.

17. The appellant's alternative case is that he meets the requirements  set
    out in NA. He has never claimed to be anything other  than  a  Ghanaian
    national. Furthermore, in his application form for a residence card  he
    states that his original passport has been with the Secretary of  State
    since 2008. The  appellant's  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained further evidence that both he and  the  sponsor  were  either
    Ghanaian nationals or had  Ghanaian  parents.  That  evidence  included
    confirmation  from  the  Ghanaian  High  Commission,  which  the  judge
    rejected for inadequate reasons.





18. I have  carefully  considered  whether  the  above-mentioned  error  is
    material given Mr Bramble's submissions to the effect that the  sponsor
    could not show that she was a qualified  person  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing. The difficulty with that argument, is that the judge  did  not
    carry out a detailed consideration of the evidence before him as to the
    sponsor's position. There was only a passing reference to Regulation  6
    and no consideration of the various Conditions  set  out  therein.  The
    brief consideration of the  sponsor's  qualification  is  woven  around
    findings as to whether the parties were cohabiting.  There  appears  to
    have been no separate assessment of her student status.

19. The sponsor's payslips and tax records for 2013-2016  were  before  the
    judge, as were documents from  Student  Finance,  comprehensive  health
    insurance policies and payslips for  2018.   The  evidence  before  the
    judge was that the sponsor had a work history, she had  shown  she  was
    applying for jobs after graduating and that she had a job to start  the
    day after the hearing.   It  is  apparent  that  the  judge  failed  to
    adequately consider all the  relevant  evidence  before  him  regarding
    whether the sponsor was  exercising  Treaty  rights.  Furthermore,  his
    brief findings were inadequate.

20. Having found that the judge erred in  his  assessment  of  whether  the
    sponsor was a qualified person, it follows that the error regarding the
    validity of the marriage is a material error.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Watson.



Signed                                                             Date   08
    April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

