
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/00635/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2017                               |On 23 June 2017               |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               mrs uzma khalid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth, Counsel, instructed by Pegasus
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burns (the judge), promulgated on 11 November  2016,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  The appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had been against the Respondent's decision of  4  January
    2016 refusing to issue her with a permanent residence card pursuant  to
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006   (the
    Regulations), as amended.

 2. At all material times the Appellant was married to a  German  national,
    Mr Rabbani, and was thus the family member of  an  EEA  national.   The
    Respondent had not been satisfied that Mr Rabbani had exercised  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years.

The judge's decision

 3. The judge found that Mr Rabbani had been employed between 14 June  2010
    and 31 July 2011.  He then found that the Appellant had been in receipt
    of Jobseekers Allowance until November 2013.  The judge also found that
    Mr Rabbani had been in receipt of Pension Credit from 15  August  2013,
    and then received a state pension from 30 December 2015.

 4. The real issue before the judge was the nature of Mr  Rabbani's  status
    between losing his job in 2011 and June 2015 (that being the  point  at
    which the necessary five years block would have accrued).  In examining
    Mr  Rabbani's  status  the  judge  considered  Regulation  6   of   the
    Regulations, and in particular whether he had satisfied Condition A and
    the "genuine chance of being  engaged"  test.   Although  it  makes  no
    material difference in this case, the relevant  period  in  respect  of
    which the judge was making his assessment fell prior to  the  amendment
    to the 2006 Regulations which introduced Conditions A and B (that being
    on 1 January 2014).  The judge finds that Mr  Rabbani  in  fact  ceased
    looking for work by 28 October 2013 at the very latest (paragraph 45).

 5. In respect of the genuine chance of being engaged test the  judge  sets
    out his findings and reasons between paragraphs 46 and 54.  He looks at
    what he describes as  two  phases  on  Mr  Rabbani's  efforts  to  find
    employment.  The first phase involved applying for work as a  geologist
    or in museums or libraries.  In respect of this first phase  the  judge
    finds that there was no genuine change of Mr Rabbani being  engaged  in
    any of these fields.

 6. In respect of the second phase, during which Mr  Rabbani  significantly
    broadened the scope of his attempts to find work, the judge notes  that
    he had made about 500 applications and received only one interview, and
    even then was unsuccessful in securing the job  on  that  occasion.  He
    notes  the  Appellant's  age,  lack  of  fluency  in  English  and  the
    Jobcentre's own concerns about his inability to find work as all  being
    relevant to the genuine  chance  of  being  engaged  test.   The  judge
    concludes that Mr Rabbani  had  not  retained  his  workers  status  in
    accordance with Regulation 6, nor was he a jobseeker.  At paragraph  61
    the judge notes Mr Rabbani's receipt of state Pension Credit  but  says
    that the issue had not been raised before him.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. There are four grounds of appeal.  The first asserts that the judge had
    failed to take into account the  fact  that  Mr  Rabbani  had  received
    Pension Credit.  It is said that this  fact  meant  that  the  DWP  had
    decided that Mr Rabbani did have  a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  This in turn  was  relevant  to  the  judge's  assessment  of
    whether Mr Rabbani was a qualified person during the  relevant  period.
    Ground 2 asserts that Student  Finance  England  had  decided  that  Mr
    Rabbani's daughter was entitled to funding on the basis that he was  an
    "EU migrant worker".  The judge had failed to take this into account as
    well.  Ground 3 asserts that the judge has failed to properly  consider
    Mr Rabbani's previous employment experience.  Ground 4 states that  the
    judge failed to adequately address Mr Rabbani's evidence on how he  had
    sought to improve his prospects of employment by way of voluntary work.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge  on  4  May
    2017 with particular reference to the pension credit issue.

The hearing before me

 9. Mr Butterworth sought to rely on the grounds.  He  submitted  that  the
    Pension Credit point had been raised in  oral  submissions  before  the
    judge and I was referred to page 7 of his skeleton  argument  (which  I
    accept was before the judge).   He  also  submitted  that  the  Student
    Finance point had been taken before the judge.  I examined  the  Record
    of Proceedings and whilst I saw reference to the Pension Credit  issue,
    there was nothing there to indicate that the Student  Finance  evidence
    had been brought to the judge's attention and/or that its  significance
    had been an aspect of the submissions made on behalf of the  Appellant.
    In light of this I informed Mr Butterworth that I did not consider  the
    Student Finance point to be a live issue before me (there had  been  no
    witness statement from Mr Butterworth in support of his assertions made
    in ground 2).

10. On the Pension Credit point Mr Butterworth submitted that  it  appeared
    as though the benefit had been awarded on the basis that Mr Rabbani was
    a  "qualified  person"  for  the  purposes  of  Regulation  6  of   the
    Regulations.  Even if  it  was  founded  upon  Regulation  15A  of  the
    Regulations he submitted that the same question had been  addressed  by
    the DWP as was to be addressed by the judge, namely that Mr Rabbani was
    a qualified person.  If this was the case the judge should  have  taken
    this into account and it was material to his decision even if  he  were
    not bound by the DWP's own assessment of his status.

11. In respect of the judge's assessment of the first phase of Mr Rabbani's
    attempts to find work, Mr Butterworth  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    erred by failing to take into account previous work  experience  whilst
    in Pakistan, work in a  library  in  Germany  in  the  year  2000,  and
    administrative experience whilst in the United Kingdom.  In respect  of
    the second phase the judge had  erred  in  respect  of  the  subjective
    element of the genuine chance of being engaged test.  This rendered the
    assessment of the test as a whole to be  flawed.   In  respect  of  the
    voluntary work, Mr Butterworth submitted that this simply had not  been
    taken into account.  The voluntary work was relevant because it went to
    the improved prospects  of  finding  employment.   In  respect  of  the
    Student Finance point, and (on the basis that I would consider  it  for
    the sake of completeness) Mr Butterworth submitted that  its  relevance
    was the same as in relation to the Pension Credit issue.

12. Mr Whitwell submitted that the Pension Credit issue was immaterial. The
    judge had provided adequate reasons in respect of the genuine chance of
    being engaged test.  The judge may have overlooked the  voluntary  work
    undertaken by Mr Rabbani but this too was immaterial.

13. In response Mr Butterworth amended a previous submission by saying that
    the Student Finance award had  been  on  a  different  basis  than  the
    decision to award Pension Credit.  I was referred to pages 191  to  193
    of the Appellant's bundle.  The email at page  191  indicated  that  Mr
    Rabbani was an "EU migrant worker" and Mr Butterworth  placed  emphasis
    on that last term.  If Mr Rabbani was a  worker  this  must  have  been
    relevant to the judge's assessment of his status.

Decision on error of law

14. As I announced to the parties at the hearing I conclude that there  are
    no material errors of law in the judge's decision.  My reasons for this
    conclusion are as follows.

15. First, Mr Butterworth's reliance upon the Pension Credit issue is in my
    view misconceived.  It is quite apparent from the award notice at  page
    134 of the Appellant's bundle that the basis upon  which  the  DWP  had
    decided that Mr Rabbani did have  a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom was based squarely upon Regulation 15A of the Regulations,  and
    not on Regulation 6.  It is clearly stated in the award notice that  Mr
    Rabbani was considered to be the primary carer of a child in education.
     Regulation 15A relates to a derivative right of residence and does not
    mean that the individual is a qualified person.

16. Having a right of residence under  Regulation  15A  would  indeed  have
    entitled Mr Rabbani to an award of Pension Credit as a matter of social
    security law.  However two consequences flow from  the  basis  of  this
    right of residence.  The first is that such residence could  not  count
    towards the accrual of  permanent  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Second, a derivative right of residence is not of course a right  under
    the Qualification Directive (as transposed into  Regulation  6  of  the
    Regulations).  Therefore the right of residence which the DWP found  to
    exist had no bearing on the issues to be  decided  by  the  judge.   It
    follows therefore that the judge's failure to specifically address  the
    issue of whether the Pension Credit award was relevant  is  immaterial.
    I would add further that a decision  of  the  DWP  was  not  of  course
    binding upon the judge in any way.

17. Second, as I indicated at the hearing the Student Finance issue is  not
    before me because I am not satisfied that  it  was  argued  before  the
    judge.  It is not included in Mr Butterworth's  skeleton  argument  and
    there is no indication of any relevant  submission  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.  I also note that there is no witness  statement  from  Mr
    Butterworth in support of ground 2 of the grounds of  appeal.   In  any
    event, and for the sake of completeness, even if the  matter  had  been
    raised and it was a live issue before me, I conclude that  the  judge's
    failure to engage with the point is immaterial to the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  As with the Pension Credit point, any determination by the DWP
    on Mr Rabbani's status was not binding upon the judge,  and  given  his
    findings as a whole the single issue of the Student Finance award would
    not have had a material bearing on  the  judge's  overall  conclusions.
    Further, and having considered pages 191-193 of the Appellant's bundle,
    there was no actual evidence of materials submitted by  Mr  Rabbani  or
    his daughter in support of the application for funding.  Therefore  the
    judge simply was not in a position to have regard to relevant evidence.
     It is true that the Student Finance did conclude that Mr Rabbani  was,
    as they put it an "EU migrant worker" but it is unclear what was  meant
    by this.  There is no legal category of "EU migrant worker" as far as I
    am aware.  It is  unclear  whether  the  Student  Finance  regarded  Mr
    Rabbani as being a worker or a jobseeker, and in any event reading  the
    judge's decision as a whole in  combination  with  the  fact  that  the
    Student Finance assessment was in no way binding upon him, in  my  view
    the omission in respect of the Student Finance point was immaterial.

18. Third, Mr Butterworth agreed that the genuine chance of  being  engaged
    test involves both a subjective element and an objective element.  Thus
    an individual may genuinely believe that they could find employment  in
    a certain sector and may be trying their best in this respect,  but  if
    on an objective view the chances were simply too low  then  a  decision
    maker is entitled to find that the chance of being engaged  was  not  a
    genuine one.  In respect of the first phase of Mr Rabbani's attempts at
    finding work, in my view the judge was fully entitled to conclude  that
    there was no genuine chance.  With all due  respect,  Mr  Butterworth's
    submissions on this point were somewhat optimistic.  Whilst Mr  Rabbani
    may have had some work experience in Pakistan between 1975 and 1979  it
    was wholly fanciful that this  could  create  a  genuine  or  realistic
    prospect of finding employment in the United Kingdom some 30 odd  years
    later.  In respect of Mr Rabbani's CV, it is  to  say  the  very  least
    brief, as acknowledged by the judge at paragraph 47.  There is a single
    line in the CV at page 102 of the Appellant's bundle  stating  that  he
    was involved in training in the Mannheim  Library  in  the  year  2000.
    Quite apart from that being many, many years ago, no detail  whatsoever
    is provided as to quite what this involved and how it could be relevant
    to the type of work  Mr  Rabbani  was  seeking  during  the  period  in
    question.  In respect of the experience with administrative work in the
    United Kingdom the letter at page 21 of the Appellant's bundle  relates
    to some employment at an  estate  agents.   Frankly  it  is  very  very
    difficult to see how this could have  had  a  material  bearing  on  Mr
    Rabbani's attempts at finding work as a  geologist  or  in  museums  or
    libraries to  the  extent  that  it  raised  his  prospects  above  the
    threshold of being genuine.

19. Fourth, in respect of phase 2, the judge acknowledges that  Mr  Rabbani
    then decided to consider a much wider variety of  possible  jobs.   The
    judge was fully entitled however to find that some 500 applications had
    been made over the course of two years with only one interview  arising
    out of these, and  that  even  then  Mr  Rabbani  was  unsuccessful  in
    securing the vacancy.  The  judge  was  fully  entitled  to  take  into
    account the concerns of the jobcentre.  He was also fully  entitled  to
    take into account the matters set out in paragraph 53 of his  decision.
    Mr Rabbani himself may have genuinely believed that he could find  work
    but on the judge's findings of fact, which were clearly  open  to  him,
    the objective position was very different.  It is also to be noted that
    Mr Rabbani in fact ceased either  looking  for  work  once  he  was  in
    receipt of Pension Credit and that of course he never found  employment
    as a result of any of his jobseeking.

20. Fifth, it is right that the judge does not  appear  to  have  expressly
    addressed Mr Rabbani's voluntary work,  although  this  was  raised  in
    evidence and noted at paragraph  21.   In  my  view  this  omission  is
    immaterial.  Volunteering to undertake certain  activities  is  clearly
    not the same as seeking  paid  employment.   It  is  also  a  fact,  as
    mentioned previously, that Mr Rabbani ceased looking for paid  work  in
    October 2013 at the very latest,  and  of  course  in  fact  had  never
    secured any employment after 2011.  Therefore and  again  applying  the
    objective limb of  the  genuine  chance  of  being  engaged  test,  the
    voluntary work was simply not a material factor in the case.

21. In light of the above the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain any material  errors  of
law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 22 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 22 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

