
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00472/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2019                      |On 25 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                         Mrs kulsum salman ussenbai
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           EntRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None.
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been granted permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  from
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her  appeal  against
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officers to  refuse  to  issue  her
    with an EEA family permit to enable her to join her sponsor in  the  UK
    as his spouse.  I was not asked to make an anonymity direction,  and  I
    do not consider that such a direction is warranted on the facts of this
    case.



Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national  of  India,  whose  date  of  birth  is  20
    February 1995.  On 11 June 2017 she applied for entry clearance as  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK.   In  her
    application, she said that she had made a previous application  for  an
    EEA family permit which had been refused on  24  October  2016  on  the
    ground that her marriage was not believed to be genuine.   Her  sponsor
    was an Indian national, whose date of birth was 22 February 1989.  They
    first met on 1 January 2014 in Mumbai, and  they  had  got  married  in
    India on 13 February 2015, which was when their relationship had begun.
     The sponsor had gone to the UK to work on 24 March 2015, and  she  had
    last seen him on 12 December 2016.

 3. On 27 November 2017 an Entry Clearance Officer  gave  his  reasons  for
    refusing the appellant's application for an  EEA  family  permit.   The
    appellant had evidenced that her husband held  a  Portuguese  passport.
    He  had  undertaken  an   extensive   examination   of   her   personal
    circumstances in accordance with Regulation 7 of the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006, and he was not satisfied that there  were  sufficient
    grounds for issuing her with an EEA family permit.  His  reasoning  was
    that she said that her relationship began on 13  February  2015,  which
    was also the day  of  their  wedding.   She  had  provided  a  marriage
    certificate for 13 February 2105, but the marriage was  not  registered
    until 1 December 2015.  She had  failed  to  provide  evidence  of  the
    wedding ceremony,  such  as  photographs,  and  she  had  not  provided
    evidence of communications over a 2-year period.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Dineen sitting at Hatton Cross
    on 4 December 2018.  Both parties  were  legally  represented.   It  is
    recorded by the Judge that, in support of  her  appeal,  the  appellant
    relied on a bundle of documents extending  to  146  pages  and  on  the
    evidence of her sponsor.

 5. In his subsequent decision, the Judge set out his findings of  fact  at
    paragraphs [12]-[25].  He concluded, at paragraph [26], that he was not
    satisfied that the parties were validly married or  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant's UK sponsor and his nominated legal representatives were
    informed in good time that the hearing of the appeal would  take  place
    at Field House on 15 July 2019.  There was no appearance by the sponsor
    or by a legal representative on behalf of the appellant at the hearing.
     Perusal of the file revealed that an attempt had been made recently to
    withdraw the appellant's appeal. Permission  had  been  refused  by  an
    Upper Tribunal Judge on the  ground  that  the  appellant  was  out-of-
    country, and it was not clear that she had authorised her appeal to  be
    withdrawn.

 7. Mr Tarlow conceded that there were errors in the Judge's approach,  and
    he invited me to set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside  and
    to re-make it in favour of the respondent.

Discussion

 8. Judge Dineen clearly misdirected himself  in  law  by  approaching  the
    matter on the basis that he was deciding an application under  Appendix
    FM, as opposed to an application for an EEA  family  permit  under  the
    Regulations 2006.  This meant that he did not consider all the evidence
    within the correct legal framework.  He assessed whether  the  marriage
    was genuine and subsisting on the basis that the burden rested with the
    appellant to show that it was, rather than on the basis that the  legal
    burden rested with the respondent to make out that the marriage was one
    of convenience, as was contended by the Presenting Officer.

 9. However, there was another issue, which was whether there was  a  valid
    marriage in the first place.  As stated by Judge Landes  when  granting
    permission, if there was no valid  marriage  then  it  mattered  little
    whether the application was one for the Entry Clearance as a spouse, or
    for an EEA family permit.

10. The Judge gave detailed reasons for doubting whether  the  marriage  in
    fact took place.  He did not, however, address the  affidavit  evidence
    referred to in Ground 4.  As noted by Judge Landes, he did not  mention
    this affidavit evidence in the list of documentary  evidence  which  he
    gave at paragraph [9] of his decision.

11. I do not, however, consider that it  was  incumbent  on  the  Judge  to
    address  individually  every  piece  of  evidence  that  was   in   the
    appellant's bundle and, in  any  event,  applying  Tanveer  Ahmed,  the
    burden rested with the appellant to show that the evidence from  abroad
    (which included the affidavit evidence)  was  evidence  that  could  be
    relied on.  The  Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    evidence of  the  sponsor,  who  gave  evidence  before  him.   In  the
    circumstances, he did not err in law  in  not  treating  the  affidavit
    evidence from abroad as salvaging  the  sponsor's  credibility  on  the
    issue of whether a valid marriage had taken place.

12. Accordingly, for the above reasons, I find that a material error of law
    has not been established, and I decline to set the decision aside.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of  law
such that the decision  should  be  set  aside.  Accordingly,  the  decision
stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 18 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

