
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00717/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10th June 2019                    |On 21st June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                  SAAD ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi, instructed by Kingswright Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Mr Ali is a Pakistani national, born on 15 June 1997. On  6th  July
         2017, aged 20, he made an on-line application for a residence  card
         as the family member of an EEA national. The application form  does
         not state, in terms, whether he is applying for a residence card as
         a family member as defined  in  regulation  7  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 or as an extended  family
         member as defined in regulation 8. The copy form, as it appears  in
         the respondent's bundle, does not identify the  type  of  residence
         card it applies to.

      2. In that application form, the appellant has described  that  he  is
         applying as a 'family member of  an  EEA  National';  he  describes
         himself as being the 'real brother' of Ehsan Ur Rehman who  is  his
         'legal guardian' and an EEA national exercising Treaty  Rights.  In
         response to the question as to  his  current  working  status,  the
         appellant  responds,  'supported  by  spouse/partner/brother'.   In
         response to questions as to how he is related to the EEA  national,
         the appellant describes Mr Rehman as his 'brother/legal  guardian'.
         In the  section  in  which  he  gives  further  information  to  be
         considered the appellant says, inter alia:

             "Ehsan Ur Rehman is real elder brother of Saad Ali and  become
             legal guardian of Saad Ali by  the  order  of  Civil  Guardian
             Judge Islamabad on 11 November 2014  and  living  together  on
             permanent address of Ehsan Ur Rehman in  Pakistan....Saad  Ali
             applied for visa of Italy, but rejected and was given right of
             appeal, Ehsan Ur  Rehman  filed  appeal  and  the  appeal  was
             accepted...but now Ehsan Ur Rehman  shifted  to  UK...and  now
             there is no need for Saad Ali to get Italy visa...EEA national
             is legal guardian of applicant. EEA  national  is  real  elder
             brother applicant. Applicant is  a  member  of  EEA  nationals
             household."

      3. The application was refused on 15th December  2017  in  a  document
         headed 'Refusal of EEA Family Permit' which stated, inter alia:

             "You have applied for an EEA family permit to  join  Ehsan  Ur
             Rehman in the United  Kingdom  as  the  Direct  Family  Member
             (Brother)  of  an  EEA  National.  I  have   considered   your
             application  under  regulation  7....  I  have  used  all  the
             information provided by you to determine if  the  requirements
             of the [2016 regulations] have been met. ..."

         The ECO did not accept that the documents provided (Pakistan Family
         relationship Certificate and appointment of guardian document) were
         sufficient evidence that the appellant was the brother of Ehsan  Ur
         Rehman. Nor did the ECO accept that the financial evidence provided
         was sufficient to validate the claim that he was  dependant  on  Mr
         Rehman and he was therefore not satisfied  the  appellant  met  the
         requirements of regulation 7.

      4. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant pleaded, inter  alia,  that
         the ECO decision was against  regulations  7  and  8  of  the  2016
         Regulations. The ECM review that took place after the filing of the
         grounds of appeal did not address regulation 8 and simply confirmed
         the ECO decision under regulation 7.

      5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey heard the appeal  on  23rd  October
         2018 and dismissed it for reasons set out in a decision promulgated
         on 7th November 2018.

         Error of law

      6. The First-tier Tribunal judge identified the decision  the  subject
         of the appeal as an appeal against a  decision  refusing  a  family
         permit as a direct family member.  He found the sponsor  to  be  an
         EEA National who was residing in the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
         Regulations and that the appellant and the sponsor  were  brothers,
         as claimed. He identified the meaning of 'direct family  member  as
         per regulation 7, found the appellant was  not,  as  a  brother,  a
         direct descendant or direct relative  in  the  ascending  line  and
         dismissed the appeal. The judge found that the  legal  guardianship
         was not relevant for the purposes of regulation 7  irrespective  of
         whether and when it came to an end (it was expressed as  continuing
         during the appellant's minority).

      7. The First-tier Tribunal judge was correct in his finding  that  the
         appellant did not meet regulation 7.

      8. The judge found:

             "4.  The appellant is not an extended family member but it  is
             clear that the Sponsor is a dual national Pakistan Italian. In
             these circumstances whilst I am  satisfied  the  documentation
             produced addresses the basis of the refusal  by  the  ECO  and
             there is sufficient evidence to show that the Appellant is the
             brother of the Sponsor, the fact is that  the  point  was  not
             picked up by ECO but it is not open to me  to  waive  it;  the
             fact is the Appellant is not a direct descendant nor a  family
             member of the Sponsor.

             5.   For these reasons therefore whilst I find  the  Appellant
             has been honest and truthful in the application, the  fact  is
             that he cannot succeed in this  appeal  in  obtaining  an  EEA
             family permit.

             6.   The evidence that was provided of the  financial  support
             that the Sponsor provides the Appellant  was  unchallenged  as
             are the other documents establishing  their  relationship  but
             they do not  resolve  the  matter  that  the  application  can
             succeed on the basis of him being a family  member  under  the
             Regulation."

      9. The judge has not addressed, in terms, the ground  of  appeal  that
         the appellant claims to be an  extended  family  member  and  falls
         within regulation 8. Ms Jones said that her note of the submissions
         made by the Presenting Officer did not indicate that  the  question
         of whether the appellant met  the  criteria  of  regulation  8  was
         raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  may  be  that   the
         Presenting Officer did not make submissions on the point, but it is
         clear that the issue was live because it features in the first line
         of the grounds of appeal. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  seems  to
         have been aware of this given his reference  to  his  inability  to
         'waive' the question of regulation 8 because it was not 'picked up'
         by the Entry Clearance Officer.

     10. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge has made an  error  of
         law such that the decision is set aside to  be  remade:  the  judge
         failed to reach a clear decision on all the grounds of appeal  that
         were before him.

         Remaking the decision.

     11. Paragraph 4  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is  a  little
         confusing; it seems to me that the first sentence includes an error
         in stating that the appellant is not an extended family member.  To
         make sense given the rest of the decision, it should read  that  he
         is not a direct family member. Later in that  paragraph  the  judge
         has only addressed issues of whether he is a family member  in  the
         context of regulation 7 and he specifically makes the point that he
         cannot waive something that has not been addressed by the ECO.

     12. The judge notes that the financial documents  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant before him were not  challenged.  Ms  Jones  acknowledged
         that there were no adverse credibility findings and that there  had
         generally been positive findings made.

     13. I raised 2 issues with the parties - first whether consideration of
         the appeal under regulation 8 would  or  should  have  been  a  new
         matter which the SSHD ought to have taken a decision on whether  to
         consent and secondly  whether,  in  any  event,  the  Tribunal  had
         jurisdiction to determine an appeal in connection  with  a  claimed
         extended family member.

     14. So far as whether consideration under regulation 8 is a new matter,
         Ms Jones took the view that it probably wasn't given the content of
         the application form but if it was she was agreeable  to  it  being
         determined by me and she did not  need  an  adjournment  given  the
         positive findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge which  were
         not challenged.

     15. The question of  jurisdiction  is  more  complex.  The  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 specifically  excluded  a
         right of appeal for Extended Family Members.  That legislation  has
         now been amended, with effect from 29th March 2019, but it does not
         have retrospective effect. It is however open to Mr Ali  to  invoke
         the doctrine of direct  effect  under  EU  law  in  relation  to  a
         decision which falls into the lacuna between the  2006  regulations
         and the amended 2016 regulations.

     16. Ms Jones said that if I could, given the positive findings, then  I
         should allow the appeal.

     17. The appellant is the brother of the EEA sponsor who  is  exercising
         Treaty Rights in the UK; the evidence  that  the  sponsor  provides
         financial support is  unchallenged.  Ms  Jones  stated  the  appeal
         should be allowed.

     18. In these circumstances I allow the appeal.

     19. The position therefore is that the respondent is  now  required  to
         undertake the assessment under regulation 12(5).

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remake it by allowing the appeal.


     Date 17th June 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
