
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/00758/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 April 2018                          |  On 27 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Between

                        Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


                                   Before

                        MOHAMED MANAS NAGOOR PITCHAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born  18  December  1989.   He
    made an application to the Secretary of  State  for  an  EEA  residence
    card.  The application was refused in a decision served on 22  December
    2015, for reasons that I need not need to set out herein.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant lodged an appeal before the FtT. That appeal came  before
    FtT Judge Traynor, who concluded in a decision  dated  24  April  2017,
    that the FtT did not have jurisdiction  to  determine  the  appeal.  No
    findings were made in relation to the  substance  of  the  appeal.  The
    Judge's conclusion was informed by the guidance given by this  Tribunal
    in Sala [2016] UKUT 00411.

 3. The appellant appealed such decision to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  FtT
    Judge O'Keeffe granted permission, decision dated 31 January 2018.

Directions by Upper Tribunal

 4. In a notice of decision dated 19 February 2018 UT Judge Reeds indicated
    that the Upper Tribunal was minded to find an error of law,  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal. If either of the parties was opposed to this course they
    were directed to inform the Tribunal in writing (giving  reasons),  not
    later than 7 days from the date the Directions were  issued.  Following
    that period, the parties were informed that the  Upper  Tribunal  would
    issue its decision.

 5. The Upper Tribunal has not  received  any  correspondence  from  either
    party within the stipulated timeframe.

Discussion

 6. The Court of Appeal has now given consideration to the  very  issue  in
    play in the instant case - see Khan v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755. The Court  concluded  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had been wrong in its conclusion and rationale in Sala.  It is
    not in dispute that the effect of the decision in Khan, if  applied  to
    this case, is that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to  conclude  that
    it did not have jurisdiction in this appeal.

 7. For this reason, I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and remit the appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
    afresh.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:                                               Dated: 18th April
2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


