
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/00483/2018
                                                               EA/00486/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 18 February 2019                 |On: 27 February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                naYyab ikram
                                saqlain ikram
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, instructed by Syeds Law Office
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants appeal, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against  the  respondent's  decisions
to refuse to issue them  with  EEA  family  permits  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the  EEA  Regulations")  as  the
sister-in-law and brother-in-law of the EEA national sponsor.

The appellants, sister and brother, are citizens of Pakistan.  They  applied
on 15 June 2017 for an EEA family permit to join the sponsor, Jolanta  Iwona
Mikulska, a Polish national. The appellants' applications  were  refused  on
30 November 2017 on the grounds that there was no evidence to show that  the
EEA national was exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK  since  the  evidence
supplied indicated that she was no longer  in  employment.  The  appellants'
applications  were  refused  under  regulations  6  and  12   of   the   EEA
Regulations.

The appellants appealed against that decision. In their  grounds  of  appeal
they referred to the First-tier Tribunal decision of 21 March  2017  in  the
appeal of Mrs Shamshad Kausar and the decision of 16  October  2017  in  the
appeal of Chaudhury Mohammed Ikram, the parents of  Sibtain  Ikram  who  was
married to the EEA national  sponsor.  Both  appeals  were  allowed  on  the
grounds that the appellants were dependant upon  the  EEA  national  sponsor
and were entitled to residence  cards  under  the  EEA  Regulations  as  her
family  members.  The  grounds  also  asserted  that  the  EEA  sponsor  was
currently a qualified person but also had  permanent  residence  in  the  UK
and, as such, the appellants were entitled to family  permits  to  join  the
sponsor upon whom they were entirely dependent under regulation 14(2).

In an entry  clearance  manager  review  on  20  July  2018  the  respondent
considered again that the appellants had  failed  to  submit  evidence  that
their EEA national sponsor was currently exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
UK. It was not accepted that the appellants  were  family  members  for  the
purposes of regulation 14(2), even if permanent residence was as claimed.

The appellants' appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  James  on  11
September  2018.  Judge  James  considered  herself  to  be  bound  by   the
Tribunal's previous findings subject to later evidence, in  accordance  with
Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702. She noted that the EEA national  sponsor  had
never attended any of the previous  hearings  and  that  Sibtain  Ikram  had
previously confirmed that he did not  pay  any  money  to  his  siblings  in
Pakistan. The judge did not find the evidence of the EEA national  sponsor's
employment to be reliable, she did not accept that she was  an  employee  or
self-employed and she did not accept that the EEA  national  was  exercising
treaty rights in the UK. The judge considered that there was no evidence  to
show that the appellants were dependent upon the EEA national  sponsor.  The
judge concluded that the appellants could not meet the requirements  of  the
EEA Regulations and she dismissed the appeals.

The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had erred by finding there  to  be  a
legal requirement for the EEA national to be a qualified person when it  had
been accepted she had acquired permanent residence and that  the  judge  had
raised concerns not previously raised by the respondent thus  depriving  the
appellants of a fair hearing. The grounds asserted further  that  the  judge
had misunderstood the evidence.

Permission was granted on 15 November 2018.

In his rule 24 response the respondent requested that the appeal  be  struck
out for want of jurisdiction as there was no right of appeal under the  2016
Regulations for extended family members.

Appeal hearing and submissions

At the hearing before me, Mr Jafferji confirmed my  understanding  that  the
Secretary of State was reviewing his position in regard to the  question  of
a right of appeal for extended family  members  under  the  EEA  Regulations
2016, further to the judgment in Secretary of State for the Home  Department
v Banger (Citizenship of the European Union - Right  of  Union  citizens  to
move and reside  freely  within  the  territory  of  the  European  Union  -
Judgment) [2018] EUECJ C-89/17. Ms Cunha was unaware of any such review  and
her instructions were to maintain that there was no  valid  appeal.  In  the
circumstances, and given that the respondent had not made  any  cross-appeal
challenging the Tribunal's jurisdiction,  I  decided  to  proceed  with  the
appeal on the assumption that the Tribunal had jurisdiction in  the  matter,
albeit that the 2016 Regulations stated otherwise and on  the  understanding
that that issue may be revisited following any such review.

In his submissions, Mr Jafferji clarified that there  were  two  grounds  of
appeal. The first ground was that there was  clear  evidence  that  the  EEA
national sponsor was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
EEA Regulations. She had permanent residence and did not need to  show  that
she was a qualified person, but there was evidence of her exercising  treaty
rights in any event.  The judge had therefore erred by finding that she  was
not a qualified person and finding that the appellants could  not  meet  the
Regulations on that basis. The second ground was that the judge  had  raised
the issue of dependency when that had  not  been  a  matter  raised  in  the
respondent's decision. As this was a papers appeal, it  was  incumbent  upon
the judge to give notice to the parties of any other issues she intended  to
consider. In any event the judge had applied the wrong  test,  at  [24],  in
considering the issue of dependency by  requiring  the  appellants  to  show
that their "full basic needs" were met by the  sponsor,  rather  than  their
basic needs. Furthermore, the judge had misunderstood the evidence. She  had
relied upon the passage in the decision in Sibtain Ikram's father's  appeal,
at [20], that the  sponsor  did  not  send  money  to  the  appellants,  his
siblings, whereas it had always been the case that the  money  was  sent  to
their parents for all the family. Further,  the  decision  in  the  mother's
appeal found that she was dependent upon her son and  that  an  increase  in
the money sent to her was for the sponsor's siblings'  college  fees.  Since
the appellants were  dependent  upon  their  mother  and  their  mother  was
dependant upon the sponsor, it followed that the appellants  were  dependent
upon the sponsor. None of that was considered by the judge.

Ms Cunha submitted that any error raised in the first ground was  immaterial
because of the  judge's  findings  on  dependency.  The  judge  applied  the
correct test. There was limited evidence in relation  to  dependency  before
the judge. The question  of  the  lack  of  evidence  of  the  EEA  national
exercising treaty rights was relevant  to  the  question  of  dependency  as
there was no evidence of her income and the P45 showed that she  had  ceased
employment. The EEA sponsor had never attended any of the appeals. Ms  Cunha
relied on the judgment in Pedro v Secretary of State for Work  and  Pensions
[2009] EWCA Civ 1358 in submitting that the judge was entitled  to  consider
the factual dependency, as the sponsor was not in the  direct  ascending  or
descending line.

In response Mr Jafferji referred me to the evidence which  had  been  before
the judge of  remittances  from  the  EEA  national  herself  and  from  her
husband, the appellants' brother. That evidence had  been  rejected  by  the
judge because it was photocopied,  whereas  the  Tribunals  considering  the
previous appeals of the appellants' parents had  accepted  the  evidence  of
remittances as credible.

Discussion

As Mr Jafferji properly submitted,  there  is  no  requirement  in  the  EEA
Regulations  for  the  EEA  national  sponsor  to  be  a  qualified  person:
regulation 12 requires that the EEA national  "is  residing  in  the  United
Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations" and that is satisfied  by  the
EEA national having permanent residence under the Regulations. In so far  as
the judge may have  considered  that  the  appellants  failed  to  meet  the
requirements of the EEA Regulations due to the lack of evidence of  the  EEA
national exercising treaty rights, I agree with Mr Jafferji  that  that  was
an error of law. However it seems to me that the  judge's  consideration  of
the EEA national exercising treaty rights and working in the UK was  in  the
context of the consideration of dependency and that  there  was  accordingly
no such error. In any event, even if the judge had made such an error, I  do
not consider that it was material  given  her  finding  that  there  was  no
dependency between the appellants and the EEA national sponsor.

It was Mr Jafferji's submission that the judge was not entitled to  consider
the matter of dependency as  it  did  not  form  part  of  the  reasons  for
refusal. However, whilst there was no direct reference to  the  question  of
dependency in the reasons letter, the refusal was  on  the  basis  that  the
appellants did not meet the requirements of regulation  12.  The  burden  of
proof therefore lay upon the appellants to  show  that  they  did  meet  the
requirements of regulation 12 and those requirements necessarily included  a
requirement that the appellants were dependent  upon  the  EEA  national  in
order to be considered as her extended family members, as  the  judge  noted
at [12]. In any event, the issue of dependency was raised by the  appellants
themselves in the grounds of appeal, as the judge recorded at [8],  and  the
appellants could hardly be said to have been taken by surprise by  the  fact
that the judge addressed the matter in  her  decision.  The  fact  that  the
appeal was determined on the papers did not place any burden upon the  judge
to provide the appellants with a further opportunity to respond  to  matters
raised at the hearing. On the contrary it was the choice of  the  appellants
to have a papers determination of the appeal rather than an oral hearing  at
which the sponsors  could  have  attended  and  responded  to  any  concerns
arising. Accordingly I do not consider that any  unfairness  arose  in  that
respect, as the grounds assert.

Neither do I agree with Mr Jafferji that the judge applied  the  wrong  test
when considering dependency or that  by  using  the  word  "full",  next  to
"basic needs" at [24], she considered that  there  had  to  be  demonstrated
anything over and above  the  appellants'  basic  needs  being  met  by  the
sponsors. It is clear from the judge's findings at  [22]  that  she  applied
the correct test.

The  further  points  raised  by  Mr  Jafferji  were  that  the  judge   had
misinterpreted or misunderstood the evidence and had  failed  to  take  into
account the positive  findings  made  in  the  allowed  appeals  of  Sibtain
Ikram's parents. However the judge  had  regard  to  the  decisions  of  the
Tribunals in those appeals. She specifically referred to the appeals at  [9]
and [10]. I do not accept that the judge took findings from those  decisions
out of context or "cherry picked", as the  grounds  of  appeal  assert.  The
evidence recorded at [20] of the father's appeal was as  the  judge  stated,
namely that Sibtain Ikram's siblings in Pakistan did not  need  him  or  his
wife to send them money. The judge  also  noted  the  lack  of  evidence  to
confirm the claim in the  mother's  appeal  before  Judge  Andrew  that  the
sponsors paid the appellants' educational costs. The judge was  fully  aware
that  Judge  Mailer  and  Judge  Andrew  had  found  that   dependency   was
established between the sponsors and Sibtain Ikram's  parents.  However  she
was also aware of concerns expressed by Judge Andrew about  Sibtain  Ikram's
evidence  and  she  referred  to  inconsistencies  between  Sibtain  Ikram's
evidence before Judge Andrew and his evidence before  previous  judges.  The
judge  was  fully  entitled  to  take  those  concerns  into  account   when
considering the weight to be accorded to  those  decisions  and  the  impact
they had on the appellants' claims of dependency.

Further, the judge had full regard to the evidence of  money  transfers,  to
which Mr Jafferji referred me, and made adverse findings  on  that  evidence
at [24]. She commented at [22] on the lack of evidence to support the  claim
that the EEA national paid for the appellants' studies and basic  needs  and
commented on the fact that the EEA national had never  appeared  at  any  of
the  appeals.  All  of  those  matters  were   relevant   to   the   judge's
consideration of the appeal and she was unarguably entitled to  accord  them
the weight that she did. There was no requirement on the judge  to  conclude
that, because previous Tribunals had found the parents to be dependent  upon
the sponsors, it was inevitably the case that the appellants were  dependent
upon  their  parents  and  thus  dependent  upon  the  sponsors.  That   was
effectively the submission made by Mr Jafferji.  The  judge  gave  full  and
proper reasons for rejecting that claim.

For all of these reasons, and in light of  the  judge's  properly  justified
concerns, the judge was fully entitled  to  reach  the  adverse  conclusions
that she did. There was no unfairness sin her approach  and  there  were  no
errors of law in her findings and conclusions. The appellants'  grounds  are
not made out. I uphold the judge's decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed: [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  Dated: 19 February 2019

