
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ea/00743/2016
                                                               ea/00744/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2018                   |On 5 November 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     FTS
                                     GAS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Sackey
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants.



Introduction

 1.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Ghana  born  in  1999   and   2006
    respectively.  They were minors when they made their  applications  for
    EEA family permits on 4 December 2015.  The second appellant remains  a
    minor and this decision refers to his circumstances.  I have  therefore
    maintained the anonymity orders.

 2. The first appellant claims to be the nephew of Mr Sackey.   The  second
    appellant claims to be the adopted brother of Mr Sackey  and  that  his
    adopted mother Mary Okusu is the mother of Mr Sackey.   The  appellants
    also claim that Mr Sackey is married to Aiga Lorence  ('the  sponsor').
    The sponsor is a Latvian and therefore EEA citizen.

 3. The appellants' family permit applications were  refused  in  decisions
    dated 4 January 2016.   Further decisions were issued dated 11 February
    2016.  The entry clearance officer ('ECO')  accepted  that  the  second
    appellant was adopted by Ms Okusu, and is therefore the adopted brother
    of Mr Sackey and that the first appellant is the nephew of  Mr  Sackey.
    The ECO found that this meant that the appellants are not direct family
    members and as such the requirements of regulation 8 of the Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 ('the  2006  Regs')  needed  to  be  met.   This
    relates to extended family members ('EFM's).  The ECO therefore refused
    the family permits having reached the following conclusions:

      i) There were doubts as to the appellants' claimed  relationship  with
         the sponsor, as the ECO was unable to contact her.

     ii) There was insufficient evidence of the appellants' dependency  upon
         the sponsor.

    iii) In any event it was not credible that the sponsor had the financial
         means to support both appellants, in addition to Ms  Okusu  and  Mr
         Sackey.

Appeal proceedings

 4. These appeals have a lengthy procedural history.  It is only  necessary
    to summarise this here.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ('FTT') against the 4 January 2016 decisions to the FTT.   The
    further decisions dated 11 February 2016 have not been the  subject  of
    any separate appeal.  In a decision  dated  19  August  2016,  the  FTT
    concluded that the  4  January  2016  decisions  had  been  effectively
    withdrawn and replaced by the 11 February 2016 decisions, and therefore
    no appeals had been lodged regarding the  latter  decisions.   The  FTT
    therefore concluded that it did not have jurisdiction.

 5. The matter came before Upper Tribunal ('UT') Judge Harris, who  decided
    in a decision dated 21 April  2017  that  any  error  in  treating  the
    decisions under appeal as withdrawn was not material because there  was
    no jurisdiction to consider the appeals in any event pursuant  to  Sala
    [2016] UKUT 411.

 6. In a consent order dated 3 August 2018, the  Court  of  Appeal  granted
    permission to appeal and  remitted  the  appeal  to  the  UT.   In  the
    accompanying statement of reasons, it was accepted  that  following  SM
    (Algeria) v ECO (UKSC 2015/0243) the appellants were entitled to appeal
    under the 2006 Regs, and that Sala was wrongly decided.

Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me, there was substantial agreement  between  the
    parties as follows:

      i) The 11 February 2016 decisions sought to clarify the ECO's position
         and the 4 January 2015 decisions, which were the subject of  appeal
         grounds must be read with that clarification in mind.

     ii) In short, the ECO continued  to  accept  the  claimed  relationship
         between the appellants  and  their  uncle  /  adopted  brother  but
         disputed (a) sponsor and (b) that there was  satisfactory  evidence
         of dependency upon the sponsor.

    iii) As such, Mr  McVeety  made  it  clear  that  there  was  never  any
         application to withdraw the 4 January 2015 decisions.

     iv) As such the appeal  against  those  decisions  remains  extant  and
         valid, and the FTT erred in law in finding otherwise.

      v) Thus far there have been  no  findings  of  fact  on  the  disputed
         issues.

     vi) These disputed issues require extensive  fact-finding,  and  it  is
         appropriate and proportionate for this to be  carried  out  in  the
         FTT.

Discussion

 8. I have no hesitation in concluding that the  parties  were  correct  to
    reach the agreement set out above.  The FTT erred  in  law  in  finding
    that the 4 January 2016 decisions were withdrawn.  The  appeal  against
    those  decisions  remains  extant.   The  further  decisions  dated  11
    February 2016 did  no  more  than  clarify  the  outstanding  areas  of
    dispute.

Disposal

 9. I have had regard to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, and I have decided that this is an appropriate case
    to remit to the FTT given the absence of any factual findings thus far.



10. There has already been substantial delay in the determination of  these
    appeals, arising as they do from decisions dated as far back as January
    2016, and it would be helpful if the appeals could be listed as soon as
    possible in the FTT.

Decision

11. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error of  law
    and I set it aside.

12. I allow the appeal against the FTT's decision.  The decision  shall  be
    remade by the FTT.


Signed        Dated

M. Plimmer    26 October 2018

Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

