
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00774/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 2 December 2016                            |On 20 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                        Mohamed Nafras Mohamed Nazeer
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the respondent's decision
    to refuse him  a  residence  permit  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as  amended)  as  an  extended  family
    member.

 2. The appellant's representatives, SEB  Solicitors,  did  not  appear  or
    provide  representation,  but  the  appellant,  despite  the  transport
    difficulties today, was present in person.  I  explained  to  him  that
    there was no valid appeal before the Upper  Tribunal,  because  of  the
    decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal  :  Albania)  [2016]  UKUT  411
    (IAC) which held that:

         There is no statutory right of appeal against the decision  of  the
         Secretary of State not to  grant  a  Residence  Card  to  a  person
         claiming to be an Extended Family Member.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf, when granting permission,  noted  the
    relevance of Sala but considered that there  were  some  matters  which
    might be properly justiciable before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   That  was
    legally erroneous:  in the absence of any statutory  jurisdiction,  the
    Upper Tribunal has no valid appeal before it and the  only  appropriate
    method of challenge  to  the  refusal  of  an  extended  family  member
    residence card is by way of judicial review.

 4. This appeal is dismissed.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson       Date:        19 December 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
