
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00956/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2020                  |On 29th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by TMC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT").
    Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, AH  is  granted
    anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly
    identify him or any member  of  his  family.   This  direction  applies
    amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply  with  this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of  Pakistan.  On  3rd  November  2017,  he
    applied for a derivative residence card  to  confirm  that  he  is  the
    primary carer of ("SA"), a self sufficient EEA national under  the  age
    of 18.  SA was born on 18th  November  2013  and  is  the  son  of  the
    appellant's brother, a  national  of  Pakistan,  and  sister-in-law,  a
    citizen of Poland.  The application was refused by the  respondent  for
    reasons set out  in  a  decision  dated  11th  February  2019  and  the
    appellant's appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Aujla ("the judge") for reasons set out  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 21st August 2019.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla


 3. The appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraphs [2] to [7]
    of the decision.  There is reference, at paragraph [10],  to  an  order
    made by Milton Keynes County Court in respect of SA, but the judge  was
    not shown a copy of that order because the appellant had  not  obtained
    the permission of the Family Court for the order to be  disclosed.  The
    judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,  his  brother  and  his
    sister-in-law.  At paragraph [17], the  judge  refers  to  the  reasons
    given by the respondent for refusing the application:


         "... He had applied on the basis that he was the primary  carer  of
         SA but the respondent's records showed that the appellant and  SA's
         mother appear to be living at the same address. As  the  child  was
         living with his mother, the respondent could not be satisfied  that
         the  appellant  had   primary   responsibility   for   the   child.
         Furthermore, the appellant had not demonstrated that  SA  would  be
         unable to remain in the UK if the appellant left for an  indefinite
         period. It was claimed that the second sponsor was a person who was
         exercising free movement rights in the UK as a worker. As such  she
         had a right to reside in the UK as a result of the provision of the
         2016 Regulations. As the second sponsor was residing in the UK, she
         could continue to care for SA if the appellant were  to  leave.  It
         was accepted therefore that as SA was more likely to remain in  the
         UK and be cared for by the second sponsor  if  the  appellant  were
         required to leave the  UK  for  an  indefinite  period  (sic).  His
         application was therefore refused."

 4. The evidence given by the appellant, his brother and  sister-in-law  is
    summarised at paragraphs [18] to [20] of the decision.  The appellant's
    brother and sister-in-law had given evidence that they had returned  to
    the UK from Poland the day before the hearing and would be leaving  the
    following day, leaving their son in the  care  of  the  appellant.  The
    judge noted the appellant claims that he is the  primary  carer  of  SA
    pursuant to the Court Order made by Milton Keynes  County  Court,  that
    the appellant submitted, amounted to legal guardianship.  The appellant
    claimed that since  the  making  of  the  order,  he  has  had  primary
    responsibility for SA's care because SA's parents  were  spending  time
    back in Poland as the appellant's sister-in-law had  inherited  a  farm
    and had responsibility for that. They therefore left SA in the UK to be
    cared for by the appellant and SA would have to leave  the  UK  if  the
    appellant is required to leave.


 5. The judge accepted the appellant is the  legal  guardian  of  SA.   The
    Judge states, at [25]; "the only other issue  before  me  to  determine
    therefore is whether or not the appellant was in fact the primary carer
    of SA".  In addressing that issue, the judge considered, at  [27],  why
    the appellant had waited until November 2018 to  make  his  application
    when in fact he claimed to be the primary carer of SA since  May  2017.
    The judge considered  the  delay  undermined  the  genuineness  of  the
    appellant's claim that he has had sole  responsibility  for  SA's  care
    since at least May 2017 and continues to  be  his  primary  carer.   At
    paragraphs [28] and [29], the  judge  sets  out  his  reasons  for  the
    conclusion that the appellant has not established, on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that he is the primary carer of SA.  The judge stated:


         "28. The evidence before me was that the sponsors were still either
         exercising  treaty  rights  or  settled  in  the   UK   under   the
         regulations. They had their home here in the UK. As the  respondent
         noted, the appellant was living in the same  household  with  them.
         Although the sponsors may be spending time in Poland from  time  to
         time, there is no evidence before me to suggest that they had  lost
         all connections with the UK. I repeat, they still had a home  here.
         There was no evidence before me to clearly  show  by  reference  to
         months weeks or days, (with  a  clear  chronology  and  appropriate
         evidence showing exit from entry (sic) back to  the  UK)  that  the
         sponsors had been absent from the UK and SA's life for  substantial
         periods of time at a time since May  2017.  There  was  equally  no
         evidence before me to show that they had 'migrated' back to  Poland
         thereby severing all connections with the UK. In the absence of any
         evidence  in  that  regard,  considering  that  they   were   still
         maintaining a home in the UK and spend time here, the fact that the
         appellant was looking after SA during his parent's  short  absences
         abroad from time to time did not make him the primary carer.

         29.  Even if I accept that the sponsors were spending some time  in
         Poland during which time SA was looked after by the appellant,  the
         appellant had to show much more involvement, confirmed by  relevant
         evidence, than what he had provided or claimed to  qualify  as  the
         primary carer of the child. The scenario before  me  was  that  the
         sponsors, as the biological  parents  of  SA,  were  still  primary
         carers of their child, like other biological parents. They were fit
         and well and physically and financially capable  of  looking  after
         the child. They have not provided a credible and sustainable reason
         for giving up their responsibility to care for the child,  if  they
         had truly given it up which I do not accept. I therefore find  that
         the appellant does not establish that he was the primary  carer  of
         SA."

 6. The Judge found, at [30] that at  its  highest,  the  appellant  shares
    responsibility for SA's care with his parents and is  not  the  primary
    carer.  The Judge found that the appeal could therefore only succeed if
    the appellant shares responsibility for SA's care with one other person
    who is not an exempt person.  An exempt person is defined in Regulation
    16(7) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  as
    inter alia a person has a right to reside under  another  provision  of
    the Regulations. The judge noted that as the  appellant's  brother  and
    sister-in-law have a right to reside in the UK under  the  regulations,
    they are 'exempt persons' and the appellant cannot  satisfy  Regulation
    16(8) of the 2016 Regulations.


The appeal before me


 7. The appellant  advances  four  grounds  of  appeal.  First,  the  judge
    considered whether the appellant is the legal guardian of  SA,  whereas
    the respondent did not challenge the appellant's claim  that  he  is  a
    legal guardian of SA.  Second, the judge refers to the late application
    for a derivative residence card as undermining  the  appellant's  claim
    that he is the primary carer of SA, but that was not  a  matter  relied
    upon  by  the  respondent  in  reaching  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    application. In the absence of a Home Office Presenting Officer at  the
    hearing of the appeal and any opportunity for the appellant to  explain
    the delay, the judge erred in concluding that the delay undermines  the
    appellant's  claim.   In  any  event  whether  the  appellant  has   an
    entitlement to a derivative right of residence is a matter of fact, and
    any delay in making an application when in fact no such application  is
    required, demonstrates the judge  taking  into  account  an  irrelevant
    factor in reaching his decision.  Third, in reaching his  decision  the
    judge failed to consider the decision of the CJEU in Chavez-Vilchez  C-
    133/15.  The CJEU held that it was important to determine which  parent
    was the primary carer of the child and whether  there  was  in  fact  a
    relationship of dependency between the child and that parent. That  the
    other parent, a Union citizen, was actually able and  willing  to  take
    responsibility for the child was a relevant factor, but it  was  not  a
    sufficient ground for a conclusion that there was not, as  between  the
    child and the third-party  national  parent,  such  a  relationship  of
    dependency that the child would indeed be compelled to leave the EU  if
    the third-party national were refused the right of residence.  Finally,
    there was no consideration of any dependency between the appellant  and
    his nephew and the judge failed to consider the best interests  of  the
    child.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    25th November 2019.  The matter comes before me  to  determine  whether
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge is tainted by a  material
    error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


 9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Coleman adopts the  grounds  of  appeal.
    He submits that at the hearing of the appeal, the judge did not ask any
    questions of the appellant and or his witnesses and the  findings  made
    are at odds with the evidence that was before the Tribunal.  He submits
    the central issue in the  appeal  was  whether  the  appellant  is  the
    primary carer of SA.  If the judge was concerned  about  the  delay  in
    making an application, and about the application that the appellant had
    previously pursued, that should have been explored at the  hearing  and
    the appellant given an opportunity to explain the delay.


10. Mr Coleman drew my attention to the evidence of the appellant  set  out
    at paragraphs [4] to [7] of  his  witness  statement.  The  appellant's
    evidence was that his sister-in-law has been  preoccupied  due  to  her
    responsibilities in Poland and his brother and sister-in-law travel  to
    Poland to maintain a farm.  The  appellant  confirms  that  his  nephew
    resides with him in the UK and as a result, his brother and  sister-in-
    law decided to make him a legal guardian.  SA is in full-time education
    in the UK and the appellant takes him  to  and  brings  him  back  from
    school. The  appellant  also  takes  SA  to  the  park  and  to  social
    gatherings. The appellant's evidence was that he is fully involved with
    SA's educational activities and helps him  with  homework  and  attends
    parents evening. The appellant said in his witness statement that he is
    responsible for SA's daily care, including  decisions  surrounding  his
    upbringing and welfare.   In  his  witness  statement  the  appellant's
    brother confirmed that his wife has inherited a farm in Poland and that
    means that she needs to be in Poland to help her elderly mother who can
    no longer maintain the  farm.  He  confirmed  that  he  has  also  been
    visiting Poland with his wife to help her run the farm. The appellant's
    brother confirmed that he  has  faith  in  his  brother  and  that  the
    appellant is a legal  guardian  to  his  son.  He  explained  that  the
    appellant takes SA to school and has a say in his upbringing. There was
    also a statement from the appellant's sister-in-law who confirmed  that
    SA is very fond of the appellant and they spend a lot of time  together
    whilst she works. She too confirms that she has  inherited  a  farm  in
    Poland which requires her and her husband's full-time  attention.   Her
    evidence was that her mother is not  well,  elderly  and  is  therefore
    unable to maintain the farm and needs their assistance.  She  confirmed
    that she has been to Poland with her husband for long periods of  time,
    leaving the appellant to care for SA.


11. The respondent was not represented at the hearing of the appeal and the
    judge did not question the evidence.  At the end of paragraph [28], the
    judge refers to the appellant looking  after  SA  during  his  parents'
    'short absences abroad', whereas the evidence was  that  SA's  parents'
    spent long periods of time in  Poland.   Mr  Coleman  submits  that  at
    paragraph [29], the judge stated that "... The scenario before  me  was
    that the sponsors, as the biological parents  of  SA,  were  still  the
    primary carers of their child...", but that is  not  founded  upon  the
    evidence that was before the Tribunal.  He submits that in reaching the
    decision as to whether the appellant  has  primary  responsibility  for
    SA's care, the judge reached a decision that was not open to him on the
    evidence. In Patel and  Shah  -v-  SSHD  [2019]  UKSC  59,  Lady  Arden
    confirmed that in the case  of  children,  it  is  first  necessary  to
    determine who the primary carer is, and whether there is a relationship
    of dependency with the third country national.


12. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Isherwood submits there is no  material
    error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   She
    submits at paragraph [10] of his decision, the judge records  that  the
    there was a Child Arrangement Order not  a  legal  guardianship  order.
    Although the respondent was not  represented  at  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal, the respondent's position was set out in the decision that  was
    the subject of  the  appeal.  The  respondent  had  confirmed  in  that
    decision that the respondent does not accept the appellant has provided
    adequate evidence to show that he has primary responsibility  for  SA's
    care.  It was for the appellant to  establish  his  claim  and  it  was
    entirely open to the Judge to conclude,  at  [28],  the  appellant  has
    failed to provide any evidence to clearly show  that  his  brother  and
    sister-in-law  have  been  absent  from  the  UK  and  SA's  life   for
    substantial periods of time since May 2017.  She submits  the  evidence
    set out in the  witness  statements  is  vague  and  just  because  the
    appellant's brother and sister-in-law claimed that there had been  long
    absences, the judge was not  bound  to  accept  there  have  been  long
    absences.  Ms Isherwood submits that at paragraphs [28] and  [29],  the
    judge reaches a decision on the evidence that was open  to  the  judge.
    The judge was entitled to conclude the appellant does not have  primary
    responsibility for SA's care and that at  its  highest,  as  the  judge
    states at [30], the appellant shares responsibility for SA's care, with
    SA's parents.


13. Ms Isherwood refers to the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Patel  &
    Shah -v- SSHD.  At paragraph [22] of the decision, Lady Arden confirmed
    that what lies at the  heart  of  the  Zambrano  jurisprudence  is  the
    requirement that the Union citizen (here, SA)  would  be  compelled  to
    leave the union territory if the third country national with  whom  the
    union citizen has a relationship of dependency,  is  removed.   In  the
    case of children, it is first necessary to determine  who  the  primary
    carer is, and  then  determine  whether  there  is  a  relationship  of
    dependency with the third country  national  or  the  national  parent.
    Here, SA would not be required to leave the EU.  SA's parents remain in
    the UK albeit, they claim to spend long periods of time in Poland.  The
    judge was not satisfied, on  the  evidence  that  they  do  spend  long
    periods of time in Poland and there was no evidence of SA's  dependency
    upon the appellant or a claim that SA would be compelled to  leave  the
    union territory if the appellant is removed.



Discussion


14. It is convenient to set out the relevant provisions of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 that make provision  relating
    to the derivative right to reside in the UK.  Insofar as  is  relevant,
    Regulation 16 stated:


         16.- Derivative right to reside

         (1)  A person has a derivative right to reside during any period in
         which the person-

             (a)  is not an exempt person; and

             (b)  satisfies  each  of  the  criteria  in  one  or  more  of
                  paragraphs (2) to (6).

         (2)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

             (a)  the person is the primary carer of an EEA national; and

             (b)  the EEA national-

                  (i)  is under the age of 18;

                  (ii) resides in the United Kingdom  as  a  self-sufficient
                      person; and

                  (iii)    would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom
                      if  the  person  left  the  United  Kingdom  for   an
                      indefinite period.

         ...

         (7)  In this regulation-

             ...

              (c) an "exempt person" is a person-

                  (i)  who has a right to reside under another provision  of
                      these Regulations;

                  ...

         (8)  A person is the "primary carer" of another person ("AP") if-

             (a)  the person is a direct relative or a  legal  guardian  of
                  AP; and

             (b)  either-

                  (i)  the person has primary responsibility for AP's  care;
                      or

                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for AP's care  with
                      one other person.

         (9)  In paragraph (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) or (5)(c),  if  the  role  of
         primary carer is shared with  another  person  in  accordance  with
         paragraph (8)(b)(ii), the words "the person"  are  to  be  read  as
         "both primary carers".

         ...

         (11) A person is not  be  regarded  as  having  responsibility  for
         another person's care for the purpose of paragraph (8) on the  sole
         basis of a financial contribution towards that person's care.

         ...

15. It was for the appellant to establish that he is the primary  carer  of
    SA.  The appellant is the paternal uncle of  SA.   Here,  to  establish
    that he is the primary carer, Regulation 16(8) required  the  appellant
    to establish that he is a legal guardian of SA; and, either, (i) he has
    primary responsibility for SA's care; or (ii), he  shares  equally  the
    responsibility for SA's care with one other person.  If  the  appellant
    is a legal guardian of SA, and does not have primary responsibility for
    SA's care, he could still establish that he is a  'primary  carer'  for
    the  purposes  of  Regulation  16(2)(a)  if  he  shares   equally   the
    responsibility  for  SA's  care  with  one  other  person.   In   those
    circumstances, Regulation 16(9) operates such that the appellant has  a
    derivative right to reside if SA would  be  unable  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom if both his primary carers left the United  Kingdom  for
    an indefinite period.


16. At paragraph [25], the judge noted that there are two issues for him to
    determine. The first is whether the appellant is a  legal  guardian  of
    SA.  Although that was not an issue identified by the respondent in the
    decision dated 11th February 2019, on appeal, it was for the  appellant
    to establish that he has a derivative right to reside in  the  UK.   In
    any event, the judge resolved that issue in favour  of  the  appellant.
    Although, the judge did not see the order made by the Family Court, the
    judge noted there was  a  child  arrangement  'agreement'  between  the
    appellant, his brother  and  sister-in-law.   The  judge  accepted  the
    submission made by Mr Coleman that it was for all intents and  purposes
    a legal guardianship arrangement.


17. The judge was not satisfied for reasons given  at  paragraphs  [26]  to
    [29] that the appellant has primary responsibility for  SA's  care.   I
    have carefully considered the evidence of the  appellant,  his  brother
    and sister-in-law that was drawn to my attention by  Mr  Coleman.   The
    judge noted, at [27], that the appellant's  brother  and  sister-in-law
    were spending time outside the UK in Poland to look after the farm that
    the  appellant's  sister-in-law  had  inherited.  Although  the   judge
    referred, at [27], to the delay in making the application as  one  that
    undermines the genuineness of his claim that he has sole responsibility
    for SA's care, the judge went on to  consider  the  evidence  that  was
    before the Tribunal.


18. The judge noted, at [28], the  appellant's  brother  and  sister-in-law
    were still either exercising treaty rights or settled in the  UK  under
    the Regulations. The judge noted they continue to have a  home  in  the
    UK, and the appellant lives in the same household with them. The  judge
    noted that although the "..sponsors may be spending time in Poland from
    time to time, there is no evidence before me to suggest that  they  had
    lost all connections with the UK.... There was no evidence before me to
    clearly show by reference to  months,  weeks  or  days  (with  a  clear
    chronology and appropriate evidence showing exit from entry (sic)  back
    to the UK that the sponsors had been absent from the UK and  SA's  life
    for substantial periods of time since May 2017. There  was  equally  no
    evidence before me to show that they  had  'migrated'  back  to  Poland
    thereby severing all connections with the UK...".  In my judgement upon
    a careful reading of paragraphs [26] to [29] of the decision, it was in
    the end the paucity of the evidence that led to  the  judge  concluding
    that he could not be satisfied the appellant has primary responsibility
    for SA's care.  Although the witness statements of  the  appellant  and
    SA's parents make the broad claim that the appellant is responsible for
    SA's daily care, the statements  are  devoid  of  any  real  detail  to
    establish that the appellant has primary responsibility for SA's  care.
    The judge was entitled to note that SA's biological  parents  are  also
    primary carers of SA.   They  are  fit  and  well  and  physically  and
    financially capable of looking after SA. There is no evidence of  their
    having given up their responsibility to care for SA.  There  is  little
    doubt the appellant cares for SA whilst his parents are in Poland,  but
    the periods and length of their stay in Poland was far from clear.   On
    the evidence, it was in my judgement open to  the  judge  to  find  the
    appellant does not have primary responsibility for SA's  care  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision.


19. That is not however the end of the matter, because Regulation  16(8)(b)
    provides that the appellant could also establish that he is the primary
    carer of SA, if he is a legal guardian (which the judge  accepted)  and
    shares equally the responsibility for SA's care with one other  person.
    At paragraph [30] of the decision, the judge found the appellant cannot
    satisfy that requirement, because the appellant could not show  he  was
    sharing responsibility for SA's care with  a  person  "who  is  not  an
    exempt person".  The judge had  set  out  Regulation  16  of  the  2016
    Regulations at paragraph [23] of his decision.  The provision cited  by
    the Judge was that in force until 28th July 2018.  In fact,  the  words
    "who is not an exempt person" in Regulation 16(8)(b)(ii), were  revoked
    by  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   (Amendment)   Regulations
    2018/801, Schedule 1 paragraph 10.  The  regulations  were  amended  to
    reflect the Zambrano principle.  I am satisfied the  judge  erroneously
    considered Regulation 16(8)(b)(ii) by reference to the provision as  it
    was in force until 28th July 2018, and the judge  erred  in  concluding
    that the appellant is not the primary carer of SA for the  purposes  of
    Regulation 16(2)(a) of the 2016 Regulations.


20. I must therefore consider whether the error is material to the  outcome
    of the appeal.   In such a case, the appellate Tribunal has  to  decide
    whether it would be just to  let  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    stand.  The question is whether I can be tolerably confident  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision would have been the same on the basis of
    the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  reasons
    which have survived scrutiny.


21.  The judge was satisfied the appellant is a legal guardian  of  SA  and
    shares equally the responsibility for SA's care  with  SA's  biological
    parents.  The appellant is therefore a primary  carer  of  SA  for  the
    purposes of Regulation 16(2)(a) of the 2016 Regulations.  The  question
    that  then  arises  by  operation  of  Regulation  16(9)  of  the  2016
    Regulations is whether SA would be unable to remain in the  UK  if  the
    appellant, his brother and sister-in-law left the United Kingdom for an
    indefinite period.


22. The judge noted the evidence that the appellant's brother and sister-in-
    law may be spending time in Poland from time to time, but there was  no
    evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  they  had  lost  all
    connections with the UK.  In fact, they continue to have a home in  the
    UK and are either exercising treaty rights or are settled  in  the  UK.
    Although there was evidence of the appellant playing a role in the day-
    to-day care of SA during periods when SA's parents are both absent from
    the UK, in Poland, there was no evidence before  the  Tribunal  as  the
    judge noted, to establish the amount of time  that  SA's  parents  were
    absent from the UK, by reference to months, weeks or days (with a clear
    chronology and appropriate evidence showing exit from and entry back to
    the UK) to establish the biological parents had been absent from the UK
    and SA's life for substantial periods of time.


23. As Lady Arden said in Patel & Shah -v- SSHD, what lies at the heart  of
    the Zambrano jurisprudence is the requirement that  the  Union  Citizen
    would be compelled to leave the Union territory if  the  third  country
    national, with whom the union citizen has a relationship of dependency,
    is removed.  In  answering  that  question,  a  Court  or  Tribunal  is
    required to take account of the best interests of the  child  concerned
    and all the specific circumstances.  They include the age of the child,
    the child's physical and  emotional  development,  the  extent  of  his
    emotional ties both to the Union  citizen  parent  and  to  the  third-
    country national, and the risks which separation from the latter  might
    entail for that child's equilibrium; Chavez-Vilchez.


24. The test of compulsion is a practical test to be applied to the  actual
    facts and the evidence before the  decision  maker.   As  Ms  Isherwood
    submits, there was quite simply no evidence to establish that there  is
    a relationship of dependency such that SA would be compelled  to  leave
    the territory of the European Union if the appellant does  not  have  a
    derivative right to reside in the UK.  There was no evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal of anything regarding the age of SA,  his  physical
    and emotional development, and the extent of his emotional ties to  the
    appellant and his biological parents, such  that  separation  from  the
    appellant would be contrary to the best interests of SA.  Although SA's
    biological parents may desire that the appellant is able to  reside  in
    the UK to keep the family together, that is  insufficient  to  conclude
    that SA would be compelled to leave the territory of the European Union
    if the appellant does not have a derivative right to reside in the UK.


25. I accept that in the circumstances, as Ms Isherwood submits, the appeal
    could not succeed on the basis of the findings that were  made  by  the
    judge which have survived scrutiny, and upon a proper consideration  of
    the very limited evidence that was before the First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    am satisfied error of law identified in this decision  would  not  have
    resulted in a different outcome and the  error  is  immaterial  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.


26. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


   27. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date          23rd January 2020

       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award


Signed                                  Date          23rd January 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
