

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number:  EA/00311/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |     Decision & Reasons  Promulgated|
|On 21 December 2017                       |     On 22 December 2017            |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                       PAULO HENRIQUE DA MOTTA PIVATO
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Unrepresented
For the Respondent:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Fox promulgated on 7 March 2017 dismissing his appeal against
         the  respondent's  decision  of  5  October  2016  to  refuse   his
         application for a resident card under the EEA Regulations.


      2. The appellant is a national of Brazil, born on this day in 1968. He
         has previously been admitted  under  the  EEA  Regulations.  He  is
         married to an Italian national. when he  made  his  application  in
         April 2016, he omitted to provide his  marriage  certificate.  This
         was later sent  to  the  Tribunal.  The  appellant  explained  that
         because it had been in Portuguese he  had  only  sent  the  English
         translation  to  the  Home  Office.  Judge  Fox  had  the  original
         certificate and translation before him but considered that  as  the
         certificate had not been before the respondent when the application
         was made, the respondent had properly refused it.
      3. Permission was granted by Judge M J Gillespie on 15 September  2017
         on the basis that the  judge  had  arguably  erred  in  failing  to
         consider  whether  the  appellant  met  the   provisions   of   the
         Regulations at the date of the hearing.



      4. The respondent, in  her  Rule  24  response,  did  not  oppose  the
         application for permission and invited the Tribunal to consider the
         marriage certificate at a hearing. The matter then came before me.



    The Hearing



      5. The appellant attended the hearing.  He  said  that  his  wife  was
         unwell and unable to accompany him. He gave his new  address  in  [
                      ]  He  explained  why  he  had  failed  to  send   his
         certificate with his application and added that when  he  was  made
         aware that it was required even though it was in Portuguese, he had
         sent it to the Tribunal.



      6. Mr Tarlow made brief submissions. He observed that the  absence  of
         the marriage certificate had been the only reason for  the  refusal
         of the application. He examined the original documents and  pointed
         out that no issues of their veracity had been raised and that there
         was nothing to suggest they were not genuine documents. He  invited
         me to allow the appeal.



      7. The appellant was content with that and had nothing further to add.



      8. At the conclusion of the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  be
         allowing the appeal. The original certificate and translation  were
         returned to the appellant.



    Conclusions



      9. The respondent has conceded that Judge Fox made  an  error  of  law
         when he failed to have regard to the  documents  submitted  by  the
         appellant and failed to make findings on whether the provisions  of
         the EEA Regulations had been met at the date of  the  hearing.  The
         decision is flawed for those reasons and is set aside.



     10. I have had regard to the original;  marriage  certificate  and  the
         English translation  undertaken  by  a  certified  interpreter.  No
         issues were taken as to its authenticity. No other  reasons,  other
         than its absence, had been  relied  on  when  the  application  was
         refused.



     11. The appellant has adduced  original  and  unchallenged  documentary
         evidence of his marriage to an EEA national. He has confirmed  that
         the marriage is subsisting and that was not disputed by Mr  Tarlow.
         I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  failure  to  submit   the
         application to the respondent with  his  applicant  was  a  genuine
         misunderstanding of what was  required.  Suffice  to  say,  he  has
         remedied that situation and I am satisfied that he is the spouse of
         an EEA national.



     12. Decision


     13. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law such that  the  decision
         is set aside. I re-make the decision and allow the appeal under the
         EEA Regulations.



     14. Anonymity



     15. No request for an anonymity order was made and I see no  reason  to
         make one.

    Signed


       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 21 December 2017














