
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00346/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th April 2017 and 10th July 2017         |On 18th July 2017             |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 donya zare
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Vaughan instructed by NBS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Henderson made following a hearing at Bradford on 21st September 2016.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Iran born  on  19th  November  1993.   She
    appealed against a decision to refuse her a family permit to  join  her
    stepmother as the family member of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK.

 3. The sole issue before the judge was whether the  appellant  could  meet
    the requirements of Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii), namely a dependant  of  the
    EEA national or her spouse, the claimant's father.

 4. The judge started her consideration with a reference to the  fact  that
    the  claimant's  younger  siblings  had  already  made   a   successful
    application and were in the UK.  They were both under the  age  of  21.
    She recorded that the claimant was studying English at  university  and
    the evidence that all her expenses were paid for by  her  father.   The
    judge noted that the evidence about the amount of money which was being
    sent for the claimant's support was  discrepant  since  the  claimant's
    father and stepmother gave different accounts of the actual sums  being
    sent and the frequency of remittance.  She  noted  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence to support the oral evidence.  The explanation was
    that no receipts  could  be  provided  because  Iran  was  still  under
    sanctions.  However, her understanding was that most of  the  sanctions
    were lifted earlier this year and the articles provided  recording  the
    difficulty of sending money to Iran related to the USA.

 5. She then concluded as follows:-

         "The position I conclude is that the  appellant's  father  supports
         his daughter as it has been accepted  that  he  supported  his  two
         younger children in the past.  The appellant relies on this  income
         to attend university and to support herself in Iran.  I am  unclear
         who supports her mother and the appellant's father referred to  his
         poor relationship with her.  I accept that the  appellant's  father
         has been sending money by unofficial means in the form of cash from
         his business.  He referred to this and to receiving  receipts.   He
         is clearly reluctant to provide receipts.  I  do  not  accept  that
         this is because he is not sending  the  money  but  because  as  he
         referred to many of the transactions not being direct and I  accept
         that this may result in problems  with  the  authorities  in  Iran.
         This does not mean that he  is  not  supporting  his  daughter.   I
         accept that he has been supporting her and continues to support her
         financially.  He is her natural father and it is more  likely  than
         not that he has this responsibility as  he  has  with  his  younger
         children.  So far as I am aware it was not disputed that she is  in
         university and remains a student.  The evidence on this  point  was
         consistent."

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in law, had not applied  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
    conflicting evidence and had not addressed the question of whether  the
    financial support was necessary  to  meet  the  claimant's  fundamental
    needs.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Woodcraft  on  11th  January
    2017 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

 8. Prior to the hearing Mr Vaughan submitted a Rule 24 reply defending the
    determination.



Submissions

 9. Mr Mills relied on his grounds and in particular  emphasised  that  the
    judge had erred in relying on the fact that the  two  younger  children
    had been granted family permits when they did  not  have  to  establish
    dependency since they were under the age of 21.

10. Mr Vaughan submitted that the judge had reached a  conclusion  open  to
    her on the evidence.  She was obliged to consider the oral evidence and
    the demeanour of the witnesses before her  and  entitled  to  find  the
    evidence truthful and credible.  She was also entitled to rely upon the
    affidavit supplied by the claimant's mother confirming that her  father
    supported  his  daughter  which  was  consistent  with   the   cultural
    expectation that he would do so, and the  emotional  bond  between  the
    family as a whole.

Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law because it is clear that she
    relied  upon  an  irrelevant  consideration.   She  set  out   in   the
    determination the difficulties with the evidence but  appears  to  have
    been persuaded by the fact that it was, as she said, accepted  that  he
    had supported his younger children in the  past.   However,  dependency
    was never an issue in their case and  there  was  no  such  acceptance.
    Moreover, she did  not  consider  whether  the  financial  support  was
    necessary to meet the claimant's financial  needs  (Lim  v  ECO  Manila
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1383).

12. Mr Vaughan said that the claimant wished to adduce further  documentary
    evidence which he was not in a position to supply today.  Mr Mills  had
    no objection to the matter being adjourned.

13. The decision of Judge Henderson is set aside.  It will be remade  at  a
    resumed hearing on 10th July 2017.

Resumed Hearing

15.  At the resumed hearing Mr Vaughan told me that he had  instructions  to
    withdraw this appeal.  He conceded that the consequence would be  that,
    the determination of Judge Henderson having been set  aside,  that  the
    appeal against the Respondent's refusal to grant family permits to  the
    Appellant would be dismissed.

Appeal Dismissed.


Signed[pic]                             Date 18 July 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


