
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00817/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd June 2017                     |On 11th July 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD FAISAL
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan, Counsel instructed by SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Simmonds, promulgated on the 9th November 2016,  to  dismiss  the  appeal
   against the respondent's decision to revoke the appellant's EEA Residence
   Card (hereafter, "the decision").

2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on the 10th  December
   1988. His EEA Residence Card had been issued to him on the  1st  November
   2012 as confirmation of a right to reside in the United  Kingdom  as  the
   spouse of a Polish national, [JP]. The appellant and [JP] were married at
   the Stoke-on-Trent Registry Office on the 16th June 2012.

3. The reason  for  the  decision  was  that  the  respondent  believed  the
   appellant's marriage to have been one of convenience.  In  reaching  that
   conclusion, the respondent noted that the appellant had been  encountered
   by Immigration Officers on the 19th November 2015 at an address in  Stoke
   (18 [ ] Place) at which  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  [JP]  was
   residing. The appellant had explained at  that  time  that  he  had  been
   living separately from [JP] since January 2015 and that she had  a  child
   ([DP]) with another man ([WH]). Given that there was no mention  of  [JP]
   having a child when the appellant applied for his Residence Card, it  was
   reasonable to infer that [DP] had been born after it had been issued.  It
   was noted by the Officers that he appeared to be texting [JP] "to  advise
   her of what [he] had told the Immigration Officers" (Notice of  Decision,
   dated 9th January 2016). This damaged the appellant's credibility.

4. The appellant's case in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  conveniently  be
   summarised as follows. It was he who had left the  marital  home  (rather
   than the other way around) when the  parties  had  separated  in  January
   2015. [JP] had accordingly never resided at 18 [ ]  Place.  It  was  thus
   unsurprising that there should have been no evidence of her  having  done
   so.  Whilst [DP] was indeed born after the marriage (some 9  days  later,
   to be precise) she was conceived before the appellant  had  met  [JP]  in
   November 2011. Her birth does not therefore signify that [JP] had been in
   a relationship with another  man  after  the  marriage.  The  Immigration
   Officer's record of the enforcement visit is highly  selective,  omitting
   as it does any reference to a conversation that  he  had  had  by  mobile
   telephone (in the appellant's presence) in which [JP] had  confirmed  the
   appellant's  account  of  their  current  separation   due   to   marital
   difficulties.

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

5. Judge Simmonds reasons for  concluding  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
   convenience can be summarised as follows -

           i) The appellant had clearly been separated from  his  wife  for
              some time by the time he was encountered  in  November  2016,
              and yet he had failed to notify the respondent of  this  fact
              [paragraph 22].

          ii) The evidence that the appellant had been  receiving  post  at
              [JP]'s  address  -  and  thus,  by  implication,   had   been
              cohabiting with her there - was "mitigated" by the fact  that
              this had continued "long after" the time when he had, on  his
              own admission, "moved out" [paragraph 23]. Indeed,  the  fact
              that the  appellant  continued  to  receive  post  at  [JP]'s
              address "when he admits he wasn't living  there"  cast  doubt
              upon his claim to have lived there at all [paragraph 29].

         iii) There would have been "no need" for the appellant  "to  coach
              [JP] about what to say if their relationship was genuine  and
              they had in fact been together until January 2015 as he  told
              the officer" [paragraph 24].

          iv)  [JP]'s  'Facebook  page'  contained  no  reference  to   the
              appellant or his relationship with her child.

           v) The appellant had been unable  to  recall  the  date  of  his
              marriage  or  date  of  birth  of  his   step-daughter   when
              encountered  by  Immigration   Officer   in   November   2016
              [paragraph 26].

          vi) The texts between the appellant and his wife all  related  to
              mundane matters (such as money,  and  collecting  the  post);
              there were no texts suggestive of  a  relationship  that  was
              "anything more than one of convenience" [paragraph 27].

         vii) A letter from a marriage guidance counsellor  post-dated  the
              decision and thus, "could be said to be  a  response  to  the
              revocation rather than a spontaneous and genuine  attempt  to
              address relationship difficulties" [paragraph 28].

        viii)  The  absence  of  any  supporting  evidence  from  [JP]  was
              significant given that  this  "would  be  easily  obtainable"
              [paragraph 30].

          ix) There was "no other evidence [such as witnesses, photographs,
              phone records, and posts on  social  media]  to  support  the
              Appellant's contention that this was a  genuine  relationship
              from  the  start".  Instead,  there  was   only   "...   some
              correspondence addressed to the Appellant at [JP]'s address".



   For these reasons, the judge found that the appellant was not a  credible
   witness [paragraphs 32 to 35] and  had  thus  "failed  to  discharge  the
   burden on  him  to  prove  that  the  marriage  is  not  a  'marriage  of
   convenience'". In giving notice of her decision, the judge repeated  that
   "the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof on him to show that
   the terms [of] regulation 2 of the Regulations are met" [paragraph 37].

Error of Law

6. The most glaring error of law in the above is in relation to  the  burden
   of proof. At paragraph 6 of her decision, the judge states that this was,
   "upon the Appellant". However, it was clearly  stated  by  the  Court  of
   Appeal in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 that the legal burden of proof is  (and
   remains throughout)  upon  the  respondent.  The  Court  of  Appeal  also
   expressed disapproval of the reasoning in IS (Serbia) [2008] UKAIT 00031,
   which it described as "seriously confused" [paragraph 29]. Judge Simmonds
   nevertheless cited it as providing support for her analysis  of  the  law
   [see paragraph 10 of the Decision].

7. The error is not however simply confined to the legal  self-direction  at
   paragraph 6. It infects every single aspect of  the  reasoning  of  Judge
   Simmond's decision. It repeatedly resurfaces during the analysis  of  the
   evidence (see,  for  example,  the  summary  of  that  analysis  at  sub-
   paragraphs 5(i) to (ix) above) and  it  permeates  throughout  the  legal
   conclusions (see paragraph 35 of the  Decision,  quoted  at  the  end  of
   paragraph 5 above). It even appears in the Notice of Decision itself (see
   paragraph 37, also quoted at the end of paragraph 5 above).

8. Furthermore, of the nine reasons summarised at paragraph  5  above,  only
   numbers (iii) and (arguably) (v) are based upon  positive  evidence  that
   the marriage was one of convenience. The other  reasons  are  essentially
   based upon an absence of evidence to discharge the burden of  proof  that
   supposedly rested upon the appellant. The error thus strikes at the  very
   core of the Tribunal's decision.

9. Given the above, it is particularly surprising to find that  the  grounds
   (which, I hasten to add, were not settled by Mr O'Ryan)  failed  to  make
   any reference to the error concerning the burden of proof.  Nevertheless,
   and in the absence of any opposition from Mr Diwnycz, I gave leave at the
   hearing for this ground to be argued. That done, Mr Diwnycz did not  seek
   to gainsay any of the observations that I have set out in  the  preceding
   paragraphs. I thus have no hesitation  in  holding  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal not only erred in law but that it did  so  in  a  way  that  was
   critical to the outcome  of  the  appeal.  For  this  reason  alone,  its
   decision must be set aside.

10. However, Mr O' Ryan drew my attention to another error of law  that  has
   also led to me to conclude that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
   cannot  stand.  That  error   arises   from   the   judge's   fundamental
   misunderstanding of the evidence concerning the  address  of  the  former
   marital home. Thus, a significant part of her  reasoning  was  predicated
   upon the mistaken belief that the former marital home was the address  to
   which the correspondence at page 81 of the appellant's  bundle  had  been
   sent (namely, 81 Brunswick Drive) whereas all  the  evidence  pointed  to
   this being the address to which the appellant had moved when  he  vacated
   the former marital home  at  number  1  Grove  Place,  London  Road  (see
   paragraph  4,  above).  The  documentary  evidence  was   thus   entirely
   consistent with the explanation that  the  appellant  had  given  to  the
   Immigration Officers during the enforcement visit on  the  19th  November
   2015 and which they appear to have accepted at the time [see  Immigration
   Officer Briggs' unsigned and undated  witness  statement].  It  was  thus
   entirely unsurprising that  the  appellant  should  have  been  receiving
   correspondence at that address many months after the separation  and  the
   judge's reasoning to the contrary, at paragraphs 23 and 28 (summarised at
   paragraph 5(ii) above), was contrary to the evidence.

Re-making the Decision

11. Both Mr O'Ryan and Mr Diwnycz agreed that I should re-make the  decision
   in the Upper Tribunal rather than remit it to the First-tier Tribunal. Mr
   O'Ryan therefore tendered the  appellant  for  cross-examination  and  Mr
   Diwnicz proceeded to ask him a number of questions concerning his own and
   [JP]'s work-history whilst residing in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  do  not
   consider their replies to  be  material  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
   marriage was one of convenience and I do not therefore record them here.

12. I start with my  analysis  of  what  Judge  Simmonds  considered  to  be
   evidence that that the appellant had been attempting to "coach" his  wife
   during the enforcement visit of the 19th November 2015;  something  which
   the appellant denies. The evidence in question consists of an undated and
   unsigned witness statement from Immigration Officer Mai Briggs,  together
   with relevant entries in the pocket  notebooks  of  Immigration  Officers
   Briggs, Edwards, and Shaw. The relevant passage from IO Briggs' statement
   reads as follows:

    "While I was on the phone FAISAL was texting someone. When I asked  him
    what he was doing I saw that he had text [JP] in an attempt  to  advise
    her of his account to me, he had attempted  to  write  something  about
    January but the message was not complete and most words were not  spelt
    correctly."

   There is very little in the above statement to inform the reader what  it
   was, precisely, that the appellant had written in his text  message.  All
   we are told is that it was "something about January". This appears to  me
   to be an extremely tenuous basis for concluding that  the  appellant  was
   attempting to notify his wife of what he had said about the circumstances
   of their claimed separation. I therefore reject it.

13. Judge Simmonds based an adverse finding upon the appellant's failure  to
   notify the Home Office of his separation from his wife.  However,  as  Mr
   O'Ryan pointed out, cohabitation is not necessary for continued residency
   rights as the spouse of an EEA national: Diatta [1985] ECHR 567; PM  (EEA
   - spouse - "residing with") [2011 UKUT 89. There had thus been no  reason
   for the appellant to have done so.

14. I have already noted that the finding that the appellant was  continuing
   to receive correspondence at the former marital home  many  months  after
   his claimed separation from his  wife  is  one  that  was  based  upon  a
   fundamental misunderstanding of the evidence [paragraph  10  above].  The
   evidence of the appellant's correspondence address is  thus  entirely  in
   accordance with his explanation of separation  following  recent  marital
   difficulties.

15. The mere possibility that the marriage  guidance  counselling  may  have
   been undertaken  by  the  appellant  and  his  wife  to  give  the  false
   impression that theirs was a genuine marriage in difficulties is not  one
   that assists the Secretary of State in discharging the burden of  proving
   that the marriage was  one  of  convenience  at  its  inception.  On  the
   contrary, when viewed within the context of the evidence as a whole,  the
   likelihood is that such counselling was undertaken in  the  circumstances
   claimed by the appellant.

16. Absent an admission from the parties, evidence to support a  claim  that
   a marriage is one of  convenience  will  necessarily  be  circumstantial.
   Circumstantial evidence can of course be compelling. However,  I  do  not
   find this to be the case in the present appeal. On the contrary,  I  find
   that it is equally (if not more) consistent  with  a  marriage  that  was
   genuine at its inception but has  since  foundered.  Moreover,  as  Judge
   Simmonds rightly pointed out, the parties were interviewed by Home Office
   officials shortly before their marriage ceremony  and  were  nevertheless
   permitted to proceed.  This  strongly  suggests  that  the  marriage  was
   accepted by those officials as genuine at  a  time  that  was  very  much
   closer to the relevant event than an  enforcement  benefit  taking  place
   several years later.

17. Finally, the Tribunal now has the benefit of evidence on oath from  [JP]
   (by way of affidavit)  wherein  she  attests  to  there  having  been  no
   ulterior motive for entering into the  marriage,  albeit  that  she  also
   confirms that it has now broken down irretrievably.

18. I therefore find that the Secretary of State  has  failed  to  discharge
   the burden of proving that the appellant's marriage to [JP]  was  one  of
   convenience. It follows that she ought not to have revoked his  Residence
   Card.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  against
   revocation of the  appellant's  EEA  Residence  Card  is  set  aside  and
   substituted by a decision to allow that appeal.

Anonymity is not directed






Signed                              Date: 10th July 2017


Judge Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





