
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00611/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 November 2019                            |On 28 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mr p n A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Thathall, counsel instructed through Thathall
Immigration
     Law Chamber


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant will be referred to  as  "the  Secretary
    of State" and the Respondent will be referred to as "the Claimant".

2.   The Claimant, a national of  Nigeria,  date  of  birth  3  March  1970,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  16  November
    2018  to  make  removal  directions  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016   with   particular   reference   to
    Regulations 23(6)(a)/23(6)(c) pursuant to Regulations 26(3)  and  32(2)
    of the 2016 Regulations.  The basis of the  justification  for  removal
    was contained within the decision and particularly relates to  the  end
    of the relationship with a claimed EEA national, Gunita,  by  whom  the
    Appellant has a child.

3.   The appeal against the adverse decision  was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lodge who on 24 April2019  in  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 1 May 2019, allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations
    and refused it on human rights based grounds.  The Secretary  of  State
    sought permission to appeal which was refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Keith (as he then was) on 21 May 2019.  Permission to appeal  was
    given by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts on 24 June 2019.

4.   Mr Mills correctly  argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    incorrectly addressed the wrong decision, which had carried no right of
    appeal, and somehow or other the matter had become  confused  with  the
    issue of the nationality of the EEA national upon whom  the  Claimant's
    claim was reliant.  Mr Thathall  argues  that  material  matters  which
    should have been addressed which bore on the issue of human rights  and
    possibly the Regulations were not addressed by the Judge.   Both  sides
    are therefore in one way  or  another  in  agreement  that  there  were
    fundamental flaws in the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  which
    cannot be remedied here and need  further  findings  of  fact  and  the
    issues properly addressed with reasons in the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   In the light of the Presidential Guidance it seems to me that the  best
    and correct course is for this matter to be remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  No findings of fact  to  stand.   No  findings  on  relevant
    issues, if any, to stand and the matter to be approached de novo.



NOTICE OF DECISION

6.   The Original Tribunal's decision does not stand  and  the  matter  will
    have to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.



DIRECTIONS

(1)  Relist at First-tier Tribunal  at  Birmingham,  not  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D Lodge.

(2)  Time estimate - one hour.

(3)  No interpreter required.

(4)  Any further documents relied upon in support of  either  an  Article  8
    claim or in respect of other issues to be served by  the  parties  upon
    each other and to the Tribunal not less than  ten  clear  working  days
    before the resumed hearing.

(5)  Anonymity direction made.



DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 11 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
