

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00250/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16th May 2017                      |On 17th May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           DANIEL ADRIAN VLADISLAV
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative or attendance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The claimant is a citizen of Romania born on  23rd  March  1988.  He
       says he has been lawfully working in the UK on a casual basis in the
       building trade from the start of 2016. The Secretary of State made a
       decision to remove him on 12th December 2016 on the basis of s.10 of
       the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 applied by virtue of Regulations
       19(3) (a) and 19(3)(c) pursuant to Regulation 21B(2)  and  24(2)  of
       the  Immigration  EEA  Regulations  2006.  His  appeal  against  the
       decision was allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kainth  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 6th March 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Keane on 31st March 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that  the
       First-tier  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  firstly   referring   to
       deportation  under s.5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 when this  was
       a removal decision; and secondly by irrationally  finding  that  the
       claimant  was  a  qualified  person  under  Regulation  6   of   the
       Immigration EEA Regulations 2006 in the context of evidence of  work
       which was all from or prior to September 2016.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. The claimant did not  attend  but  I  was
       satisfied that he had been notified of the hearing and that  it  was
       fair and in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of State firstly argues  that
       the First-tier Tribunal  wrongly  records  at  paragraph  1  of  the
       decision the basis of the appeal as being deportation when this  was
       a removal decision that the claimant had ceased to have an EEA right
       to  reside  under  Regulation  19(3)(c)  of  the   Immigration   EEA
       Regulations 2006 (the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that  the
       person's removal is justified on  grounds  of  abuse  of  rights  in
       accordance with Regulation 21B(2)).

    5. Secondly the decision is irrational as there was  no  evidence  that
       the  claimant  was  exercising  Treaty  rights  at   the   date   of
       determination of the appeal as the most recent evidence of work  was
       payslips from September 2016, and the  other  evidence  only  showed
       that he had only sporadically worked throughout 2016.

    6. The claimant did not attend  hearing  or  put  forward  any  written
       submissions on the issue of the argued for errors of law.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. There clearly is a legal error at paragraph 1 of the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal as it states that the basis of the decision is a
       deportation one under s.5(1) of the Immigration Act  rather  than  a
       removal under s.10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  in
       accordance  with  Regulation  19(3)(c)  of   the   Immigration   EEA
       Regulations 2006 (the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that  the
       person's removal is justified on  grounds  of  abuse  of  rights  in
       accordance with Regulation 21B(2)).  However, there is  no  evidence
       that this was a material error or  that  any  deportation  test  was
       applied when deciding the appeal, rather than the correct  basis  of
       whether the claimant could be removed from the UK  on  the  test  of
       whether he was abusing his rights as an EEA worker.

    8. The Secretary of State's decision is based on the concept  of  abuse
       of rights under Regulation 21B(2) of the Immigration EEA Regulations
       2006, and this is said to be the case because the claimant had  been
       in the UK for a year at the date of decision in  December  2016  and
       was rough sleeping in a park, and had  not  shown  he  was  able  or
       intended to exercise  his  free  movement  rights,  and  as  such  a
       decision to remove him was proportionate.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal found the claimant was not removable in this
       way because  he  had  registered  with  HMRC  and  the  Construction
       Industry Scheme in March 2016 and had evidence  of  being  paid  for
       such work in June, August and  September  2016,  and  had  evidenced
       receiving a support payment from his mother in  December  2016,  and
       that he had shown the Secretary of State his  Mastercard  which  she
       had failed to check, although he said he had also done  agency  work
       paid into this card.  The  documentary  evidence  of  a  history  of
       exercising Treaty rights together with the claimant's oral  evidence
       was found to suffice to show there was no abuse of rights justifying
       his removal as contended for  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  her
       decision.

   10. I find there is no material error of law as there is no evidence  of
       an abuse of rights as defined in  Community  law  by  the  Court  of
       Justice of the European Union in Emsland - Staerke  as this is not a
       situation where objectively there is formal observance of  Community
       Rules but a failure to achieve the purpose of the Rules, and further
       there is no evidence of a subjective  element  of  an  intention  to
       obtain an advantage from Community rules  by  creating  artificially
       the conditions laid down for obtaining it.

   11. Further the claimant was found by the First-tier Tribunal  genuinely
       to have done casual building work since arriving in the UK,  and  to
       have been homeless/ rough sleeping for one night due to falling  out
       with his  girl-friend.  There  was  no  evidence  that  this  was  a
       persistent state of affairs or that  he  was  not  taking  steps  to
       exercise Treaty rights or that there were any aggravating factors so
       he would appear not even to meet the Secretary of State's definition
       of a rough sleeper for whom removal is justified on the basis of  an
       abuse of rights as set out at page 25 of the  Secretary  of  State's
       own guidance dated 1st February 2017 on EEA administrative removal.

   12. This was not  a  decision  that  the  claimant  was  entitled  to  a
       residence card as a worker so evidence of  the  exercise  of  Treaty
       Rights at the date of decision is not the central material issue for
       this appeal. The appeal was a challenge to a decision regarding  the
       proposed administrative removal of the claimant on the basis  of  an
       abuse of EEA rights which I find was dealt with in a lawful  fashion
       with adequate reasoning and without legal error  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 16th May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







