
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00807/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12th October 2017                  |On 26th October 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                       mr Jaykumar Mukeshchandra nayee
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, Counsel instructed by Eagles Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of India, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State of  19th  August  2015  to
    refuse his application for a Derivative Residence Card as  the  primary
    carer of a British citizen under  Regulation  15A  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006  Regulations).
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough dismissed the appeal in a  decision
    promulgated on 26th September 2016.  The appellant now appeals to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by Designated Judge Macdonald on  16th
    August 2017.

 2. According to the papers the appellant claims to have entered the UK  on
    12th April 2011 with entry clearance as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    valid until 13th December 2012. On 12th December 2012  he  applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his private and family  life  but  that
    application was refused on 4th April 2014. A further application on the
    same basis was refused on 16th June 2014. On 21st May 2015  he  applied
    for a Derivative Residence Card claiming that he is the  primary  carer
    of his grandparents, Gomatiben Kantilal  Nayee  and  Kantilal  Mohanlal
    Nayee, both of whom are British citizens. As set out in the Reasons for
    Refusal letter the Secretary of State refused the  application  on  two
    grounds of appeal. It was not accepted that the appellant  was  related
    to the British nationals as  claimed.   The  respondent  also  did  not
    accept that the appellant had established that he was the primary carer
    of the British nationals in accordance with Regulation 15A of the  2006
    Regulations.

 3. On the basis of  DNA  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellant,  it  was
    accepted by the Presenting Officer at the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the appellant was related to  the  British  nationals  as
    claimed. Therefore the only issue to be determined  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was  whether  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 15A.  The judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and
    from his grandparents and the judge concluded that  the  appellant  had
    not demonstrated that  he  is  the  primary  carer  of  either  of  his
    grandparents or that they are in  want  of  care.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied that either grandparent would be unable to reside in  the  UK
    or in another EEA state if the appellant were required to leave the UK.



 4. The Grounds of Appeal take issue with a number of the judge's  findings
    disputing the weight attached by the judge  to  various  parts  of  the
    appellant's evidence.  Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge erred in law  in  failing  to  take
    account all factors.

The Law

 5. The provisions of the 2006 Regulations, which were  applicable  at  the
    time this application was made are as follows:-


         "Derivative right of residence
         15A. (1) A person ("P") who  is  not  an  exempt  person and  who
         satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5)  of
         this regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in  the
         United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.
         ...
         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
             (a)P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
             British citizen");
             (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United
             Kingdom; and
             (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
             the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.
         ...
         (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if
             (a)P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and
             (b)P-
                  (i)is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                  person's care; or
                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's
                  care with one other person who is not an exempt person.
         ..."

Submissions

 6. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal Ms Isherwood informed the Tribunal
    that the Home Office records showed that the appellant  had  an  asylum
    appeal listed  for  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal earlier in the week.  Having  taken  instructions,  Mr  Parkin
    advised the Tribunal that the appellant had instructed him that he  did
    have an asylum appeal scheduled to be heard earlier  in  the  week  but
    that he had withdrawn that appeal on the evening before it was  due  to
    be heard.  He said that the appellant understands that the  appeal  did
    not go ahead.  It appeared to me that the potential asylum  appeal  did
    not appear to infringe upon the error of law matter to be determined by
    me and, with the agreements of the parties, I concluded that  the  fact
    that the appellant appeared to have an asylum appeal before the  First-
    tier Tribunal earlier in the week was not a barrier to the error of law
    hearing proceeding.

 7. In the grounds as developed by Mr Parkin at the hearing it is  asserted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  his
    findings. Mr Parkin's primary submission was that, whilst each  of  the
    errors relied upon may not have amounted to an error of  law  on  their
    own, the cumulative effect of a number of errors amounted to  an  error
    of law.

 8. Mr Parkin conteded that at the judge  erred  at  paragraph  41  of  the
    decision where he found that he was not satisfied that the  appellant's
    grandparents have any significant care needs that are not being met  or
    could not be met through the various agencies of the welfare  state  or
    the private sector.  In Mr Parkin's  submission  the  judge  failed  to
    refer here to the evidence from the appellant and his grandparents,  in
    particular the evidence recorded at paragraph  19  that  the  appellant
    said his grandparents were unable to afford the cost of  private  care.
    He submitted that, whilst it might have been  open  for  the  judge  to
    disbelieve this evidence, it was not open to  him  to  ignore  it.   Mr
    Parkin submitted that the judge  made  an  error  in  relation  to  the
    assessment of care needs at paragraph 42 of the decision  in  light  of
    the evidence from the appellant as to the  medical  conditions  of  his
    grandfather and the care given by him [15-16].  He submitted  that  the
    Tribunal failed to make reference to the care provided by the appellant
    to his grandparents at paragraph 42. In  his  submission  this  pattern
    developed further at paragraph 43 where the judge said  that  the  main
    area  where  the  grandparents  need  assistance  is  in  relation   to
    interpretation.  In his submission this was part of the  oral  evidence
    but not all of it.  He submitted that, had the judge taken  account  of
    all of the evidence at paragraph 16, he could have reached a  different
    conclusion.  He argued that the judge's conclusion at paragraph 43 that
    the grandparents' nephew who lives nearby would be able to assist  goes
    against  the  evidence  at  paragraph  20  that  the  nephew  sees  the
    grandparents infrequently.  Mr Parkin argued that  in  concluding  that
    the grandparents could rely on the private sector the judge  failed  to
    take account of the evidence that the grandparents are impecunious.

 9. Mr Parkin submitted that there was an inference to be  drawn  from  the
    evidence before the judge, which painted a picture of  almost  complete
    dependency on the appellant, showing that  the  grandparents  would  be
    unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA state if the appellant was
    to leave.  In his submission it  was  implicit  that  the  grandparents
    would have to leave the UK or the EU if the appellant was removed.   He
    contended that, if the judge had found that the appellant was a primary
    carer, he would have then had  to  consider  whether  the  grandparents
    would have had to leave the UK if the appellant was removed.

10. Ms Isherwood submitted that the grounds amounted to a  disagreement  as
    to  the  weight  the  judge  attached  to  the  evidence  and,  in  her
    submission, that was a matter for the judge.  She  submitted  that  the
    complaint that the judge did not consider the appellant's oral evidence
    that his grandfather suffered  three  falls  since  2014  when  he  was
    walking alone was a matter of weight which was a matter for the  judge.
    She submitted that the complaint in relation  to  the  judge's  finding
    that the grandparent's nephew could assist was also an issue of  weight
    which was an issue for the judge.

11. Ms Isherwood pointed out that there was no medical evidence to  support
    the assertion in the Grounds of Appeal that there is a possibility that
    the grandfather's current diagnosis of COPD may in fact be lung cancer.
     Ms Isherwood submitted that when the actual evidence before the  judge
    is considered it is apparent that he did not ignore any evidence.   She
    highlighted paragraph 22 where the appellant said that his  grandfather
    was able to bathe independently and that he used a bath or shower  seat
    but would sometimes need assistance.  She also highlighted paragraph 23
    where the appellant said that his grandmother cooks all the  meals  and
    was able to undertake housework and both grandparents could carry light
    shopping.  She referred to paragraph 27 where the judge  observed  that
    care workers and aids were available through the NHS,  social  services
    and a variety of other providers to  assist  the  grandfather  and  the
    appellant said that his grandmother did not like strangers in the house
    and that his grandparents had problems accessing services because  they
    did not speak English. In her submission services are provided  and  it
    was open to the judge to take account of those.

12. Ms Isherwood highlighted the grandfather's evidence  at  paragraphs  31
    and 32 where he said that he is able to walk unaided and that his  wife
    had no health problems.  She also highlighted in paragraphs 33, 34  and
    35 where the grandfather said that he accepted that his wife  was  able
    to cook and undertake most of the housework,  needing  assistance  when
    she was not feeling 100%.  The judge noted at  paragraph  41  that  the
    appellant's desire to care for his grandparents was understandable,  as
    is their wish that such care should be delivered by  a  family  member.
    In her submission the findings at paragraphs 41, 42,  43  and  44  were
    open to the judge in light of the evidence before him.

13. Ms Isherwood relied on the case of Ayinde and Thinjom  (Carers  -  Reg.
    15A - Zambrano)  [2015]  UKUT  00560  (IAC).  She  submitted  that  the
    evidence before the judge does not indicate that if the appellant  were
    to be removed the grandparents would  have  to  leave  the  UK  or  the
    European Union. She referred to paragraph 21 of the decision which sets
    out the appellant's evidence that if he was removed  from  the  UK  his
    grandparents would be reliant upon social services, but they would  not
    "receive the same standard of care as he was  able  to  provide".   The
    appellant  is  recorded  as  saying  that  he  had  concerns  that,  if
    unsupervised, his grandfather might take  the  wrong  medicine  at  the
    wrong time or accidentally overdose, as has happened in the  past.   He
    said that his grandmother was unable to  assist  him  in  managing  his
    medicines because she is illiterate.   Ms  Isherwood  referred  to  the
    appellant's witness statement and said that there was  nothing  in  the
    statement to indicate that the grandparents would have to leave the UK.
     In her submission this has never been addressed by  the  appellant  or
    grandparents in their evidence.

14. In response Mr Parkin submitted that it is accepted that  weight  is  a
    matter for the judge.  However, he submitted that it was for the  judge
    to explain the basis on which he reached the conclusions  he  did.   He
    argues that the judge must do more than assert that he  preferred  some
    evidence over the other.  He must look at the evidence as a whole,  not
    just particular factors.  He submitted  that  a  mere  record  of  some
    evidence in cross-examination is not enough to show that the judge took
    it into account.  He accepted that the evidence establishes that  there
    are aspects  of  the  grandparents'  lives  when  they  are  relatively
    independent, but the point is that the grandfather sometimes does  need
    care bathing and there is no evidence that the  NHS  can  provide  such
    services or that such services are available.

Discussion and Conclusions

15. It is worth referring back to the provisions of Regulation 15A  in  the
    context of this appeal.  The burden was on the appellant to demonstrate
    that he is the primary carer for his grandparents and that  they  would
    be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA state if the  appellant
    was required to leave.

16. These provisions were considered in the  case  of  Ayinde  and  Thinjom
    where the Tribunal's  guidance  is  summarised  in  the  head  note  as
    follows:-

         "(i) The deprivation of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of
             the rights attaching to the status of European Union  citizens
             identified in the decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 is
             limited to safeguarding  a  British  citizen's  EU  rights  as
             defined in Article 20.

         (ii) The provisions  of  reg.  15A  of  the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006  as  amended  apply  when  the
             effect of removal of the carer of a  British  citizen  renders
             the British citizen no longer able to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom or in another EEA state.  This requires the  carer  to
             establish as a fact that the British citizen will be forced to
             leave the territory of the Union.

         (iii)    The requirement is not  met  by  an  assumption  that  the
             citizen will leave and does not  involve  a  consideration  of
             whether it would be reasonable for  the  carer  to  leave  the
             United  Kingdom.   A  comparison  of  the  British   citizen's
             standard of living or care if the appellant remains or departs
             is material only in the context of whether the British citizen
             will leave the United Kingdom.

         (iv)   The Tribunal is required to examine critically a claim  that
             a British citizen will leave the  Union  if  the  benefits  he
             currently receives by remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
             unlikely to be matched in the country in which  he  claims  he
             will be forced to settle."

60.  The Tribunal gave the following analysis in the body of the decision:-

         "42. The  appellants  argue  that  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
             substance of  the  rights  of  their  British  family  members
             includes  the  right  of  those  suffering  the   effects   of
             increasing age,  infirmity  or  illness  should  be  protected
             against losing their home and  losing  the  care  provided  by
             their family members.  The submission runs  dangerously  close
             to arguing that those who are unable to  benefit  from  carers
             from within their family are at risk of suffering a  violation
             of their rights by being cared for by local  authority  carers
             or social workers or by the NHS or by being placed in a  care-
             home.  This is simply misconceived.  The support  provided  by
             local  authorities,  care  agencies,  residential  homes   and
             hospitals has at its core the preservation of the  dignity  of
             those under their care.  Care workers would  justifiably  feel
             aggrieved at the suggestion that  their  care  falls  below  a
             standard that preserves the dignity  of  their  patients.  The
             fact  that  examples  can  be  found  of  care  falling  below
             acceptable standards is not to  the  point.   Whilst,  in  the
             course of argument, Mr Knafler disavowed any suggestion to the
             contrary, it is the inevitable  consequence  of  his  reliance
             upon the Charter.  If he were not suggesting the  two  British
             citizens  involved in these appeals would  suffer  a  loss  of
             their protected right to dignity if they were required  to  go
             into residential care, there  would  have  been  no  point  in
             relying on the Charter.

         ...

         54.  These situations are very  different  from  the  situation  in
             Zambrano.  Whilst  a  minor  child  can  survive  without  his
             parents in that adoption, foster-care or a children's home may
             provide a proper and adequate level of care, such  alternative
             care is only likely to be contemplated if  there  are  serious
             reasons for breaking the relationship between a child and  one
             or both of his parents.  Serious wrong-doing on  the  part  of
             both parents (or, more often,  of  one  of  the  parents)  may
             justify the separation.   However,  elderly  adults  can  more
             readily survive without a family member to act as their  carer
             if there are  adequate  support  mechanisms  in  existence  to
             provide them with alternative care to an appropriate standard.
              It is beyond the range  of  proportionate  responses  that  a
             minor should be required to go into some form  of  alternative
             care (be it adoption,  foster-care  or  residential  care)  in
             order to enjoy his EU rights were both his parents required to
             leave.  The same consideration  does  not  normally  apply  in
             relation to the infirm or elderly.

         55.  The differential in the  care  provided  by  a  family  member
             acting as carer and the standard of care  provided  by  social
             services, care  agencies  or  the  NHS  does  not  engage  the
             Zambrano  principle.   In  Ruiz  Zambrano,  it  was  not   the
             difference between the standard  of  care  that  the  Zambrano
             parents provided to the children at home and the  standard  of
             care provided by child care agencies that prompted  the  Court
             of Justice to reach its decision.  A comparison of alternative
             care arrangements was  not  being  considered.   It  was  not,
             therefore, the quality of life or care that was in  issue  but
             what would happen to the Zambrano children, that  is,  whether
             they would remain or leave.  For the  Zambrano  children,  the
             answer was obvious: the children would go with their  parents.
             It was impossible to contemplate  an  outcome  in  which  they
             would not be driven to leave.  That is  a  far  cry  from  the
             situation facing Mrs Animashaun and  Mr  Stevens,  neither  of
             whom will leave the United Kingdom.

         ...

         60.   This leads us back to the words of reg. 15(4A) (iii) that the
             British citizen must be unable to reside in the United Kingdom
             if the appellant were to  leave.These  words  can  readily  be
             applied in both appeals: Mrs Animashaun  and  Mr  Stevens  are
             able to reside in the United Kingdom".

17. As we are reminded in the  case  of  Ayinde  and  Thinjom  it  must  be
    demonstrated that the effect of the removal of the carer, the appellant
    in this case, would render the British citizens, the grandparents here,
    no longer able to reside in the UK or in another EEA state.  They  must
    establish as a fact that the British citizen will be  forced  to  leave
    the territory of the union.  Hence the test is in two main parts.   The
    judge in this case engaged with the evidence around  the  issue  as  to
    whether the appellant is a primary carer  for  his  grandparents.   The
    judge set out all of the oral evidence of  the  appellant  and  of  the
    grandparents.  In  the  findings  and  reasons  the  judge  focused  on
    elements of the evidence which he considered relevant to resolution  of
    the issues.   The  Grounds  effectively  take  issue  with  the  weight
    attached to the various pieces of evidence by the judge.  In my view it
    is  clear  that  the  judge  weighed  all  of  the  relevant  evidence,
    addressing in particular the pieces of evidence relevant to  the  issue
    as to whether the appellant is the primary carer.  The judge took  full
    account, as he was entitled to, of the availability of  care  from  the
    NHS or other sources.  The judge took full account  of  the  fact  that
    there was  no  objective  medical  evidence  to  indicate  that  either
    grandparent was "unable  to  self-care  or  has  any  disability  which
    restricts their daily living or mobility activities" [41].   The  judge
    took account of the fact of the evidence that the grandmother  is  able
    to cook, undertake  housework  and  shopping  and  has  no  significant
    medical issues.  The judge took into account that the grandparents need
    assistance  in  relation  to  interpretation  but  that  interpretation
    services are available throughout the NHS  and  social  services.   The
    judge also took account of the  fact  that  the  grandparents  live  in
    supported accommodation which provides for an alarm  system  to  summon
    help in case of emergency.  All of this evidence entitled the judge  to
    reach the conclusion he did that the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated
    that he is the primary carer for either of his grandparents, or  indeed
    that they are in want of care.

18. In any event, it is very clear that the evidence before the  judge  did
    not establish that the second part of 15A as  contained  in  Regulation
    15A(4A)(c) had been established.  In fact the evidence  points  in  the
    other direction.  So at paragraph 21 the appellant was  asked  how  his
    grandparents would manage if he was removed and he said that they would
    be reliant upon social services, albeit they believed that  they  would
    not receive the same standard of care as he was able  to  provide.   At
    paragraph 27 the appellant is recorded as saying that  his  grandmother
    did not like strangers in the  house  and  that  his  grandparents  had
    problems accessing services because they did  not  speak  English,  but
    again he made no reference to them leaving the UK if he  were  removed.
    At paragraph 35 the appellant's grandfather  was  asked  how  he  would
    manage if the appellant was removed and he said "It  would  be  in  the
    hands of the Gods".  Again he made no reference to any belief  that  he
    would be forced to leave the UK or the EU if his grandson was  removed.



19. In my view it is clear that there was  no  evidence  before  the  judge
    which would have enabled him to reach an alternative finding to that at
    paragraph 47, that he was not satisfied that the grandparents would  be
    unable to reside in the UK or another EEA state if the  appellant  were
    required to leave the UK.

20. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the judge  reached  findings
    open to him on the evidence and there is no material error  of  law  in
    the decision.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 25th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 25th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

