
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: EA/00182/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 January 2018                     |On 24 January 2018                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                MONICA MATHUR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr. M. Symes of counsel, instructed by
Global Immigration              Solutions
For the Respondent:                   Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant was born on 20 February 1972, is a national of India.  On
    18 May 2015 she applied for a family permit as  the  dependent  of  her
    sister in law, Jan Majcherova, who is  an  EEA  national  exercising  a
    Treaty right in the United Kingdom. Her application was refused  on  26
    May 2015 and she appealed on 17 June 2015.

2.   Her appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  Scott-Baker  and
    Allen on 15 February 2017 but in a decision promulgated on 3 April 2017
    they found that they had no jurisdiction to hear her  appeal  following
    the decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2006] UKUT  00411  (IAC).
    The Appellant appealed on 13 April 2017 and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew granted her permission to appeal on 13 October 2017 on the basis
    that it the light of recent case law there was an arguable error of law
    and that further consideration should be given as to whether there is a
    valid appeal.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   The Appellant's appeal was originally listed with that  of  her  mother
    and her father but her mother has now been granted a family permit  and
    her  father  has  sadly  died.  Therefore,  it  was  only  het  current
    Appellant's case that was before me. Both counsel for the Appellant and
    the Home Office Presenting Officer made very short oral submissions and
    I have referred to the content of these submissions, where relevant, in
    my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   The Home Office Presenting Officer  requested  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    stay the appeal until  a  decision  was  reached  on  the  Respondent's
    renewed application for permission to the Supreme Court in the case  of
    MK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755
    and the judgment by the Supreme Court in  the  case  of  SM  (Algeria),
    which had been heard on 29 November 2017.

5.   Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the order made by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MK
    stayed the decision that  in  MK's  case  the  decision  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal would be set aside and the appeal remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and also  stayed  the  costs  order  made  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant. However, it did not stay paragraph 1  of  the  order,  which
    stated that the appeal was allowed or paragraph 2 of the  order,  which
    said that permission to appeal to the Supreme Court was refused.

6.   Therefore, the substance of the decision in MK stands, which  was  that
    Sala was wrongly decided and that extended  family  members  refused  a
    residence card are entitled to a right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations. As
    a consequence, I am bound by that decision as it was made by the  Court
    of Appeal.

7.   As a consequence, I find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  Scott-Baker
    and Allen did err in law in their decision.

8.   As the substance of the appeal has not yet been  re-considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I find that the appeal must be  remitted  to  that
    Tribunal. It will also be able  to  address  any  subsequent  decisions
    reached  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  cases  referred  to  by  the
    Respondent.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judges Scott-Baker and Allen for a de novo hearing.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 22 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

