
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/00283/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Friday 1 March 2019               |On Monday 11 March 2019              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              MS SEVIM CALISKAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Blair, Counsel instructed by London solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kainth promulgated on 21 September 2018 ("the Decision"). By  the
    Decision  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 11 December 2017 refusing the  Appellant  a
    residence card as the mother of her British Citizen son ("the Sponsor")
    who it is said exercised Treaty rights in Germany as a worker and  with
    whom the Appellant lived at that time before returning to the  UK  with
    him.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Turkey as, originally, is her  son.  He
    is a  naturalised  British  citizen.   Following  the  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's applications to enter the UK under  the  Immigration  Rules
    for either settlement or as a visitor, in March 2016, the Sponsor  went
    to Germany to live with  his  nephew.   He  worked  while  there.   The
    Appellant went to Germany for a visit in August 2016 and remained there
    with the Sponsor.  She was granted a residence  permit  as  his  family
    member there on 5 January 2017, valid to 4 January 2022.

3.    The Appellant and Sponsor returned to the UK on 14 May  2017  and  the
    Appellant applied for a residence card here under regulation 9  of  the
    Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2016,   which
    application was refused by the decision under appeal.

4.    Judge Kainth dismissed the appeal on the basis that he did not  accept
    that regulation 9 was met.  I do not need to expand on that  conclusion
    because the grounds of appeal as argued before me focus on the  Judge's
    conduct and  some  of  his  factual  findings  which  are  said  to  be
    inconsistent with or disclose a misunderstanding of the  evidence.   It
    is said that the Judge displayed a lack of objectivity at  the  hearing
    and  appeared  to  have  pre-determined  the  outcome.   Although   the
    Appellant does not go so far as to suggest that the Judge was  actually
    biased, it is said that he would have appeared so if  his  conduct  was
    considered by an independent, fair-minded observer. I will come  on  to
    the detail of the allegation below.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Povey
    on 17 October 2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... [3] The primary issue in the appeal centred around  Regulation
         9 of the EEA Regulations 2016.  The Judge set out the text  of  the
         Regulation in its entirety and at [27]  provided  reasons  for  his
         finding that the sponsor's residence in Germany  was  not  genuine.
         The Judge's reasoning applied and addressed the factors  identified
         as relevant in Regulation 9(3).  He reached conclusions which  were
         open to him on the findings he made.  No error of law was apparent.

         [4]      Various allegations were made of the  Judge's  conduct  of
         the hearing and his treatment of the evidence.   Those  allegations
         were contained in the grounds drafted  by  the  same  advocate  who
         appeared before the Judge.  If the allegations were made out,  they
         could arguably constitute an error of  law  (as  a  number  of  the
         challenged factual findings were material to the Judge's finding on
         genuine residency).

         [5]      As such,  the  application  for  permission  disclosed  an
         arguable error of law and permission to appeal is  granted.   Given
         the interdependence of the two grounds advanced, they may  both  be
         argued."

6.    The matter came before me initially on 13 December 2018.  I  adjourned
    the  hearing  on  that  occasion  as  the  barrister  representing  the
    Appellant was Ms Shaw who appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    whose evidence was required to make out the  allegation  regarding  the
    Judge's conduct.  I gave directions to both parties to file  and  serve
    evidence relating to the conduct issue.   The matter  comes  before  me
    with a different representative now acting for the Appellant  in  order
    to determine whether there is an error of law and, if  I  so  find,  to
    either re-make the decision or  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide afresh.

Conduct of the Hearing

Nature of the Allegations and Evidence

7.    The pleaded grounds in this regard make the following allegation:

         "[12] Prior to  the  start  of  the  hearing  (as  the  appellant's
         representative entered the courtroom), the  FTTJ  enquired  whether
         this was 'a Regulation 9 case'. Upon the appellant's representative
         confirming  that  Regulation  9  applied,  the  FTTJ  sarcastically
         commented that 'I'm seeing a lot of these cases lately.'   He  then
         proceeded, throughout the course  of  the  hearing,  to  critically
         comment in response to the live evidence of the sponsor and nephew.
          Such remarks suggest a lack of impartiality and  pre-determination
         of the appeal.  This in turn, raises a concern as  to  whether  the
         Tribunal properly and fully  considered  relevant  evidence  having
         regard to the correct test(s).  This concern is further  raised  by
         the FTTJ's palpable  lack  of  objectivity,  as  evidenced  by  his
         'selective' recording/presentation of the evidence in  his  written
         evidence..."

    That citation is followed by a list of errors said to have been made in
    relation to the factual findings, some of which I consider below.

8.    The Judge was  invited  to  comment  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    specifically the allegation regarding  conduct  of  the  hearing.   His
    comments led to the issuing of a  Memorandum  which,  in  this  regard,
    states as follows:

         "...Ground 2: I have some recollection of commenting "I'm seeing  a
         lot of these cases lately".  It was meant as indicating that  I  am
         familiar with the applicable regulations and the case law...."

9.    In response to my  directions,  a  witness  statement  was  filed  and
    served from Ms Frances Shaw who is the barrister who attended the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.   On the day  before  the  hearing,  I  received
    documents from the Respondent,  being  the  Presenting  Officer's  file
    minute from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and  the  Respondent's
    written submissions pointing out that the minute makes  no  mention  of
    the Judge's behaviour and that, although there  was  evidence  from  Ms
    Shaw, there was none from the witnesses.  That prompted the  filing  on
    the day of the hearing of  a  statement  by  the  Sponsor.    Ms  Blair
    accepted  that  this  had  been  prepared  only  in  response  to   the
    Respondent's submissions.  Mr Melvin objected to the late production of
    the evidence although,  as  Ms  Blair  pointed  out,  the  Respondent's
    evidence and submissions were also produced late.

10.   In the event, I decided that it was neither appropriate nor  necessary
    to hear from the Sponsor.  I have not taken his statement into account.
     As I pointed out, his only familiarity with the conduct of appeals  is
    the one hearing and whatever his view as to the Judge's conduct on that
    occasion, it would be unlikely to assist me in determining  whether  it
    was unfair due to that lack of experience of how Judges should  behave.
    That point is made at [2] of the  headnote  in  PA  (protection  claim:
    respondent's enquiries; bias) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 0337 (IAC) ("PA").



11.   I also indicated that I was not assisted by the  Presenting  Officer's
    file note.  Although I accept that this does not  indicate  that  there
    was anything untoward in the Judge's conduct,  without  any  supporting
    evidence from the Presenting Officer, it  does  not  follow  that  this
    omission amounts to evidence that  the  Judge  did  not  behave  in  an
    inappropriate manner.

12.   I heard oral evidence from Ms Shaw.  She was  also  cross-examined  by
    Mr Melvin.  She  gave  evidence  that  she  completed  her  second  six
    pupillage in October 2011 and has appeared in immigration  cases  as  a
    barrister since then.  She has focussed almost entirely on  immigration
    work since about 2012.  She does some family cases but in the past  two
    and a half years, has done only one family case.   She  estimates  that
    70% of her work since 2012 has been in immigration.   She  attends  the
    First-tier Tribunal on a regular basis to present appeals - often daily
    and at least several times in a week.  This is the first occasion  when
    she has made a complaint about a First-tier Tribunal Judge's conduct.

13.    In  support  of  her  witness  statement,  Ms   Shaw   produced   her
    contemporaneous handwritten notes of the  hearing.   My  attention  was
    drawn in particular to the following notes.  On the first page, Ms Shaw
    has written:

         "As I walked into ct, IJ asked  if  case  was  a  Reg  9  case.   I
         confirmed it was & IJ sarcastically said 'I'm seeing a lot of these
         cases lately, they're v popular @ the mo."

    At internal page [6], in the course  of  the  Sponsor's  evidence,  the
    following is recorded:

         "(14)    Deposit in Deposit protection scheme - IJ says  OK  that's
         against the law but then."

    Ms Shaw gave this as an example of where the Judge  had  made  negative
    comments about the evidence  and  taken  negative  points  of  his  own
    volition.   She  explained  that  this  concerned  the  rental  of  the
    Sponsor's London property.  The Judge had asked whether the Sponsor had
    placed a deposit from the tenant in the deposit protection scheme.  The
    Sponsor did not know about this scheme and so had said that he had  not
    to which the Judge replied that this was against the law in the UK.  It
    was not clear what was meant by "but then".

14.    Ms  Shaw  accepted  that  there  were  no  other  negative   comments
    identified in her notes but said that this was because she  was  trying
    to take a full note of the evidence.  She says this  in  her  statement
    about further comments:

         "[6]     Unfortunately, my contemporaneous record of proceedings do
         not fully record all of Judge Kainth's  comments  during  the  live
         evidence and I cannot recall the exact number of  remarks  made  or
         their precise content.   I  do  recall  however,  that  there  were
         several remarks made in response to the live evidence  and  that  I
         viewed the comments to be negative and/or  critical,  such  that  I
         felt sufficiently concerned about Judge Kainth's conduct to mention
         it in my Attendance Note to my instructing solicitor as follows:

             "Before the hearing started the  IJ  sarcastically  said  "I'm
             seeing a lot of these cases, they  are  very  popular  at  the
             moment." The IJ continued to sarcastically comment  throughout
             the evidence which suggested he was  looking  for  reasons  to
             refuse the appeal."

15.   Ms Shaw accepted  that  she  had  not  complained  about  the  Judge's
    conduct at the time.  In response to a question from me, she  confirmed
    that she had not complained either immediately after the hearing.   She
    was unaware that it was possible to make a complaint informally to  the
    Resident Judge.  Having spoken to senior colleagues since, she accepted
    that she should perhaps  have  done  so.   Her  evidence  is  that  she
    "regrets" not doing so. In her statement, she says the following  about
    her reasons for not raising this at the time:

         "[4]     I confirm that, although surprised,  I  did  not  question
         Judge Kainth's comment as I entered the courtroom as I was  of  the
         view  that  the  appeal  was  strong   and   should   succeed   and
         consequently, the remark would become immaterial.   I  did  however
         make a full note of the comment (as confirmed above).

         [5]      Nor did I question Judge Kainth's comments during the live
         evidence, as I was taken aback by them, and not having been in this
         position before, I was  not  entirely  sure  how  to  approach  the
         matter.  I was also concerned that I might alienate the  judge  and
         cause an atmosphere that would worry and upset my elderly and frail
         client, who was already very anxious.  I do however  recall  saying
         that I considered the judge was being  'unfair'  when  he  abruptly
         refused to allow  the  appellant  until  4pm  that  day  to  submit
         evidence from Turkey of her son in law's health issues.  My request
         to submit further evidence  was  only  made  because  Judge  Kainth
         questioned the absence of this evidence for the second time  during
         oral evidence, which led me  to  believe  that  he  considered  the
         evidence to be relevant to his decision-making."

16.   Ms Shaw was asked to explain  why  she  had  viewed  the  comments  as
    sarcastic.  She replied that she recognised sarcasm when she  heard  it
    and that she was even more taken aback because  the  comment  was  made
    when she had just entered the room and had not even sat down.  She  was
    asked whether the comments might just have been a display  of  rudeness
    rather than bias to which she replied:

         "I don't actually think it was actual bias but in particular  based
         on the  comment  when  I  entered  this  suggested  pre-disposition
         because he had seen a lot of regulation 9 cases lately.  I found it
         unusual for him to comment so  often  on  evidence.   This  is  not
         something I've come across before."

    The point was made to Ms Shaw that the Judge said that he only made the
    comment he did to short circuit legal submissions.  She did not  accept
    that this was his  reason  and  insisted  that  the  comment  was  made
    sarcastically.

17.   In relation to the point made  about  the  challenge  to  the  Judge's
    refusal to allow the Appellant time to adduce further evidence, Ms Shaw
    expanded upon this as follows.  She accepted that her notes do not show
    that she said it was unfair.  She said though that she remembered  that
    the Judge had asked whether there was evidence from  Turkey  about  the
    health issue.  She recalled clearly that she asked the Judge for  seven
    days to submit that evidence which he  refused.   When  he  raised  the
    point again during cross-examination, she asked again  for  time  until
    4pm the same day and he again refused.

18.   Ms Shaw also strongly refuted Mr  Melvin's  suggestion  that  she  had
    only raised this complaint as a  ground  because  she  was  disgruntled
    about the outcome and the Judge's refusal to allow her time to  put  in
    more evidence.  She said that had  the  conduct  been  limited  to  the
    comment made at the start of the hearing, she may have accepted that it
    was insufficient to show bias, but the  Judge  had  made  a  number  of
    comments throughout the evidence which were all negative not  positive.
    She formed the view that the Judge  had  therefore  pre-determined  the
    appeal. She thought the behaviour unprofessional.

Discussion and Conclusion

19.   Mr Melvin relied on the Judge's response to the grounds  and  to  what
    was said (or rather not said) in the Presenting  Officer's  file  note.
    As I have already indicated, I do not view  that  omission  as  of  any
    assistance one way or another. Mr  Melvin  also  pointed  out  that  no
    accusation had been made at the hearing and no complaint made until the
    grounds.   He submitted that the  allegation  was  not  made  out.   He
    submitted that this was a case of a disgruntled representative who  was
    simply trying to obtain a good outcome for her client.

20.   Ms Blair submitted that Ms Shaw clearly had not  made  the  allegation
    lightly.  As a junior barrister, she would be cautious before making  a
    complaint.  Based  on  the  evidence,  Ms  Blair  submitted  that   the
    allegation was made out.  She reminded me that the test is whether from
    the perspective of an independent, fair-minded observer, there would be
    a perception of bias. Justice must not only be done but be seen  to  be
    done.

21.   I have taken into account what is said by the Judge.  He was  provided
    only with the one allegation relating to his comment at  the  start  of
    the hearing.  As I observed in the course of the hearing, by indicating
    a familiarity with a particular type of case, the  Judge  might  simply
    have intended to indicate to the representatives that they did not need
    to dwell on the legal issues as he would be aware  of  them.   That  is
    what Judge Kainth says that he thinks he meant by the comment.  It  may
    be that he did.  However, the addition of  the  words  "they  are  very
    popular at the moment" is potentially pejorative and might suggest that
    he took a negative view of such cases.  He may not  have  meant  it  in
    that way but if, as he  says,  he  merely  intended  to  indicate  that
    submissions could be foreshortened, it would have been better expressed
    as a direction to the representatives at the outset rather than a  glib
    remark before the Appellant's barrister had taken her seat.  The manner
    in which the comment was phrased was ill-advised.

22.   However, if this had been the only matter complained of, I  would  not
    have been inclined  to  consider  that  this  demonstrated  a  lack  of
    impartiality.  Indeed, Ms Shaw accepted as much  during  her  evidence.
    As it is, though, I was impressed by Ms Shaw's evidence.  I  found  her
    truthful. I accept her evidence that she did  not  make  the  complaint
    lightly.  She did not seek to exaggerate her evidence and was  able  to
    draw my attention to one contemporaneous note of where  she  said  that
    the Judge had taken a negative stance (regarding the tenancy  deposit).
    I confess that I can see absolutely no relevance to that issue at  all.
    It may be that the Judge thought it was relevant.  However, the comment
    following the response that this was against the law in the UK  strikes
    me as unnecessary and reflective of the general attitude  of  which  Ms
    Shaw complained.

23.   The other specific example  given  of  the  Judge  refusing  to  allow
    evidence to be produced after the hearing is less persuasive.  A  Judge
    is entitled to expect evidence to be produced before the hearing or  at
    the latest at the hearing itself.  However, the  fact  that  the  Judge
    himself raised the omission of such evidence as relevant in the  course
    of the hearing and  then  refused  to  allow  further  evidence  to  be
    produced is further indication of his attitude to the Appellant (or  at
    the very least provides a perception of being ill-disposed towards  the
    Appellant when taken with the other complaints).

24.   I have had regard to  the  headnote  in  PA.   I  do  not  reach  this
    decision lightly.  I also take  into  account  that  Ms  Shaw  did  not
    complain of the Judge's  conduct  during  the  hearing  or  immediately
    thereafter.  However, I accept Ms Shaw's evidence about the reasons she
    did not do so, and I also note her "regret" at having  failed  to  make
    clear her concerns at the time.  The fact that she wrote as she did  to
    her instructing solicitor after the hearing is an indication  that  she
    did have those concerns at the time and has not invented them since  in
    order to overturn an adverse decision.

25.   Based on the evidence as set  out  above,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has made out her case on this ground.  I emphasise that there
    is no suggestion  that  the  Judge  was  actually  biased  against  the
    Appellant and her witnesses.  However, for  the  reasons  given,  I  am
    satisfied that an independent, fair-minded observer may well form  that
    perception based on the  conduct  alleged.   At  the  very  least,  the
    evidence tends to show a pre-disposition  to  a  certain  outcome.  For
    those reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision should  be  set  aside.
    The appeal  is  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined afresh by a different Judge.

Factual Errors

26.   Given my conclusion on the first ground, it is not strictly  necessary
    for me to go on to consider the other grounds.  I deal however with the
    factual errors alleged for the sake of completeness.  The following  in
    particular were drawn to  my  attention  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument and are made out on  the  evidence  (taking  into  account  Ms
    Shaw's contemporaneous notes of the oral evidence):

    (a)    The Judge at [27] of the Decision  draws  an  adverse  inference
         from the Sponsor having rented a three-bedroomed flat  in  Germany.
         The evidence of the Sponsor was that he had lived with  his  nephew
         the whole time (in other words that  the  three-bedroomed  property
         belonged to his nephew). Due to that mistake  of  fact,  the  Judge
         also failed to recognise that, even if  the  Sponsor's  income  was
         lower in Germany, his outgoings would also be lower because he  was
         living with his nephew.

    (b)    The Judge at [19]  of  the  Decision  says  that  there  was  no
         evidence from the nephew of financial support being offered to  the
         Sponsor when he lost his job in Germany.  Whilst that may  make  no
         difference to any of the findings, it is factually  incorrect  (see
         question [7] at internal page [9] of the notes)

    (c)    At [27] of the Decision, the  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
         Sponsor had transferred his principal residence to Germany  because
         he maintained a flat in London.  Although the Judge  notes  in  the
         timeline at [23(1)] that the flat was rented out in November  2014,
         about eighteen months before the Sponsor moved to Germany and after
         he had moved within the UK to Chesterfield  that  is  not  factored
         into the Judge's reasoning in this paragraph on this issue.

27.    Taken  alone,  those  are  not  significant  factual  errors.   Taken
    together, however, they are capable of infecting the Judge's  reasoning
    on the central issues.  It is not in any event  appropriate  to  retain
    any of the factual findings in the Decision because this  appeal  must,
    for the reasons I have already set out, be reconsidered afresh.

DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Kainth
promulgated on 21 September 2018 is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.


Signed      [pic]      Dated: 7 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
