
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00100/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2018                            |On 26th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                        Erica Ariana Salgueiro bayan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel, instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Portugal  born  on  20th  November
    1990.  She is said to have first entered the United Kingdom in  October
    1997.  On 10th August 2016 she applied for a certificate  of  permanent
    residence on the basis of five years' continuous residence  in  the  UK
    under the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  That application was refused for the  reasons  given
    in a Notice of  Decision  dated  12th  December  2016.   The  Appellant
    appealed and her appeal was decided on the papers and without a hearing
    at Manchester on 22nd February 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robson
    (the Judge).  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given in
    his Decision dated 12th March 2017.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and eventually, following a hearing in the  Upper
    Tribunal on 1st December 2017, I decided that the decision of the Judge
    contained an error on a point of law and I set it aside.

 2. This hearing is for the purpose of remaking the decision in the appeal.



The Hearing

 3. At the  hearing  I  heard  brief  evidence  from  the  Appellant.   She
    confirmed that the contents of her Statement dated 15th March 2018 were
    true.  She was not cross-examined.

 4. I also heard representations from both  parties  at  the  hearing.   Mr
    Kotas addressed me first when  to  begin  with  he  conceded  that  the
    evidence of the Appellant and from DWP showed that  the  Appellant  had
    been exercising Treaty Rights in the UK for a  period  of  four  years,
    nine months up to the date of the hearing.  However,  she  had  been  a
    student from March to June 2013.  In order to satisfy the provisions of
    Regulation  4(d)(ii)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 she needed to have  comprehensive  sickness  insurance
    for that  period.   There  was  no  evidence  that  she  had  had  such
    insurance.

 5. In response Mr Khan explained that the Appellant had been  resident  in
    the UK since 1997 when she had been 7 years of age.  Since becoming  an
    adult she had worked for most of the subsequent time.  She had  been  a
    student between 2009 and 2013, and had returned to her studies for  the
    period from March to June 2013.  After that  she  had  resumed  regular
    employment.  However, Mr Khan was unable to say that there was evidence
    that the Appellant had had comprehensive  sickness  insurance  for  the
    relevant period between March and June 2013.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The relevant facts in this matter are not in  dispute.   The  Appellant
    applied  for  a  permanent  residence  card  under  the  provisions  of
    Regulation 18(1) of the Regulations.  For her appeal  to  succeed,  she
    must show on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  she  satisfies  the
    provisions of Regulation 15(1) for a continuous period  of  five  years
    prior to the date of the hearing in accordance with those  Regulations.
    She can do so for the great majority of that period as  a  worker,  but
    for the period from March to June  2013  she  was  not  working  but  a
    student.  During this period she could still qualify as a jobseeker if,
    according  to  Regulation  4(d)(ii)  of  the   Regulations,   she   had
    comprehensive sickness insurance.  This the  Appellant  has  failed  to
    show.  The appeal must therefore be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity

 8. I was not asked to make an order  for  anonymity  and  indeed  find  no
    reason to do so.  I make no order for anonymity.


Signed                              Date  24th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date  24th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
