
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/00296/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 March 2019                        | On 19 March 2019                 |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           OLALEKAN SAHEED KAZEEM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Mr Kazeem, to whom I shall refer hereafter as "the  appellant"  (and  I
    shall refer to the Secretary of State as "the  respondent"  as  he  was
    before the judge) was successful in an  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Judge where he challenged the respondent's refusal of  his  application
    for a derivative residence card.

2.   The application was based on the relationship that  the  appellant  has
    with his son and his partner Ms Dos Santos.

3.   The Secretary of State challenged the decision of the judge, and  at  a
    hearing on 20 December 2018 I found that there were errors  of  law  in
    the judge's decision with regard to his assessment of the documentation
    purporting to show that Ms Dos Santos was working as claimed  and  that
    the evidence was sufficient to enable the couple's child to  show  that
    she was residing in the United Kingdom  as  a  self-sufficient  person.
    Accordingly, I set aside the decision and directed that it  be  re-made
    in the Upper Tribunal.

4.   On 28 February 2019 a letter was received from the  representatives  of
    Mr Kazeem stating that they had his instructions to withdraw the appeal
    before the Tribunal as he had decided to make a fresh application for a
    residence card in the United Kingdom.

5.   An email was sent to his representatives on 28 February 2019  informing
    them that the judge could not consider the application to withdraw  the
    appeal as it was the Secretary of State's appeal,  Mr  Kazeem's  appeal
    having been  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Judge.   It  was  said  that
    accordingly the appeal was that of the Home Office who  would  need  to
    approve a withdrawal and in  the  absence  of  such  the  matter  would
    proceed to hearing.

6.   Mr Avery made it clear that the Secretary of  State  did  not  wish  to
    withdraw the appeal but wanted the matter to be determined  bearing  in
    mind the points made in the error of law decision.  I am satisfied that
    it had been made clear to the appellant that the hearing date  had  not
    been vacated and that as a consequence it was appropriate to proceed to
    determine the appeal in the appellant's absence.

7.   It is clear in my view  that  the  appeal  is  to  be  dismissed.   The
    documentary evidence provided to which I have referred in  some  detail
    in the error of law decision, was not such as to show  that  the  child
    was residing in the United Kingdom as a self-sufficient person.  It  is
    clear that the vast majority of Ms Dos Santos' income is  derived  from
    public funds and that is inconsistent with the child being able to show
    that he is self-sufficient bearing in mind the definition in Regulation
    4(1)(c)(i) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016
    that a self-sufficient person has to be  somebody  who  has  sufficient
    resources not to become a burden on the social assistance system of the
    United Kingdom during the person's period of residence.

8.   It has not been shown that Ms Dos  Santos  could  not  restructure  her
    work or make use of childcare services, and therefore it has  not  been
    shown that the child would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if
    the appellant left for an indefinite period.   No  Zambrano-type  claim
    can therefore succeed.

9.   Accordingly, I find that the appellant has not made out  the  challenge
    to the Secretary of State's  decision,  and  his  appeal  against  that
    decision is dismissed.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 14 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 14 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

