
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00638/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 August 2021                  |On 01 September 2021               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                               ASHLEY MUSERERE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Ofei-Kwati, Counsel instructed by Wisemart
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.  This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  to  which  both   parties   have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by  Microsoft  Teams
      (V). A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party  expressed  any
      concern, with the process.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born in  April  1972,  who  has
      lived in the UK since 2002.

   3. In 2008 she made an application for asylum that was refused.

   4. In February 2010 she  married  an  Austrian  citizen  and  soon  after
      applied  for,  and  was  issued  with,  a  residence  card  under  the
      Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
      Regulations"). In October 2015 she applied for a  permanent  residence
      card. Although initially refused, following a  successful  appeal  she
      was issued with a permanent residence card valid from December 2017 to
      December 2027.

   5. On 11 January 2020 the appellant arrived in the UK on  a  flight  from
      Ghana. Following a review by a duty fraud officer, the respondent  was
      satisfied that the biodata page in the appellant's Zimbabwean passport
      was fraudulent. In a decision dated  12  January  2020  ("the  refusal
      decision") the respondent stated that because the appellant  had  used
      deception,  refusal  of  admission  under  the  2016  Regulations  was
      "justified on serious grounds of public  policy/health/security".  The
      respondent stated that:

        a. admission was refused under  regulation  11(2)(b)  of  the  2016
           Regulations;

        b. the appellant was refused entry in  accordance  with  paragraphs
           320(3), 320(5) and 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules; and

        c. the appellant's permanent  residence  card  in  accordance  with
           regulations 23 and 24 of the 2016 Regulations.

   6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  her  appeal
      came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bunting ("the judge"). In
      a decision promulgated on  2  March  2021,  the  judge  dismissed  the
      appeal. The judge stated (in paragraph 39 of the  decision)  that  the
      sole issue in the appeal was whether  the  appellant  had  produced  a
      valid passport. The judge  considered  -  in  detail  -  the  evidence
      relating to the appellant's passport and concluded that the respondent
      had discharged the burden of showing that the biodata page was  false.
      On the basis of this finding, the  judge  concluded  that  the  appeal
      should be dismissed because regulation 11 of the 2016 Regulations  had
      not been satisfied.

   7. The grounds of appeal take issue with the judge's  assessment  of  the
      evidence relating to the validity of the  appellant's  passport.  They
      also state that the judge erred by not considering the  refusal  under
      the  Immigration  Rules  and  regulations  23  and  24  of  the   2016
      Regulations.

   8. There is, in my view, a plain error  in  the  decision  such  that  it
      cannot stand. The error is that the judge did not  consider  (and  did
      not make a decision in respect of) whether the  appellant's  permanent
      residence card should be revoked.  I  put  this  to  Mr  Whitwell  who
      acknowledged that regulations 23 and 24  were  not  addressed  by  the
      judge. However, he argued that if the evidence  established  that  the
      appellant was not who she said she was then there was not a basis  for
      her to have a permanent right of residence. The difficulty  with  this
      argument is that the judge did not actually  address  this  point.  He
      only considered, and  made  a  finding  in  respect  of,  whether  the
      appellant's passport was genuine. This finding was necessary, but  not
      sufficient, to decide the appeal. As  the  judge  failed  to  consider
      issues  relevant  to  the  revocation  of  the  appellant's  permanent
      residence card the decision cannot stand.

   9. In my view, the effect of the error has been to deprive the  appellant
      of an opportunity for her case, in respect of the decision  to  revoke
      her permanent residence card,  to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. I have  therefore  decided,  in  accordance  with  paragraph
      7.2(a) of the  Practice  Statements  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal,  that  the
      appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  made  afresh  by  a
different judge.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed

D. Sheridan

Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan                Date: 27 August 2021
