
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00140/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 February 2021                  |On 04 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                VJOLLCA KASKO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 26 November 2020 the Upper Tribunal set aside a decision of  the
        First-tier Tribunal and gave directions in relation to  the  future
        conduct of this appeal, one of which was for the Secretary of State
        to confirm whether in light  of  the  preserved  findings  and  the
        current  interpretation  of  Regulation  7(4)  of  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  it  was  accepted  the
        appeal should be allowed without a further hearing.
     2. The Tribunal is grateful to Mr Melvin  of  the  Specialist  Appeals
        Team who, in written submissions dated 10 December 2020,  confirmed
        the Secretary of States representative has considered the  findings
        made by the First-tier Tribunal and preserved by the Upper Tribunal
        and has reached the conclusion that this appeal falls to be allowed
        on those findings under Regulation 7 as the appellant is the mother
        (ascending line) of the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty
        rights and that the respondent respectfully accepts that the appeal
        should be allowed without a further hearing.
     3. I find it in the interests of justice and in  accordance  with  the
        overriding objectives for the merits of the appeal to be determined
        without a further  hearing  on  the  papers  and  without  inviting
        further submissions from the appellant's representatives,  as  none
        are required or will make a material difference to the outcome.


Decision

     4. I allow the appeal.

   Anonymity.


     5. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 23 February 2021












