
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00454/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2018                            |On 6 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     E M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Callender Smith promulgated  on  22  December  2016
    dismissing her appeal against a decision of the respondent made  on  18
    December 2015 refusing to issue  her  a  permanent  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of permanent residence  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. For the reasons given in my decision promulgated on 1 August 2018, that
    decision was set aside  to  be  re-made  once  directions  set  out  at
    paragraph 12 of that decision had been completed.

 3. The appellant provided the original of her son's British passport which
    is accepted by Ms Holmes as evidence of his nationality.  The appellant
    also handed up a letter from the London Borough of Redbridge  dated  15
    February 2018 explaining her difficulties, and also a report of a Child
    and Family Assessment made in respect of  her  son  in  May  2018.   It
    appears from this that the appellant had been evicted on 26 March 2018,
    has no money, is not entitled to benefits and her only regular  finance
    is �84 a month in child support from  the  father  of  her  child.   It
    appears also that she needed food bank vouchers and baby clothing  from
    a local baby bank, as well as milk, pursuant to Section  17.   It  also
    appears from the  report  that  several  attempts  have  been  made  to
    communicate with the child's father, but from whom there  has  been  no
    response.  It is stated that:

         "he is evasive with professionals  and  has  not  engaged  in  this
         assessment.    [The  appellant]  states  that   she   is   not   in
         communication with him".

 4. It is noted also that the appellant had made it clear that she  is  the
    sole carer of her son and that she is meeting her child's needs  though
    is being supported to do so.  It is stated also

         "[The child's] sole carer is his mother, [the appellant].   He  has
         not had a relationship with his father.  All of his maternal family
         are in Ghana whom he has not met.  He  has  not  met  his  paternal
         family and it is not known where they are though it is  thought  to
         be the UK".

 5. It is also recorded that the parents are no longer in contact with each
    other and the father has not been in contact since  January  2018,  his
    and his family's whereabouts being unknown.

 6. As indicated in the directions given on the previous occasion, the fact
    of a British citizen child being born to the appellant is, in my  view,
    a "new matter" within the meaning of Section 85 of the  2002  Act.   Ms
    Holmes accepted that that was so and that she was,  on  the  particular
    facts of this case, prepared to proceed for me to consider that  matter
    without the need for an adjournment.

 7. It is unfortunate that despite  the  directions  I  gave  on  the  last
    occasion, the respondent did  not  obtain  national  insurance  records
    relating to the appellant's former  husband.   There  is  only  limited
    evidence of his income as shown by his tax returns and  the  tax  paid.
    These are disclosed in the witness statement  of  an  officer  from  HM
    Revenue and Customs.

 8. In order to obtain a residence card confirming the right  of  permanent
    residence, the appellant needs to show that her former husband had been
    employed or was exercising treaty rights and  the  appellant  needs  to
    show that she falls within Regulation 10(5) which provides as follows:

         "(5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -

             (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person  on
                  the termination of the marriage or  civil  partnership  of
                  the qualified person;

             (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
                  these Regulations at the date of the termination;

             (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

             (d)  either -

                  (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for  the
                      termination of the marriage or the civil  partnership
                      the marriage or civil partnership had lasted  for  at
                      least three years and the parties to the marriage  or
                      civil partnership had resided in the  United  Kingdom
                      for at least one year during its duration;

                  (ii) the former spouse or civil partner of  the  qualified
                      person has  custody  of  a  child  of  the  qualified
                      person;

                  (iii)     the  former  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                      qualified person has the right of access to  a  child
                      of the qualified person under the age  of  18  and  a
                      court has ordered that such access must take place in
                      the United Kingdom; or

                  (iv) the  continued  right  of  residence  in  the  United
                      Kingdom of the person is  warranted  by  particularly
                      difficult circumstances, such as he or another family
                      member having been  a  victim  of  domestic  violence
                      while  the  marriage   or   civil   partnership   was
                      subsisting".

 9. The appellant's rights are dependent on  her  now  ex-husband's  status
    prior to the date of divorce.  That is because she needs to  show  that
    she had accrued at least five years'  lawful  residence  in  accordance
    with the EEA Regulations (see Regulation 15(1)(b)).

10. There are a number of ways in which the appellant can show that she had
    lawful residence.  It can be because:-

      i) her husband was a qualified person;

     ii) her husband had acquired permanent residence; and

    iii) she had retained the right of residence after the divorce.

    The necessary five year period can be made up of a combination  of  all
    three of these types of residence.

11. For these reasons it is necessary to ask the following questions:-

      i) On what date did the former husband become a qualified person, that
         is a person exercising treaty rights?

     ii) Are there any gaps in him exercising that  right  within  the  five
         years after that date?

    iii) Did he cease to be a worker or otherwise a qualified  person  as  a
         result of any of those gaps?

     iv)  If  not,  on  what  date  did  the  ex-husband  acquire  permanent
         residence?

12. It is only after these questions have been answered that it is possible
    to determine whether the appellant has acquired the right of  permanent
    residence as on the chronology of  this  case  where  she  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2009 and the marriage  broke  down  in  2016,  it  is
    possible that she acquired the permanent right of residence before  the
    marriage was terminated, in which case it is  unnecessary  for  her  to
    rely on having a retained right of residence.  On the  evidence  before
    me, there is no evidence of the husband working or  otherwise  being  a
    qualified person prior to 1 January 2013.  That is in a letter dated  4
    January 2014 from HM Revenue and Customs.  This shows  a  gap  of  only
    five days in April 2011 and that there was continuous  employment  with
    Seabrook Warehousing Limited from 1 January 2013  at  least  until  the
    date of enquiry 4 January 2014.

13. The witness statement  from  HM  Revenue  and  Customs  shows  no  PAYE
    employment records held for the tax years 2011/2012 to 2013/2014 but it
    does show income from Interserve in tax years 2014/2015 and  2015/2016.
    This inconsistency is unexplained but I draw no inferences  adverse  to
    the appellant on this; it is entirely plausible that the documents were
    given to her by her husband and she relied upon them in good faith.  It
    is not submitted, nor  am  I  persuaded  that  she  has  created  false
    documents or has used documents knowing them to be false, and I bear in
    mind that the  marriage  with  her  husband  broke  down  in  difficult
    circumstances.

14. On  the  basis  of  this  information  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's husband was exercising treaty rights  prior  to  2014.   On
    that basis, as a matter of arithmetic, the appellant cannot  show  that
    she has acquired five years' lawful residence within the meaning of the
    Regulations, and she has not been exercising treaty rights  as  she  is
    required to do by Regulation 10(6) after the date of  the  marriage  to
    reach a total of five years and, in any event, the  earliest  at  which
    she could do so would be 5 April 2019.

15. It therefore follows that the appellant has not shown she  is  acquired
    the permanent right of residence.

16. I turn next to the issue of whether she is  entitled  to  a  derivative
    residence card.  Regulation 16  of  the  EEA  Regulations  provides  as
    follows:-

         "16.  (1)  The  Secretary  of  State  must  issue  a   registration
                  certificate  to  a   qualified   person   immediately   on
                  application and production of -

                  (a)  a valid identity card or passport issued  by  an  EEA
                      State;

                  (b)  proof that he is a qualified person.

             (5)   The  Secretary  of  State  may  issue   a   registration
                  certificate to  an  extended  family  member  not  falling
                  within  regulation  7(3)  who  is  an  EEA   national   on
                  application if -

                  (a)  the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended
                      family  member  is  a  qualified  person  or  an  EEA
                      national with a permanent right  of  residence  under
                      regulation 15; and

                  (b)  in all the circumstances it appears to the  Secretary
                      of  State  appropriate  to  issue  the   registration
                      certificate.

             (6)  Where the Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application
                  under  paragraph  (5)  he  shall  undertake  an  extensive
                  examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant
                  and if he  refuses  the  application  shall  give  reasons
                  justifying the refusal unless  this  is  contrary  to  the
                  interests of national security.

             (7)  A registration certificate issued under  this  regulation
                  shall state the name and address of the person registering
                  and the date of registration and shall be issued  free  of
                  charge.

             (8)  But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1)".

17. I am satisfied from the passport produced that  the  appellant  is  the
    mother of a British citizen; that the child is resident in  the  United
    Kingdom as is shown by her evidence and that of  Social  Services,  and
    third, that the child would be unable to reside in the  United  Kingdom
    or another EEA state if the appellant left the United  Kingdom  for  an
    indefinite period.  That is because there is nobody else with whom  the
    child could live.  The father wishes to have nothing  to  do  with  the
    child, as is shown by his interaction with Social Services.   It  would
    appear also that  despite  giving  a  small  amount  of  money  to  the
    appellant, it is wholly insufficient to support the child and there  is
    no indication that he wishes to have anything to do with his son.

18. Having had regard to the decision of the CJEU  in  Chaves-Vilchez,  and
    bearing in mind that in the circumstances the only  realistic  prospect
    would be for the child to be taken  into care,  that  the  child  would
    effectively be forced to leave the United Kingdom with his mother  were
    she to be removed.

19. Accordingly, I am  satisfied  that  she  fulfils  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 16 and thus, by virtue of Regulation 20, she is entitled  to
    a derivative residence card.

20. For these reasons, I allow the appeal  albeit  on  a  different  basis,
    under the EEA Regulations.


Summary of Conclusions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.


 2)  I  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the   EEA
    Regulations.


 3) An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 30 November 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

















                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00454/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2018                               |                              |
|Extempore                                     |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                                    E M
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT Made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

21. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Callender Smith promulgated  on  22  December  2016
    dismissing her appeal against a decision of the respondent made  on  18
    December 2015 refusing to issue  her  a  permanent  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of permanent residence  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

22. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  She married a Netherlands citizen
    in 2009 and was issued with a family permit that allowed her to come to
    the United Kingdom in 2009 on that basis.  She arrived at some point in
    November 2009.  The marriage then broke down owing to domestic violence
    and the marriage was eventually on 21 May 2015.

23. The appellant supplied some documents to the Secretary of  State  which
    were also put to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  showing  that  her  former
    husband had been employed.  These date at the earliest from 13 November
    2009 and end with wage slips from Seabrook Warehousing Limited covering
    the period of 3 May 2013 to 4  April  2014.   Importantly  there  is  a
    document from HM Revenue & Customs dated 4 January 2014 which sets  out
    some of the former husband's employment record.  There is also a letter
    from Poolfresh Limited which confirms that the former husband had  been
    working for them from 1 May 2014 to 1 June 2015.

24. The Secretary of State did not accept the evidence noting that  contact
    had been made with Seabrook Warehousing Limited and that in an email of
    2015 they had said he is not an employee.

25. The judge considered the evidence and it appeared accepted the evidence
    set out in the letter from HMRC which importantly includes a  reference
    to the husband at that point being  employed  by  Seabrook  Warehousing
    Limited.  The judge does however not accept that he continued  to  work
    for them and considered that because of the email  correspondence  with
    the Home Office that there was unreliability of the evidence.   He also
    considered that the evidence from Poolfresh was not  specific  to  show
    that the appellant's husband had been working for them.  On that basis,
    he was not satisfied that there had been continuity of  employment  and
    he dismissed the appeal.

26. The appellant appealed that decision on the basis that  the  judge  had
    erred first in not  considering  the  document  properly  and  reaching
    inconsistent findings as to whether or not the appellant's husband  had
    been employed by Seabrook Warehousing because the HMRC had said that he
    did, yet the judge considered that this was inaccurate.   Second,  that
    the judge improperly rejected the evidence from Poolfresh  and  further
    that the judge should have made a direction pursuant  to  Amos  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 552.

27. Although the appeal was lodged out of time, time was extended by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Plimmer who on 15 May 2018 granted permission.

28. I heard submissions from M and from Mr Tarlow.

29. I am satisfied that the judge did err in his approach to  the  evidence
    about Seabrook Warehousing Limited.  That is  because  he  accepts  the
    letter from HM Revenue & Customs which said that  he  was  working  for
    Seabrook  Limited  but  failed  properly  to  explain  why  the   email
    correspondence showed that he was not, given that the email  only  says
    that at that point in May 2015 he was not working for them.  That  does
    not mean that he  had  not  worked  for  them  previously.   Second,  I
    consider that in this case the judge erred in that this appears to have
    infected his consideration of the letter from Poolfresh.

30. For these reasons I consider that the decision did involve  the  making
    of a material error of law and I set it aside.  I do not consider  that
    it is appropriate to re-make the decision today because  there  is  not
    sufficient  evidence  of  the  former  husband's  employment.   I  also
    consider that it would in this case be appropriate to make a  direction
    in line with the Court of Appeal's decision in Amos.

31. Further, there is an additional fact to be taken into account  in  that
    it now appears that the appellant is the mother of a  child  who  is  a
    British citizen.  That is clearly a  new  matter  and  something  about
    which the Secretary of State will need to take action but need not .

32. I therefore make the following directions.

      1) The respondent is directed to contact HM Revenue & Customs in order
         to obtain details of the appellant's ex-husband Mr James Atta Krufi
         Nuamah, whose National Insurance number is SG 79 14 75  D,  and  to
         obtain from HM Revenue & Customs details of his national  insurance
         records since his entry into the system, and the date  of  divorce.
         Second, to obtain income tax records from HM Revenue & Customs.

      2) The material received is to be served on the Upper Tribunal and  on
         the appellant at  least  ten  days  before  the  next  hearing,  if
         necessary details redacted to preserve data protection.  So far  as
         it is necessary these directions are to operate as directions  made
         pursuant to Rule 5(3)(d) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 requiring HM Revenue & Customs and/or  DWP  to  disclose
         the information required.  Pursuant to Rule 14 it is to be directed
         that the information provided pursuant to the directions is not  to
         be disclosed by the parties to  any  third  party  without  further
         order of the Tribunal.

      3) The Secretary of State is to consider whether in the light  of  the
         fact that the appellant  has a British citizen  child  which  is  a
         new, the appeal should nonetheless proceed on the basis  that  that
         should be considered. The response must be made within 28 days.

      4) The resumed hearing will be listed  to  be  remade  not  before  20
         September 2018 to allow time for the Secretary of State to get  the
         documents.



Signed                                  Date  30 July 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

