

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
EA/00900/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 19 September 2019                     |On: 24 September 2019          |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                           SYED IRFAN HUSSAIN SHAH
                         (Anonymity Order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal (Direct Access Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born  on  26  November  1983.  He
   appeals, with permission, a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
   Lucas) dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
   to issue him with a residence card under Regulation 10 of the Immigration
   (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 as a  person  with  a  retained
   right of residence following his divorce from his EEA national wife.


2. The background to this appeal  is  as  follows.  The  appellant  made  an
   application in June 2014 for a residence card as the  spouse  of  an  EEA
   national, whom he had married in a proxy marriage  ceremony  in  Senegal.
   The Secretary of State refused the application and the appellant's appeal
   against that decision came before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  September
   2015. By a decision promulgated on 23 October 2015,  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Roots dismissed the appeal.

3. So far as  the  marriage  was  concerned,  in  line  with  Kareem  (proxy
   marriages-EU law) [2014] UKUT 249, at that time good law, the judge found
   the appellant was not validly married. The judge then went on to consider
   whether or not the couple were parties  to  a  durable  relationship  and
   found, on the basis of the  evidence,  that  they  were  not  and  indeed
   concluded that it had not been established that the parties lived or  had
   ever lived together let alone in a relationship.

4. The appellant then, on 20 August 2018, applied for a  residence  card  as
   the former family member of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in
   the UK who had a retained right of residence following  the  end  of  his
   marriage. That application was refused on 8 February 2019 and it was  his
   appeal against that decision which came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
   Lucas on 7 May 2019.

5. The 2018 application was refused, not on the  basis  that  there  was  no
   valid marriage but on the basis that documents  that  the  appellant  had
   provided in support of his application  to  show  that  his  wife  was  a
   qualified person were found to be false. In particular  he  had  provided
   P60s and employee letters from Z A Butchers Ltd and H and S Woolwich  Ltd
   which, when the Secretary of State performed checks, revealed that  there
   was no record of the  appellant's  wife  having  the  national  insurance
   number provided on the documents.  Furthermore,  the  appellant  provided
   what purported to be joint bank statements with Santander, which the bank
   confirmed were not genuine. There was a letter from Thames  Water  which,
   after checks with Thames Water, the Secretary  of  State  found  was  not
   genuine and an Aviva insurance policy which, while  the  document  itself
   was genuine, had lapsed due to non-payment.

6. Furthermore, the appellant had not provided a passport  or  ID  card  for
   his former wife.

7. Of particular note in the refusal letter is the fact that  the  Secretary
   of State recorded that,  while  the  marriage  had  not  been  previously
   recognised due to it having been  a  proxy  marriage,  given  the  Decree
   Absolute of 4 January 2019 in relation to a marriage solemnised on the 25
   July 2013, the Secretary of State accepted the appellant was  the  former
   spouse of an EEA national.

8. The issues to be decided before the First-tier  Tribunal  therefore  were
   whether the appellant's application should have been refused for  failure
   to provide an ID card or passport and whether the appellant had submitted
   false documents.  Those were the only issues to be decided.


9. Judge Lucas, in the Decision and Reasons failed to make any  findings  on
   either of the issues under appeal. Despite noting at paragraph 6  of  the
   Decision and Reasons that the Secretary of State accepted  the  appellant
   was a former spouse,  the  judge  proceeded  to  look  carefully  at  the
   judgment of Judge Roots and  applied  Devaseelan.  The  judge  noted,  at
   paragraph 7 of his judgment, some surprise that the  refusal  letter  did
   not mention Judge Roots' determination.  At paragraph 8 the  judge  noted
   that the findings of Judge Roots were significant and could not be simply
   ignored.

10. At paragraph 10 Judge Lucas referred to Judge Roots'  finding  that  the
   appellant was not in a durable relationship and then went on at paragraph
   11 to say that that was hardly a satisfactory basis upon which to seek to
   argue that he should acquire the benefit of a retained right of residence
   following the dissolution of a marriage that had been  found  not  to  be
   durable in 2015.

11. The judge went on at paragraph 13 to state the  purpose  of  the  appeal
   before him was not to sidestep the findings of the previous tribunal  and
   that there had been a clear finding that  the  appellant  was  not  in  a
   durable relationship in that appeal. He said that he was entitled to rely
   on the findings of the previous judge and at paragraph 16 said  that  the
   problem for the appellant in this appeal was that he could not go  behind
   the findings of the previous appeal. He said the Tribunal  was  "entitled
   to the clear finding that he is not in a durable  relationship  with  the
   EEA national  and  that  therefore  he  could  not  now  rely  upon  that
   relationship to show that he has in some way acquired a retained right of
   residence."

12. Unsurprisingly, the appellant was granted permission to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal and equally unsurprisingly, Mr Bramble conceded  that  the
   decision of Judge Lucas contained material errors of law.

13. The judge failed, following the concession by  the  Secretary  of  State
   that there had been a valid marriage, to consider the  actual  issues  in
   the appeal. The previous decision and reasons was  wholly  irrelevant  to
   the issue before him. It was not a matter of whether the relationship was
   durable or not but rather the issue was, having  terminated  a  marriage,
   whether the appellant could show that his EEA national former spouse  was
   a qualifying person at the relevant time and in deciding  that,  to  make
   findings on whether the appellant  had  submitted  false  documents.  The
   judge was also required to make findings on the  appellant's  failure  to
   provide an ID document for his former spouse. The judge wholly failed  to
   consider the issues under appeal.

14. The First-tier Tribunal's decision containing a material error  of  law,
   we set it aside.

15. We then considered whether the appropriate course  was  for  us  to  re-
   decide the appeal, to adjourn it for a  resumed  hearing  or  whether  it
   should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In considering that we noted the terms of the  grant  of  permission  by
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Shaerf. He clearly stated, at paragraph 6  of
   the grant, that the issues in the appeal appeared to  be  justiciable  on
   the basis  of  documentary  evidence  and  legal  opinion  and  that  the
   appellant should consider taking  legal  advice  on  the  nature  of  the
   evidence which might be required at the next hearing if an error  of  law
   is found and the hearing proceeds to a re-making of the decision.

17. Prior to the hearing before us  no  additional  documentation  had  been
   provided. At the time of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the
   appellant  was  represented  by  Greenwich  solicitors.  Before  us   the
   appellant was represented by direct access  Counsel.  Counsel  sought  to
   adduce a 123-page bundle on the morning of the hearing. He also indicated
   that he had not seen the respondent's bundle in the  case  and  therefore
   had not seen any of the documents relied upon by the Secretary  of  State
   to show the various documents submitted by the appellant had been false.

18. Before deciding the appropriate course, we stood the matter down for  30
   minutes. Mr Bramble was provided with the appellant's bundle and Mr Iqbal
   was provided with a copy of the respondent's bundle.

19. The appellant's bundle, despite  running  to  123  pages,  contained  no
   evidence whatsoever addressing the  issue  of  the  false  documents.  It
   contained a witness statement signed by the appellant on 6 September 2019
   which was wholly silent on  the  matter.  It  also  contained  copies  of
   various documents within the appeal proceedings,  documents  relating  to
   the marriages and divorce and then numerous bank statements  in  relation
   to the appellant's bank account. As the  bundle  was  irrelevant  to  the
   issues to be decided, its late production did not justify an adjournment.

20. Mr Iqbal made an application, on the basis that he  had  not  previously
   seen  the  respondent's  bundle,  or  the  documents  contained   therein
   justifying  the  respondent's  decision  on   the   documents,   for   an
   adjournment.

21. We noted that the decision in this matter was taken  in  February  2019.
   We noted that the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal had taken  place
   in May 2019. We noted that  the  bundle  of  documents  provided  by  the
   appellant's representatives for the First-tier Tribunal hearing contained
   no documents or evidence that spoke to the veracity of the documents  and
   the actual issues in the appeal. Whilst we accepted that Mr Iqbal had not
   had  sight  of  the  respondent's  bundle  and  therefore   the   various
   verification documents, he had  seen,  because  it  is  included  in  the
   appellant's  bundle,  the  refusal  letter.  The  refusal  letter   makes
   abundantly clear why the application  was  refused.  It  made  abundantly
   clear which documents were said to be false and why,  in  particular  the
   P60s namely that there was no trace of the appellant's former wife having
   the national insurance number shown on the P60s.  The  purportedly  joint
   bank statements with Santander which were found to be false were referred
   to but nevertheless the appellant had not obtained any  further  evidence
   to counter the suggestions that they were false. If he indeed had a joint
   account with his wife, such evidence would  have  been  easily  obtained.
   Furthermore, the appellant's witness statement was completely  silent  on
   the issue of false documents. We concluded that  the  appellant  had  had
   ample opportunity to address the issues  in  the  appeal  both  with  the
   assistance of his former solicitors and subsequently and yet he has  done
   nothing. Keeping in mind the wisdom of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) we
   concluded that there was no unfairness to the appellant in proceeding and
   declined the adjournment request.


22. The adjournment application having been refused; Mr  Iqbal  acknowledged
   that there was no evidence  before  us  to  challenge  the  Secretary  of
   State's reasons for refusal concerning the documents.

23. We now consider the documents in question.

24. The Secretary of State had made interdepartmental checks with regard  to
   the P60s and employees letters from Z A Butchers Ltd and H and S Woolwich
   Ltd and the result of those checks confirmed that there was no record  of
   the appellant's  former  spouse  having  the  national  insurance  number
   provided on the documents. The results of the enquiries are contained  in
   the bundle.

25. The Santander bank statements purported to be from  an  account  in  the
   joint names of the appellant and his former wife were  checked  with  the
   bank who indicated that only one of the persons named  held  the  account
   and it was not a joint account.  The email from Santander is contained in
   the bundle. Similarly, checks with Thames Water showed that the  document
   did not conform to that authority's  paperwork.  In  the  light  of  that
   cogent evidence adduced by the Secretary of State and in the  absence  of
   any evidence to counter it, we accept, on  a  balance  of  probabilities,
   that  the  documents  submitted  in  support  of  the  application   were
   fraudulent. For that reason alone the Secretary of State was entitled  to
   refuse the application and the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

26. Mr Iqbal, relying on the case of Rehman (EEA regulations  2016-specified
   evidence) [2019] UK UT195 (IAC) asked us to find that  the  Secretary  of
   State was not entitled to refuse the application because of the  lack  of
   an ID card for the EEA national. However, the Secretary of State did  not
   refuse the application for that reason alone. It  is  apparent  from  the
   refusal  letter  that  the  main  reason  was  the  submission  of  false
   documents.

DECISION

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  an
   error on a point of law. We set aside the decision. For the above reasons
   we remake the decision and dismiss the appeal.


28. There has been no application for an anonymity order and in our view  no
   justification for making one.


Signed:     [pic]                       Dated:      19 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
