
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/00020/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 February 2018                        |On 20 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                            mr emtiaj uddin ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mrs I Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Bangladesh, has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Kelly of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) concluding
    that he had no jurisdiction in respect of the  appeal  brought  by  the
    appellant against the decision of the respondent dated 20  August  2015
    to refuse to issue him a residence card as an extended family matter of
    his sponsor uncle who  was  stated  to  be  a  national  of  Italy  and
    therefore an EEA national.

2.   There was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   No
    explanation  has  been  forthcoming  for  this  failure.   In  all  the
    circumstances I decided to proceed with the hearing in the  absence  of
    one of the parties.  I heard brief submissions from Mrs Isherwood.

3.   The grounds of appeal were twofold.   First  it  was  argued  that  the
    judge was wrong to follow the case of Sala.  Secondly it was  contended
    that the judge should have allowed the appeal because the appellant had
    "provided sufficient evidence" of his dependency on his uncle.

4.   The judge's decision is plainly wrong in law.  That  is  no  particular
    fault of the judge  because  he  based  his  decision  as  to  want  of
    jurisdiction on the reported case of the Upper Tribunal of Sala  [2016]
    UKUT 411 IAC).  However Sala was overturned by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.  Hence the FtT judge erred in  law  and  his
    decision is  accordingly  set  aside.   I  turn  then  to  re-make  the
    decision.

5.   As noted earlier, the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  argue  that  the
    judge should have allowed the appeal because the appellant had produced
    evidence of his dependency.

6.   I am unable to agree that the appellant's  appeal  should  be  allowed.
    In her reasons for  refusal  the  respondent  considered  the  evidence
    produced by the appellant and found it deficient in three respects:

    (i)  it did not establish  that  he  was  related  as  claimed  to  his
         sponsor;


    (ii) it did not establish prior dependency; and


    (iii)    it did not establish dependency since the appellant's  arrival
         in the UK.

7.   I make two observations on the  respondent's  assessment.   First,  the
    respondent was fully entitled to  find  shortcomings  in  the  evidence
    produced  by  the  appellant.   He  had  not  provided  his  own  birth
    certificate; the money transfers he provided to prove prior  dependency
    did not relate to him but to his father; the documents he  produced  to
    show dependency since arrival in  the  UK  related  to  two  addresses,
    making it uncertain that he was either residing with  or  dependent  on
    his uncle.

8.   Second, the appellant has been afforded an opportunity in the  form  of
    a further hearing before me to produce  further  evidence  or  seek  to
    provide a satisfactory explanation of the  shortcomings  identified  by
    the respondent.  The appellant has not taken this opportunity.  In  the
    absence of any evident perversity in the decision of the respondent, my
    conclusion can only be that the appellant has failed to  discharge  the
    onus of proof on him to show that he was related as claimed or that  he
    was a dependent of his uncle within the meaning of Regulation 8 of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

9.   For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 16 March 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


