
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00504/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 August 2021                             |On 11 October 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                            Melissa Sancio Mejia
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Krushner, Counsel (no instructing solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senor Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.  This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  to  which  both   parties   have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by  Microsoft  Teams
      (V). A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party  expressed  any
      concern, with the process.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines who, in  November  2019,
      applied for a derivative residence card under regulations 20 and 16 of
      the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").

   3. The  2016  Regulations  were  revoked  on  31  December  2020  by  the
      Immigration and Social Security Co-ordination (EU Withdrawal) Act 2020
      (Consequential, Saving, Transitional and  Transitory  Provisions)  (EU
      Exit) Regulations. However, paragraph 6 of Schedule  3  provides  that
      regulation 20 of the 2016  Regulations  continues  to  apply  for  the
      purposes of considering applications for a derivative  residence  card
      made  before  31  December  2020.  As  the  appellant  applied  for  a
      derivative residence on November 2019  this  appeal  must  be  decided
      under the 2016 Regulations.

   4. In relevant part, the 2016 Regulations state:

           20.- Issue of a derivative residence card
           (1)  The Secretary of State must issue a person with a
           derivative residence card on application and on production of-
           (a)  a valid national identity card issued by an EEA State or a
           valid passport; and
           (b)  proof that the applicant has a derivative right  to  reside
           under regulation 16.

           16.- Derivative right to reside
           (1)  A person has a derivative right to reside during any period
           in which the person-
           (a)  is not an exempt person; and
           (b)  satisfies each of the criteria in one or more of paragraphs
           (2) to (6).
           ...
           (5)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-
           (a)  the person is the primary carer of a British citizen
           ("BC");
           (b)  BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and
           (c)  BC would be unable to reside in the United  Kingdom  or  in
           another EEA State if the person left the United Kingdom  for  an
           indefinite period

   5. Regulation 16(5) implements into domestic legislation a  principle  of
      European law, derived from  the  CJEU  case  Ruiz  Zambrano  v  Office
      national de l'emploi (Case C-34/09) [2012] QB 265, which is frequently
      referred to as the "Zambrano principle". The  Zambrano  principle  was
      succinctly summarised by the Supreme Court in  Patel  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2019] UKSC 59 as follows:

           "In Zambrano, the Court of Justice of the European  Union  ("the
           CJEU") held that a third-country (ie non-member state)  national
           parent ("TCN" parent), of a  Union  citizen  child  resident  in
           Union territory, was entitled to a right of residence  to  avoid
           the child  being  deprived  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
           substance of their Union citizenship rights on  removal  of  the
           TCN parent. The principle extends  to  dependents  who  are  not
           children, and has been applied even where the Union citizen  has
           not exercised  their  right  of  free  movement.  The  right  of
           residence is a "derivative right", that is, one derived from the
           dependent Union citizen. A key to this derivative right  is  the
           deprivation of the benefits of the Union citizenship as a result
           of the Union citizen being compelled, by the TCN's departure, to
           leave Union territory."


   6. Regulation 16(5) must be interpreted so  far  as  possible  compatibly
      with EU law. See paragraph 3 of Patel.

   7. The factual matrix in this case is not in dispute. It is common ground
      that:

        a. The appellant is the primary carer of a  British  citizen  child
           (who was naturalised as a British citizen in July 2019).


        b. If the appellant were to leave the UK her child  would  have  no
           realistic alternative other than to do the same as there  is  no
           one else to care for him.


        c. The appellant is not lawfully in the UK but previously,  between
           August 2013 and February 2016, had limited leave to remain under
           Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  of  her
           relationship with her child.

   8. The respondent refused the appellant's application on the  basis  that
      she could make an application for  leave  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
      Immigration Rules, which would have a realistic prospect  of  success,
      and a derivative right to reside is a right of last resort which  only
      applies if a person has no other means to remain lawfully in the UK.

   9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  her  appeal
      came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cockburn  ("the  judge").
      Following a detailed  analysis  of  Patel,  the  judge  dismissed  the
      appeal. Her reasons, in summary, were that (a) the respondent does not
      presently intend to remove the appellant and has invited her to  apply
      for leave under the Immigration Rules; (b)  the  appellant's  evidence
      was that she would seek legal advice with a view to applying for leave
      under the Rules; and (c)  because  of  the  foregoing,  it  is  not  a
      consequence of refusing the appellant a derivative residence card that
      she (and her son) will be compelled to leave the UK.

  10. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge misinterpreted  Patel  (and
      the CJEU Zambrano jurisprudence), as  well  as  regulation  16(5),  by
      dismissing the appeal because the  appellant  did  not  face  imminent
      removal and could make an application under Appendix FM.

  11. A  similar  issue  was  recently  considered  in  the  High  Court  in
      Akinsanya, R (On the Application Of) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2021] EWHC 1535 (Admin). This case concerned an  applicant
      who had limited leave to remain  under  Appendix  FM  but  nonetheless
      applied under the EU Settlement Scheme for indefinite leave to  remain
      under Appendix  EU  on  the  basis  of  the  Zambrano  principle.  The
      respondent argued that because the appellant had leave to remain  (and
      therefore did not face compulsion to leave the territory of the UK  or
      EU) the Zambrano principle  was  not  applicable.  This  argument  was
      rejected by Moystn J, who, inter alia, noted that  the  appellants  in
      Zambrano itself did not face compulsion to leave the EU (as they had a
      limited residence permit). Moystn J found that  neither  CJEU  nor  UK
      jurisprudence (including Patel) supports the view that  limited  leave
      to remain under national law is a "Zambrano extinguishing factor".  In
      paragraph 41 he described the suggestion that a grant of limited leave
      extinguishes the Zambrano principle as "a fallacy" and in paragraph 51
      he stated:

           "My  conclusion  is  that  nothing  decided  in  the   CJEU   or
           domestically since the decision in Zambrano supports the  theory
           that the existence of a concurrent limited leave  to  remain  of
           itself  automatically  extinguishes   a   claim   for   Zambrano
           residence. On the contrary, it is clear to me from the facts  of
           Zambrano itself  that  the  CJEU  tacitly  acknowledged  that  a
           limited national leave to remain, and a wider Zambrano right  to
           remain, in many cases can and will coexist."

  12. Plainly, if Moystn J is correct that having limited  leave  to  remain
      does not extinguish a claim for a derivative right to reside under the
      Zambrano principle it follows that  having  a  realistic  prospect  of
      being granted limited leave to remain also does not extinguish a claim
      for a Zambrano derivative right of residence.

  13. Recognising the extent to which Akinsanya undermines the  respondent's
      position, Mr Avery applied for an adjournment on the  basis  that  the
      respondent has been granted permission to appeal in Akinsanya, and the
      hearing in the Court of Appeal is listed for  7-8  December  2021.  Mr
      Krushner opposed the adjournment application  on  the  basis  that  it
      would not be until next year that the  Court  of  Appeal  judgment  is
      handed down and we do not know the basis  upon  which  permission  has
      been granted. I refused the application given that it is likely to  be
      at least six months before the Court of Appeal judgment  is  published
      and the respondent has not provided any information about the scope of
      the appeal.

  14. I have carefully  reviewed  Akinsanya  and  agree  entirely  with  the
      reasoning given by Moystn J about the scope of the Zambrano principle.
      For the reasons given by Moystn J, the fact that the  appellant  could
      apply (with a realistic prospect  of  success)  for  leave  under  the
      Immigration Rules is irrelevant to the  question  of  whether  she  is
      entitled to a derivate right to reside. The judge therefore fell  into
      error by treating as relevant to whether the appellant was entitled to
      a derivative right to reside an issue  (whether  the  appellant  faced
      removal and/or whether she could apply for leave  under  Appendix  FM)
      that was irrelevant.

  15. The agreed/non-contested facts can yield only  one  answer,  which  is
      that the appellant is entitled to a derivative residence card. This is
      because the appellant, who is not an exempt person as defined  in  the
      regulation 16(7)(c), meets all of the conditions of regulation  16(5).
      First, she is the  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen  child  and
      therefore she satisfies 16(5)(a). Second, her child is residing in the
      UK and therefore she satisfies 16(5)(b). Third,  her  child  would  be
      unable to reside in the UK (or in the EEA) if she leaves the UK for an
      indefinite  period  and  therefore  she  satisfies16(5)(c).   As   the
      conditions of regulation 16(5) are satisfied, she  is  entitled  to  a
      derivative residence card under regulation 20(1).


Notice of decision

  16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside. I re-make the decision  and  allow  the
      appeal.


|                                  |                                  |
|Signed                            |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|D. Sheridan                       |                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     |                                  |
|                                  |Dated: 2 September 2021           |








