

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/00564/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 October 2017                         |  On 18 October 2017             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                MR MOAZAM ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     none
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 July 1988. He appealed
    against the respondent's decision to refuse him  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of residence under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006. His appeal against  that  refusal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McIntosh ("the FTTJ")  in
    a decision promulgated on 9 January 2017.

 2. No anonymity direction has been requested and none is required.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle  on
    25 July 2017 on the grounds that it was arguable the FTTJ did not  have
    jurisdiction to consider the appeal in the light of Sala  (EFMs:  Right
    of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC). Thus the appeal has come before me.

 4. The appellant did not  attend  the  hearing.  His  representatives,  MA
    Consultants, had requested that the hearing take place  on  the  papers
    but this request had been refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on  6
    October 2017. The Tribunal had attempted to telephone  the  appellant's
    representatives on that date to notify this decision but there had been
    no answer in response to the telephone call. A letter had been sent  on
    6 October 2017 to MA  Consultants  to  confirm  the  outcome  of  their
    request. Despite the refusal of that request no representative attended
    for the hearing  before  me.  The  usher  attempted  to  telephone  the
    appellant's representative but there was,  again,  no  answer.  Ms  Pal
    submitted that the hearing should go  ahead  and  I  decided  that  was
    appropriate, given that the appellant had been served  with  notice  of
    hearing; his representatives were aware of  the  hearing  date  and  no
    application had been made for an adjournment. There was  no  suggestion
    from the papers before me that, if  the  hearing  were  adjourned,  the
    appellant or his representative would attend an adjourned  hearing.  It
    was in the interests of justice  that  the  matter  should  be  decided
    expeditiously.

Submissions

 5. I bore in mind  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  this  tribunal.  For  the
    appellant it was submitted the FTTJ had jurisdiction because  Sala  had
    been wrongly decided. Various reasons were given for this  proposition.
    In essence the judgment was not compatible  with  Directive  2004/38/EC
    and Article 19 of the TEU.  There  was  also  a  vicarious  entitlement
    through Regulation 8 and 7(3). It was also submitted that Sala was  not
    binding on the FTT. LO (Partner of EEA national) Nigeria  [2009]  UKAIT
    00034 was preferred. It was submitted the decision in Sala breached the
    principles of "equivalence".  It was further submitted  that  where  no
    issue was taken on the matter of jurisdiction, the FTT  should  proceed
    (Anwar & Or v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 1275 and  Pokhriyal  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1568, albeit the latter related  to  the  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules).

 6. For the respondent, Ms Pal adopted the Rule  24  reply.  She  submitted
    that the FTTJ did not have jurisdiction following the decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Sala and that there was therefore no error of law.

Discussion

 7. The appellant had applied for a residence card as  an  extended  family
    member, pursuant to the EEA Regulations.  That application was  refused
    by the respondent pursuant to Regulation 8(2).

 8.  The  appellant  had  the  benefit  of  legal  representation  and  his
    representatives lodged a notice and grounds of appeal in the  following
    terms:

      "The decision breaches the appellant's rights under the ECHR under  EU
      treaties in relation to entry or residence in the United Kingdom".

 9. The appellant does not  suggest  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  this
    tribunal that the FTTJ should have decided whether the decision was  in
    breach of the Convention. In any event, such  an  approach  would  have
    been unsuccessful in  the  light  of  the  guidance  in  Amirteymour  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353.

10. The appellant's representative accepted in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    this tribunal that, according to Sala, there was  no  right  of  appeal
    against a decision by the respondent to refuse a residence  card  to  a
    person who claimed to be an extended family member. It  was  submitted,
    instead, that Sala was wrongly decided.  Whether or not it was  wrongly
    decided, it was not an error of law for the FTTJ to follow the guidance
    in Sala which is binding on  the  FTT.   While  the  matter  is  to  be
    considered afresh in the Court of  Appeal  no  judgment  has  yet  been
    handed down by that Court. The UT's judgment in Sala addresses  exactly
    the issue which was before the FTTJ and the FTTJ identified as much  at
    paragraphs 10 and 20 of the decision.

11. For the avoidance of doubt, I also find that, in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant or any representative on his behalf, the FTTJ was entitled to
    decide the issue of jurisdiction. In Virk v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  652,
    it was said that "Statutory jurisdiction cannot be conferred by  waiver
    or agreement; or by the failure of the parties or the  tribunal  to  be
    alive to the point".  Whilst fairness would have  required  this  being
    raised, given that it had  not  been  raised  previously,  neither  the
    appellant nor any representative attended the hearing; furthermore, the
    appellant did not request an adjournment of the hearing in the FTT  and
    this appeal is not  grounded  on  a  submission  that  the  failure  to
    consider an adjournment was a procedural irregularity amounting  to  an
    error of law. In such circumstances, it was wholly appropriate for  the
    FTTJ to decide the issue of jurisdiction.

12. The decision of the  FTTJ  contains  no  material  error  of  law:  the
    appellant had no right of appeal as is clearly stated at  paragraph  20
    of the decision under the heading "Decision and Reasons".

Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

14. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed           A M Black                   Date        16 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



