
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00835/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th January 2019                   |On 07th February 2019                |
|                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 AMIR SHAZAD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, instructed by Whitefield solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (on 13th November), Mr E Tufan (on
                    9th January), Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
         against the decision of the respondent to refuse to issue him  with
         a family permit as an extended family member - the younger  brother
         of Mr Imran Bibi who is Spanish Citizen (since March 2014). For the
         reasons set out in a decision sent to the parties  on  22  November
         2018 I found an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
         judge Pickup such that I set aside his decision to  be  remade.  At
         the resumed hearing before me on 9th January 2019 I had before me a
         bundle of documents filed on behalf of the appellant under cover of
         a letter dated 20th December 2018; a  skeleton  argument  filed  on
         behalf of the appellant and the case of Lim [2015] EWCA Civ 1383. I
         heard oral evidence from  Mr  Imran  Bibi,  the  appellant's  older
         brother, and I heard submissions from both representatives.

      2. There was no dispute between the parties that the appropriate  test
         to be applied was that set out in Lim [32]:

             "In my judgment, the critical question is whether the claimant
             is in fact in a position to support himself or not, and  Reyes
             now makes that clear beyond doubt,  in  my  view.  That  is  a
             simple matter of fact. If he can support himself, there is  no
             dependency, even if he is given financial material support  by
             the EU citizen. Those additional resources are  not  necessary
             to enable him to meet his basic needs. If, on the other  hand,
             he cannot support himself from his own  resources,  the  court
             will not ask why that is the case, save perhaps where there is
             an abuse of rights. The fact that he chooses not to get a  job
             and become self-supporting is irrelevant. It follows  that  on
             the facts of this case, there was no dependency. The appellant
             had  the  funds  to  support  herself.  She  was   financially
             independent and did not need the additional resources for  the
             purpose of meeting her basic needs."

      3. A number of issues that had arisen before the  First-tier  Tribunal
         and at the error of law hearing had fallen away  by  the  time  the
         resumed hearing took place. It was no longer in issue that

           . Mr Bibi and the appellant are brothers with  the  same  mother
             and father;

           . Mr Bibi, the oldest son in the  family,  has  been  a  Spanish
             Citizen since about March 2014;

           . Mr Bibi has been in the UK exercising Treaty Rights since  7th
             August 2014;

           . Mr Bibi left Pakistan for Spain in about 2000;

           . Prior to leaving for Spain Mr Bibi had lived with  his  mother
             and father, brother and other family  members  in  the  family
             home;

           . Their father died in 2011;

           . Their mother, Mr Bibi's wife and children  and  the  appellant
             continue to live in the family home;

           . Mr Bibi has sent money back  to  Pakistan  since  leaving  for
             Spain; sometimes by way of bank transfers and other  times  by
             taking cash when he travels there;

           . The appellant is not  a  member  of  Mr  Bibi's  household  as
             defined in the context of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

      4. The table of payments made to Pakistan by Mr Bibi that appeared  at
         pages 121- 122 of the appellant's bundle was not challenged  by  Mr
         Tufan save as to their purpose. There was no submission by Mr Tufan
         that the sums transferred or taken to Pakistan were not frequent.

      5. The critical and core issue before me was whether  the  appellant's
         basic needs were met by his brother, as claimed and/or  whether  he
         was working. Intertwined with this is the credibility of Mr  Bibi's
         evidence.

      6. The written evidence of Mr Bibi and  the  appellant  was  that  the
         appellant was not working but that he had sought employment without
         success because of the economic situation  in  Pakistan;  that  the
         money sent by him to Pakistan  was  for  the  daily  needs  of  the
         appellant, Mr Bibi's wife and his children.  The  written  evidence
         does not refer to the appellant and Mr Bibi's mother and any income
         she may or may  not  have  or  whether  funds  were  used  for  her
         maintenance.

      7. In oral evidence Mr Bibi said that  the  appellant  had  undertaken
         some studies at college but had  not  completed  his  studies,  his
         studies were "normal studies", that he thought the  cost  had  been
         about 5000 Pakistani Rupees per month, that he had finished college
         about 11 or 12 years ago, that he had done some jobs but left. When
         asked what jobs he had done, Mr Bibi said that  his  last  job  had
         been, he thought, about five years ago clerking in an office,  that
         he thought the appellant had done  some  jobs  in  offices  in  the
         private sector in different offices. When asked why he wasn't  sure
         he said that the appellant was looking after their  mother,  taking
         her to hospital and sometimes he left the job he had, for  her.  He
         also said that the reason the appellant could not obtain employment
         was definitely because of the  economic  situation.   In  his  oral
         evidence Mr Bibi also said that his father had been  in  government
         service and had, after he died, left a small pension which amounted
         to about 20,000 rupees per month; that pension went to  his  mother
         and about half of that went on her medical treatment; that no  rent
         was paid on the family home; that the equivalent of the balance  of
         the pension was spent on his children's school fees and the rest of
         the money that  went  to  the  household  was  used  for  household
         expenses. Actual payments were made by the appellant from the money
         that was sent by  him.  He  said  that  other  occasional  expenses
         included, for example, where there was a family wedding  and  money
         was given.

      8. There was no documentary evidence in the bundle to corroborate  the
         evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  occasional  employment,  his
         school/college fees/qualifications, the school  fees  paid  for  Mr
         Bibi's children, the pension paid after the father's death  or  the
         mother's ill health and medical treatment or the cost of treatment.
         There was no explanation provided for the lack of that evidence  or
         why there had been no reference to those expenses  in  any  of  the
         written statements.  There was no break-down of household expense -
         although it may not be possible to obtain corroborative evidence, a
         breakdown could nevertheless have been provided.  The oral evidence
         was the first time it became apparent that the appellant has worked
         in the past. Different explanations were given why it  was  claimed
         he was not working.

      9. Most of the remittance advice  slips  in  the  bundle  show,  where
         receipt is endorsed, receipt of the money in cash to the appellant.
         I have little doubt but that the monies are collected  by  him  and
         that they are utilised for the benefit of the family as a  whole  -
         the  mother,  wife,  children  and  the  appellant.  There  is   no
         indication that there is a bank account in Pakistan in the name  of
         the appellant - or his mother for receipt of the pension.

     10. Mr Tufan submitted that Mr Bibi was evasive  and  contradictory  in
         his answers to questions about finance. I do not agree that he  was
         evasive, but I am not satisfied that either he or the appellant has
         given sufficiently accurate and detailed evidence about the  family
         finances to enable a finding to be made  that  the  funds  Mr  Bibi
         sends to Pakistan are to enable basic needs to be met, whether  for
         the appellant or the other family members.

     11. Mr Georget submitted that there was no doubt that funds  were  sent
         to the family and that it was not simply a case of meeting  medical
         and schooling; the sums sent by Mr Bibi were sufficient to  support
         the household when considered in the context of local standards  of
         living.

     12. The burden of proof is upon the appellant. The evidence  before  me
         is such as to raise significant doubt as to the level of funds that
         are going into the family finances other than from Mr  Bibi.  I  am
         unable to find that Mr Bibi's evidence can be relied upon to assist
         me in my decision. The evidence of the  appellant's  employment  is
         contradictory and  as  such  I  cannot  make  a  finding  that  the
         appellant  is  not  working  at  all  or  whether  he  is   working
         sporadically or part-time. I cannot assess the level  of  necessary
         household expenses, the funds required for school fees or the funds
         required for medical treatment. Such evidence could be produced but
         has not been. Nor is it possible, on the  evidence  before  me,  to
         find on a balance of probabilities that there is  partial  reliance
         on the funds sent by Mr Bibi to meet basic needs.

     13. Although the funds sent by Mr Bibi may be sufficient to support the
         family in the context of local standards, that does not  mean  that
         they are necessary and required to enable basic needs  to  be  met.
         The question before me to be resolved  is  whether  the  funds  are
         required. That there is financial support is not doubted but  there
         is a lack of evidence that it is required wholly  or  partially  to
         meet basic needs.

     14. I find that on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  me  the  funds
         provided by Mr Bibi are not such as to enable a  finding  that  the
         appellant is dependent.

     15. On the basis of these findings I dismiss this appeal. The appellant
         has not shown, on a balance of probabilities, that he is  dependent
         upon his brother, Mr Bibi.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


     Date 15th January 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
