
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00916/2019(P)

                                                            EA/00918/2019(P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2020                 |On 22 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                              HINDA MOHAMED ALI

                               ADEN ALI DIRIE

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                       For the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     No submissions received

For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


                     Background

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal to the appellants by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on  20
          April 2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
          Thapar, promulgated on 30 October  2019  following  a  hearing  at
          Birmingham on 30 September 2019.


       2. The appellants are Somali nationals and the wife and father of the
          sponsor, Mr Ali, a citizen of  Norway.  They  appeal  against  the
          respondent's  decision  of  24  January  2019  to   refuse   their
          applications for entry permits to join the sponsor  under  reg.  7
          and reg. 8(3) of the EEA Regulations 2016.


       3. The respondent refused the application in  respect  of  the  first
          appellant (who married the sponsor on 29 October 2018 in Ethiopia)
          because  it  was  considered  that  the  marriage   was   one   of
          convenience. The application of the second appellant was  refused,
          although it was accepted that he was the sponsor's father, because
          the respondent was not satisfied that  he  was  wholly  or  mainly
          financially dependent upon the  sponsor  nor  that  his  essential
          living needs were being met by the sponsor.


       4. The appeal came before Judge Thapar who heard oral  evidence  from
          the sponsor, considered the  documentary  evidence  but  concluded
          that the marriage was not genuine and was one of  convenience.  In
          respect of the second appellant, the judge found that there was no
          evidence to show that the funds sent to him were  being  used  and
          that the mere fact that funds were  sent  was  not  sufficient  to
          demonstrate dependency. Accordingly, the appeals were dismissed.


       5. The appellants sought permission to appeal. This  was  granted  by
          the First-tier Tribunal although the view was expressed  that  the
          grounds largely  amounted  to  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
          findings and an attempt to reargue the  appeal.  However,  it  was
          considered that the judge had  arguably  failed  to  consider  the
          sponsor's oral evidence at the  hearing  and  also,  although  not
          raised in the grounds, the Robinson obvious point of  whether  the
          correct burden of proof  had  been  considered  and  applied  with
          respect to the respondent's allegation that the marriage  was  one
          of convenience.


                 Covid-19 crisis : preliminary matters


       6. The appeal would then have normally been listed  for  hearing  but
          due to the pandemic this could not be done and instead  directions
          were  issued  on  10  July  2020  inviting  the  parties  to  make
          submissions on the decision being made on the papers  and  on  the
          error of law issue.


       7. The respondent replied on 20  July  2020.  No  response  has  been
          received from the appellants who although overseas are represented
          by a UK law firm to whom the directions were sent. I now  consider
          whether it is appropriate to determine the matter without an  oral
          hearing.


       8. In doing so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
          Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v  The
          Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note  No  1
          2020: Arrangements during the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
          Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I  have  regard
          to the overriding objective which is defined  in  rule  2  of  the
          Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable
          the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To  this
          end I have considered that dealing with a case fairly  and  justly
          includes: dealing with it in ways that are  proportionate  to  the
          importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;
          avoiding unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
          proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
          able to participate fully in the proceedings;  using  any  special
          expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and  avoiding  delay,
          so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues (Rule
          2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).


       9. I have had regard to the submissions and the  evidence  before  me
          before. I take the view that a full account of the facts  are  set
          out in those papers,  that  the  arguments  for  and  against  the
          appellants have been clearly set out and that  the  issues  to  be
          decided are straightforward. There are no matters arising from the
          papers which would require clarification and so  an  oral  hearing
          would not be needed for that purpose.  The  appellants  have  been
          given the  opportunity  to  present  any  objections  to  a  paper
          determination but have not done so. In all the circumstances I  am
          satisfied that I am able to  fairly  and  justly  deal  with  this
          matter without an oral hearing and proceed to do so.


                Submissions


      10. The appellants have not complied with directions. I  am  satisfied
          that these were properly served by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  their
          legal  representatives.  I  also  note   that   the   respondent's
          submissions were served on the appellants' representatives and  so
          they have had two opportunities  to  reply.   The  representatives
          have not notified the Tribunal at  any  stage  that  they  are  no
          longer acting for the appellants.


      11. The respondent in submissions of 20 July 2020 does not oppose  the
          appellants' application for permission and accepts that the  judge
          did not consider whether the respondent had discharged the initial
          burden with respect to the marriage.  It  is  also  accepted  that
          there is a lack  of  clarity  with  respect  to  the  findings  on
          dependency. The Tribunal is invited to set aside the decision  and
          to list the case for a re-hearing.


                  Discussion and conclusions

      12. I have considered the evidence, the determination, the grounds for
          permission and the respondent's submissions.


      13. The judge  referred  to  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  at
          paragraph 8. I cannot speculate on whether the judge made use of a
          standard paragraph or whether he overlooked that in a case such as
          this where the respondent had made allegations of a sham marriage,
          the burden was on her  to  make  out  that  claim.   Whatever  the
          reason, that has not been acknowledged by the judge at paragraph 8
          or anywhere else in his determination. Although he raises  several
          valid concerns about the evidence regarding the marriage  and  the
          relationship, his omission to recognise that the burden lies  with
          the respondent and to then focus on whether that burden  has  been
          discharged is fatal to  his  decision  on  the  first  appellant's
          appeal.  The complaints  made  in  the  appellants'  grounds  with
          respect to the first  appellant  are,  as  Judge  Keane  observes,
          largely disagreements with the evidence. It is  indeed  surprising
          that irrelevant matters are relied upon and the glaring error  has
          been overlooked by the representatives.


      14. With respect to the second appellant, the grounds maintain that at
          the hearing the Presenting  Officer  conceded  that  he  had  been
          supported by  the  sponsor.  No  contemporaneous  notes  from  the
          representatives have been adduced to support this  contention  and
          the judge's Record of Proceedings shows that it was only  accepted
          that there was a  level  of  financial  support  provided  by  the
          sponsor. It was not accepted that the second appellant's essential
          living needs were being met or that he was  financially  dependent
          upon  the  sponsor  (confirmed  also  at  paragraph  15   of   the
          determination).


      15. Nevertheless, the sponsor's oral  evidence  on  support  does  not
          appear to have been taken  into  account  and  there  is  lack  of
          reasoning as to the findings  on  the  documentary  evidence.  For
          example, no  clear  reason  is  given  for  why  the  letter  from
          Dahabshill Transfer Services  was  rejected  as  evidence  of  the
          transfer of funds from 2014 (at 18) simply  because  there  was  a
          separate receipt from 2018.  It is also unclear why the judge  was
          not satisfied that the funds sent to Ethiopia were  not  genuinely
          received by the appellants (at 19) or that the funds were used  by
          them (at 21).


      16. For these reasons, I  find  that  the  judge's  decision  contains
          errors of law and cannot stand. It is set aside in  its  entirety.
          Neither party has sought to preserve any findings and  the  matter
          is thus remitted for a de novo hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.




          Decision

      17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
          it is set aside. A fresh decision shall be made by  another  judge
          of the First-tier Tribunal.


                 Anonymity


      18. No request has been made at any time for an anonymity order and  I
          see no reason to make one.


                Directions


      19. Further directions for the hearing shall be issued by the relevant
          Tribunal in due course.




        Signed


              R. Keki?

              Upper Tribunal Judge

              Date: 17 September 2020








