
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00696/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2018                          |On 8th April 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                HALEEMA BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                    Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell, instructed by Zenith Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                ERROR OF LAW
Background

 1. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Robson (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who,
    in a decision promulgated on  7  December  2017  dismissed  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent to refuse her application for an
    EEA Family Permit as confirmation of a right to reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a dependent family member of her daughter-in-law,  Rita  [M]
    (hereinafter  "the  Sponsor"),  a  Portuguese  national   pursuant   to
    Regulation  7  and  8  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the "EEA Regulations").

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. On 1 April 2016  the  Appellant
    made an application for an EEA Family Permit  as  a  dependent  of  the
    Sponsor who is married to her son.

 3. In a decision made on 30 December  2016  the  Respondent  refused  that
    application. The Respondent's reasons for reaching that  conclusion  is
    set out concisely by the FtTJ at [18] to [20] as follows:

         "In addition to the aforementioned money transfer documents and pay
         slips, it appears that the Appellant had furnished bank  statements
         which showed little in savings or disposal income to support her in
         another country as well as the family in the  United  Kingdom.  The
         Respondent had noted that the  Appellant  had  recently  sold  some
         property, indicating that she had assets of her own to rely on  and
         in a previous visa application to visit her son, she  had  provided
         bank statements showing funds  of  her  own  and  stated  that  she
         received income from agricultural land  and  property  in  Pakistan
         and, indeed, was proposing to meet her own expenses in  the  United
         Kingdom. In the light of that evidence,  the  Respondent  took  the
         view that it was not clear why the sons in the United Kingdom could
         not support the Appellant financially and to send money to  her  in
         Pakistan were that to be needed.

         The Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant was  wholly  or
         mainly financially dependent on the Sponsor or  that  if  she  was,
         that it was a  dependence  of  necessity  rather  than  choice  and
         therefore the Respondent was not satisfied that the  Appellant  was
         an extended family member in accordance with Regulation 8(2) of the
         European Regulations.

         Equally, whilst medical documentation had been furnished, there was
         no mention in the letters of support that the Appellant was  unable
         to either care for herself or to receive the  appropriate  care  in
         Pakistan if required, with financial assistance from her sons."

 4. The FtTJ heard oral evidence from the Sponsor and the Appellant's  son.
    While the FtTJ noted an inconsistency between  their  evidence  he  did
    accept the evidence that the Appellant had undergone surgery  resulting
    in the amputation of two toes and the lower right leg. He also accepted
    that funds had been sent to the Appellant by her son  and  the  Sponsor
    and that the Appellant was currently cared for by her husband's cousin.
    A summary of his findings is set out at [58] as follows:

         "(i)     Although I accept  the  Appellant  has  undergone  surgery
         resulting in an amputation of her lower  right  leg,  there  is  no
         evidence before me, be it medical or  otherwise,  as  to  what  her
         current needs are, be it either in terms of caring or treatment.

         (ii)     There  is  no  evidence  before  me  that  the  cousin  is
         unwilling to continue the care that is being offered or  that  such
         care as is necessary could not be continued by the use  of  another
         provider.

         (iii)    There is no evidence  before  me  that  the  Appellant  is
         wholly financially dependent on the European worker (I accept  that
         the daughter-in-law is a European Worker) or her spouse.

         (iv)     I find  that  on  the  evidence  before  me,  the  current
         arrangement can continue in terms  of  accommodation,  funding  and
         communication."

 5. The FtTJ thus concluded that the Appellant  did  not  satisfy  the  EEA
    Regulations and dismissed the appeal.

 6. On 18 December 2017 grounds of appeal were  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant. The grounds aver that the FtTJ  erred  in  not  finding  the
    evidence of witnesses credible; gave inadequate reasons  for  rejecting
    the evidence; failed to apply a structured approach  to  the  issue  of
    proportionality under Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and  made  a  material
    misdirection in law in his consideration of the EEA Regulations.

 7. Permission to  appeal  the  decision  was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 2 May 2018 on all grounds save for the ground  relating  to
    Article 8 as this was not before the FtTJ.

 8. A brief Rule 24 response was filed by the Respondent on  21  June  2018
    opposing the appeal.

 9. At the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  representatives  made
    helpful and succinct submissions. In amplifying the grounds of  appeal,
    Mr Ell argued that the FtTJ had failed to make findings in  respect  of
    key issues in the appeal.  He submitted that there  was  no  engagement
    with the issue of whether funds were remitted to meet  the  Appellant's
    basic needs and the reasons  given  were  unclear  and  inadequate.  Mr
    Diwnycz submitted that the FtTJ's findings were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence  and  that  Appellant's  challenge  to   them   was   a   mere
    disagreement. In reply Mr Ell submitted that the  FtTJ's  reasoning  at
    [55] was inadequate and at [58] failed to apply the correct test.

Error of Law

10.   According to the application, the Appellant applied for an EEA  Family
      Permit as a family member of an  EEA  national.  The  application  was
      considered by the Respondent by reference to Regulation 7 and 8 of the
      EEA Regulations. The grant of permission observed that  the  FtTJ  did
      not set out in his decision those provisions in full and, whilst  that
      would have been helpful, they are referred to briefly at [7] and it is
      apparent that the FtTJ was aware that the key issue before him was the
      question of whether  the  Appellant  was  dependent  on  her  son  and
      Sponsor.

11.   While the  FtTJ  observed  that  there  was  an  absence  of  evidence
      relating to the sale of the Appellant's property  and  of  her  actual
      outgoings, he did accept at [54] the evidence of the  Appellant's  son
      and Sponsor that monies  were  sent  to  the  Appellant  as  and  when
      required. The FtTJ then jumped to answering the question of dependency
      at [58 (iii)] against the Appellant on the basis that  there  was  "no
      evidence...that the Appellant is wholly financially dependent  on  the
      European worker...or her spouse". The difficulty with that analysis in
      my view is two-fold. First, I agree with  Mr  Ell  that  there  is  an
      obvious  misdirection  in  law.  The  question  was  not  whether  the
      Appellant had established that she was "wholly financially  dependent"
      on her son and Sponsor,  but  whether  she  required  their  financial
      support in order to meet her basic  needs:  Reyes  v  Migrationsverket
      (Case C- 423/12). That, in my view, is an apparent failure to  analyse
      the accepted evidence within the correct legal framework. It may  well
      be  the  case  that  the  FtTJ  was  misled  by  the  wording  of  the
      Respondent's refusal and it does not appear  that  he  was  given  any
      assistance by the representatives then before him but, nevertheless, a
      material error has been made.

12.   Second, in view of the FtTJ's acceptance that monies were remitted  to
      the Appellant, I agree that no cogent reasons are given as to why this
      did not meet the test of dependency as defined. The analysis  at  [54]
      is unclear and the FtTJ's reference to the lacuna in the  evidence  at
      [55] is not sufficient to discharge the duty  to  provide  reasons  in
      view of the accepted evidence. The evidence  of  the  Appellant's  son
      recorded at [35] and [54] was that  the  monies  paid  for  treatment,
      medication and food. This would clearly meet part of  the  Appellant's
      essential needs. I agree with Mr Ell that  it  is  not  at  all  clear
      whether the FtTJ accepted or rejected that evidence, and the criticism
      that the FtTJ failed to  engage  with  any  consideration  as  to  the
      evidence of what that money was used for is made out.

13.   For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point  of  law  and  the
      decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   I  must  then
      consider whether to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal,  or  to
      re-make the decision myself. In reaching my decision I have taken into
      account paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement  of
      25 September 2012 and consider that it is  appropriate  to  remit  the
      matter to the First-tier Tribunal  as  the  appeal  will  have  to  be
      reheard in its entirety. The parties will be advised of  the  date  of
      the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set aside, no findings  are  preserved,  and
is remitted for a fresh hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge
Robson) on a date to be fixed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Date 14/02/2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



