
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00789/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2019                 |On 18 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                             Waseem Aslam Minhas
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Mazhar Ilahi of Counsel, instructed by with
                    Ashton Ross Law, solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr David Clark, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse him a permanent right  of  residence  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 as the former  spouse  of  an
    EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

Background

 2. The appellant is 32 years old.  He came to the  United  Kingdom  almost
    nine years ago, on 23 December 2010, as a Tier 4 student migrant.    He
    had leave to remain on that basis until 15 June 2012.  When it expired,
    he did not embark.

 3. On 26 July 2012, five weeks after the expiry of his Tier 4  leave,  the
    appellant married a Hungarian citizen and  on  17  July  2013,  he  was
    granted an EEA residence  card  under  the  2006  Regulations,  as  her
    spouse.  The marriage was not successful: in June 2018,  the  appellant
    issued divorce proceedings.  On 2 August 2018,  the  appellant  applied
    for a permanent right of residence card, stating that he had  separated
    from his  wife.   There  was  insufficient  evidence  of  the  spouse's
    passport or identity card, and the respondent refused the application.

 4. On 14  November  2018,  decree  nisi  was  pronounced  in  the  divorce
    proceedings, with decree absolute on 3 January 2019.   That  terminated
    the marriage.

 5. On 5 December 2018, the appellant had made a second permanent residence
    application.  That was refused on 30 January 2019.

Refusal letter

 6. The respondent's reasons for refusing were that the appellant had  been
    unable to provide sufficient evidence either of his  spouse's  exercise
    of Treaty rights up to the date of  application  for  a  divorce  (June
    2018), or of his own exercise of Treaty rights between June 2018 and  5
    December 2019, when the appellant  applied  to  the  respondent  for  a
    permanent right of residence.

 7. The refusal letter stated that the appellant  had  produced  sufficient
    evidence to confirm the divorce proceedings and a copy of his Hungarian
    ex-wife's passport.  The appellant had lived with his wife  only  since
    February 2013 and told the respondent he left  his  wife  on  2  August
    2018.  However, there were gaps in the continuity  of  her  employment.
    In 2011/2012, the spouse's income was recorded  by  HMRC  as  �0.   The
    appellant produced evidence of her employment for three full tax years:
    2013/14, 2014/15, 2017/18, and  for  the  first  three  months  of  the
    2018/2019 tax year but there was no  evidence  of  exercise  of  Treaty
    rights by her  from  June  2018  -  November  2018,  when  the  divorce
    proceedings began.

 8. The appellant had not produced evidence  of  residing  himself  in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with  the  Regulations  for  a  continuous
    period of 5 years prior to  his  December  2018  application  (so  from
    December 2013 to December 2018).

 9. The respondent refused to grant a permanent right of residence and  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal was listed on
    29 March 2019 but then  adjourned,  following  an  application  by  the
    appellant's former solicitors, Law Lane Solicitors.  On 3 May 2019,  he
    instructed his present solicitors, Ashton Ross Law, and the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing was on 15 May 2019.

10. On 7 March 2019, Law Lane solicitors emailed  the  Presenting  Officers
    Unit in Cardiff, asking them to search via HMRC to verify the  spouse's
    exercise of Treaty rights in each of the  years  2013/2014,  2014/2015,
    2017/2018 and from June to November 2018.  They gave her date of birth,
    nationality and National Insurance number. The respondent responded  by
    email stating that the respondent's policy on HMRC  requests  was  that
    'this will only happen in exceptional cases, for example where domestic
    violence has taken place'.  She relied on Alarape and another  (Article
    12, EC Regulation 1612/68) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00413 which held at [20]
    that:

         "20. ... We can appreciate that Mr Salama's leaving the matrimonial
         home in 2006/2007 may have made it more  difficult  than  otherwise
         for the appellants to obtain evidence of  his  employment  history.
         However, the appellants failed  to  produce  credible  evidence  of
         having  taken  reasonable  steps  to  obtain  further  and   better
         particulars of Mr Salama's work history and they did  not  request
         the FTT to make an interlocutory order (under Rule 50 of the Asylum
         and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005).  The  burden  of
         proving Mr  Salama  had  been  exercising  Treaty  rights  for  the
         requisite period rested on them: see Amos v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 552. Hence the  appellants  had
         not been able to prove that Mr Salama was exercising Treaty  rights
         except between (at best) February 2004  -  April  2006.  There  was
         accordingly no material error of law on the  part  of  the  FTT  in
         finding that the appellants failed to show they  were  entitled  to
         permanent residence documentation  on  the  basis  of  Mr  Salama's
         exercise of Treaty rights. ..."

11.  The appellant was on notice of the need to apply  for  an  Amos  order
    from 3 April 2019 but made no such application at  any  time.  Instead,
    soon after taking over the case, on 1 May 2019, Ashton Ross  Law  wrote
    again to the appellant's former spouse, asking her for the information.
      If she responded, her response is  not  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    bundle.

Mr Jegede's skeleton argument

12. In Mr Jegede's skeleton argument dated 14 May 2019 for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, he says that the appellant 'has  done  all  that  he  can  to
    acquire the relevant evidence from the EEA sponsor' and relied on Amos.
    He stated that the respondent 'must now make checks  for  the  relevant
    period to confirm whether the EEA sponsor had  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights...This can be directed upon by the Judge'.   He  still  made  no
    application for an Amos direction to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Attached to the skeleton argument is evidence of  the  appellant's  Tax
    Summary for the year 2017/2018 (so ending on 5 April  2018),  a  single
    bank statement for 13 July 2018 which shows money in and money out, but
    not what it was, and a bank statement for October 2017 showing  various
    shopping purchases.  None of these documents assists much with  showing
    that between June 2018, when  he  commenced  divorce  proceedings,  and
    December 2018, when the application for a permanent right of  residence
    was made, the appellant was exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom in his own right.



First-tier Tribunal decision

14. The First-tier Judge found that the evidence adduced by  the  appellant
    did not demonstrate the exercise of Treaty rights  by  the  appellant's
    former wife, or by him, at the material times. Mr Jegede conceded  both
    those points at the hearing, according to the Presenting Officer's note
    of proceedings.

15. The respondent had declined to make enquiries directly with  HMRC.   No
    Amos direction (Amos v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2011] EWCA Civ 552) for  production  of  evidence  or  for  a  witness
    summons under rule 4 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 had been sought, before  or
    at the hearing. Rule 4 in the 2014 Procedure Rules replaced rule 45  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005,  mentioned
    in the Amos judgment.

16. The appellant sought to adduce additional documents at the end  of  the
    hearing.  The Judge did not proceed to make an Amos  direction  of  his
    own motion, considering it inappropriate by reason of the vagueness  of
    the evidence from the appellant, both about what his  former  wife  was
    doing, and about his  own  employment.   The  appellant  also  had  not
    explained why, having married his wife in July 2012, he did  not  begin
    to live with her until February 2013.

17. The appeal was dismissed  and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

18. First-tier Judge Alis granted permission to appeal on  the  basis  that
    the First-tier Judge had arguably acted unfairly in not giving an  Amos
    direction, nor permitting examination-in-chief.

19. There had been a request for the record of proceedings, which  was  not
    evident on the Tribunal file, and the decision itself was silent as  to
    the question whether examination-in-chief was sought and/or refused.

Rule 24 Reply

20. The material part of the respondent's Rule 24 Reply is as follows:

         "3.  Ground One:  the appellant does not demonstrate that  this  is
         an appeal which is exceptional as to facts.   It  is  not  for  the
         First-tier Judge to assume and/or to speculate as to the nature and
         content of the email (A1:20).  First-tier  Judge  correctly  adopts
         the natural meaning of the words contained.

         4.   Ground Two:  the grounds imply  that  the  relevant  documents
         were available and could be produced and this amounted to procedure
         unfairness.  Respectfully, it is common practice for all  documents
         to be served in good time, in keeping with directions and  evidence
         relied upon.  It cannot be argued that it would  be  good  practice
         for the First-tier Judge, firstly to allow further documents during
         cross-examination, and/or secondly at the conclusion of submissions
         allowing either party to produce  documents  to  rebut  points  put
         forward.

         5.   The grounds do not suggest an application was made  to  submit
         further documents  at  the  start  of  the  hearing,  nor  give  an
         indication as to why the documents were not  served  prior  to  the
         hearing and/or contained within the appellant's bundle. ...."

21. In addition, the respondent attaches a note of proceedings from Matthew
    Williams, the Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing:

         "It is a great pity that no  enquiries  were  made  concerning  the
         spouse - [name] - with regard to her 2011/2012 involvement with  [a
         different man] (see indicative criteria Directive 38/2004).

         This appeal against the refusal to grant a permanent residence card
         heard yesterday - 15 May 2019 - @ Harmondsworth before IJ  Housego.



         Mr Jegede represented and conceded that the [appellant]  could  not
         meet Regulation 10(5) as there was  a  lack  of  evidence  of  [the
         spouse] exercising [Treaty rights] in/during the material period.

         Similarly, he eventually  conceded  that  the  [appellant]  himself
         could not show that he had been resident in the United  Kingdom  in
         line with the Regulations for the requisite period.

         Matter  heard  on  submissions  only,  relied  on   Amos   and   on
         irrationality in Theophilus.

         At this late stage, the representative requested an adjournment for
         the Tribunal to issue an Amos direction to the respondent regarding
         the spouse's alleged employment.  The Immigration  Judge,  properly
         in my view, refused  that  application  as  clearly  too  late  and
         obviously made in desperation given what had been said.

         Determination reserved."

22. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Mr Kolade Jegede's witness statement

23. By a witness statement dated 27  June  2019,  Mr  Jegede  disputed  the
    account of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  also
    in the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's  note.   He  relied  on  his
    attendance note (which is not provided) and on his skeleton argument to
    the First-tier Tribunal, which  he  says  set  out  the  need  for  the
    respondent to make HMRC checks  on  the  earnings  of  the  appellant's
    former spouse.

24. He set out the discussion which then ensued, in which the  Judge  asked
    why there had been no application for  an  Amos  direction  before  the
    hearing, and Mr Jegede said that 'in many hearings, as [sic] it was not
    uncommon for an Amos direction to be made at the point of  hearing...an
    Amos direction can be made at any  point  in  any  event'.   The  Judge
    relied on Amos at [36] and [40], on Mr Jegede's account.

25. Following the discussion, the First-tier Judge 'took the view  that  no
    official request had been made'.  Mr  Jegede  disagrees  and  considers
    that he had requested an Amos direction.  The Judge refused to make  an
    Amos direction, and then asked the Presenting Officer whether there was
    any dispute about the facts of the appeal.  The Presenting Officer said
    that there was not, and Mr Jegede says that the Judge went straight  to
    submissions.  He does not say whether he objected at the time.

26. Mr Jegede complained that the appellant was not  given  the  chance  to
    adopt his witness statement or  to  verify  the  documents  which  were
    before the Tribunal (excluding the late-produced documents, which  were
    not admitted).

Rule 15(2A) application

27. By an email dated 10 September 2019 and sent at  11:46  AM,  Mr  Jegede
    made a rule 15(2A) application to adduce further documentary  evidence,
    the forms P60 which the First-tier Judge refused to  admit  during  his
    submissions on 15 May 2019.   The  evidence  is  not  attached  to  his
    application.  The basis of the application is that the appellant  seeks
    to submit evidence illustrating his  working  history,  'covering  five
    years as the  non-EEA  family  member  of  his  former  spouse'.   That
    evidence  should  have  been  submitted  with  his  application  for  a
    permanent right of residence in December 2018.

28. Ashton Ross Law's letter says that  the  Forms  P60  had  'only  [been]
    gathered [by the appellant] a day  before  the  hearing'  due  to  late
    instructions given to Ashton Ross Law.  The  letter  says  that  Ashton
    Ross Law were instructed on 5 May 2019 but their Notice  of  Change  of
    Representative was dated 3 May 2019.  The letter continues:

         "The documents which consisted of P60s  was  only  gathered  a  day
         before the hearing, as we had cited the  Judge  that  part  of  the
         delay was based on late instructions, as we were  instructed  on  5
         May 2019, which  is  cited  in  the  determination  on  page  5  at
         paragraph 21.  We thus requested for the documents to  be  provided
         at the hearing by the appellant.  Thus, the documents were prepared
         to be illustrated to the  Judge.   It  is  worth  noting  that  the
         documents were not said to be refused to be accepted  on  the  pure
         basis that they were not produced prior to  the  hearing,  but  has
         been noted particularly to  be  declined  on  the  basis  that  the
         evidence was admitted at the conclusion of the  hearing  (paragraph
         31 of determination).

         We have since disputed the context by which the Judge  has  reached
         this conclusion, which are highlighted within the  initial  grounds
         and witness statement of dated [sic] 27 June 2019. ... "

   Messrs Ashton Ross Law ask for the  documents  to  be  admitted  'in  the
   interest of fairness and justice'. As  they  were  not  attached  to  the
   application, the Upper Tribunal was not able to  form  a  view  of  these
   documents before the hearing. They are admissible  only  if  there  is  a
   material error of law in the decision such that it should  be  set  aside
   and remade.

Analysis

29. When considering whether there is an error of  law  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, still less a material error of law, I remind myself that this
    is a challenge to the respondent's decision made on the evidence  which
    the appellant chose to put before her when he made his application on 5
    December 2018.  The burden of proof for  Regulation  10(5)  is  on  the
    appellant, and applying Baigazieva v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1088, he must  be  able  to  show  that  his
    former wife exercised Treaty  rights  until  the  commencement  of  the
    divorce proceedings, and that thereafter, he  exercised  Treaty  rights
    himself until the date of application, such that there was a continuous
    period of 5 years residence in accordance with the Regulations.

30. Ashton Ross Law were not acting in December  2018.   According  to  the
    notice of acting on the Upper Tribunal file, they began to act, at  the
    latest, on 3 May 2019.  However, documentary evidence of  the  spouse's
    exercise of Treaty rights until June 2018, and the appellant's exercise
    of it thereafter, should have been submitted with the application.

31. The First-tier Tribunal hearing took place on  15  May  2019,  12  days
    after Ashton Ross Law accepted  instructions.   Some  documents,  which
    Counsel Mr Ilahi has not seen, and nor  has  either  Mr  Clark  or  the
    Tribunal, were obtained by the appellant  before  the  hearing  but  no
    attempt  was  made  to  adduce  them  until  the  end  of  Mr  Jegede's
    submissions.   No proper reason has been  advanced  for  waiting  until
    submissions in the First-tier Tribunal, at the end of the  hearing,  to
    seek to adduce them.

32. I am satisfied that the First-tier Judge did not err in law in refusing
    to admit those documents, which apparently were some forms P60.  In any
    event, they would have been of little assistance, it seems to  me:  the
    appellant's forms P60 for the tax years up to  and  including  5  April
    2018 would not have assisted, as that was the period in which he needed
    to show that his spouse was exercising Treaty rights.  If there existed
    by 15 May 2019 a form P60 for the tax year 2018/2019, that  was  not  a
    document which could have been placed before the respondent in December
    2018.

33. I consider next the criticism of the First-tier Judge for not making an
    Amos direction of his own motion.  I note that at [35-36] and  [40]  in
    Amos, Lord Justice Stanley Burnton, with whom Lord Justice Maurice  Kay
    and the Master of the Rolls agreed, said this:

         "35. There is nothing in the Directive or the Regulations or in the
         decisions of the Court of  Justice  to  detract  from  the  general
         principle of Community Law that procedural matters are  subject  to
         the domestic law of the Member States. ...

         36.  Similarly, in Case C-408/03 Commission v  Belgium,  the  Court
         pointed out that:

             "... as the right of residence under  Article  18  EC  is  not
             unconditional, it is for the citizens of the Union  to  adduce
             the necessary evidence that they meet the conditions laid down
             in that regard by the relevant Community provisions."

         40.  ... Ms Theophilus does not suggest that the procedural law  of
         the Tribunal hindered her ability to prove her case. Rule 51 of the
         Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  authorises
         the Tribunal to "allow oral, documentary or other  evidence  to  be
         given of any fact which appears to be relevant to  an  appeal"  ...
         even if that evidence would be inadmissible  in  a  court  of  law.
         Furthermore, as Mr Eicke pointed  out,  Ms  Theophilus  could  have
         applied under regulation 50 for a witness summons requiring her ex-
         husband to attend and give evidence as to whether or not he was and
         had been working. She did not do so. Nor did she seek  a  direction
         under rule 45 requiring the  Secretary  of  State  to  provide  any
         information necessary for the determination of her appeal.  Indeed,
         she made no relevant application to the Tribunal. As Maurice Kay LJ
         pointed out in the course of argument, in these circumstances it is
         impossible to identify any error of law on the part of the Tribunal
         in this respect."

34. Mr Jegede acknowledged at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  that  the
    evidence of exercise of Treaty rights was inadequate, both in  relation
    to the appellant and his spouse.  Ashton Ross Law made  no  application
    for an Amos direction requiring the respondent to seek HMRC  disclosure
    at any time before the First-tier Tribunal hearing,  nor  is  it  clear
    that they did so at the hearing: their argument is that the  First-tier
    Judge should have made an Amos direction of his own motion.

35. That contention is unarguable: the responsibility was on the  appellant
    to obtain the evidence  to  support  his  assertions  with  appropriate
    evidence and there was no error of  law  by  the  First-tier  Judge  in
    refusing to admit late-produced forms P60 which were not the subject of
    the  respondent's  decision  and   appear   unlikely   to   have   been
    determinative of  the  appeal  in  any  event.   The  evidence  of  the
    appellant's own exercise of Treaty rights was always within his custody
    or control and has never been  produced.   The  application  could  not
    succeed on that basis and the appeal was bound to fail.

36. The final question is whether the appellant should have been allowed to
    give evidence.  Mr Jegede does not say that he challenged the  decision
    to move directly to submissions.  Nor does he challenge the note by the
    Home Office Presenting Officer recording  that  he  conceded  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of Regulation  10(5)  because
    he could not show continuous exercise of Treaty rights  by  his  spouse
    during his marriage, or by the  appellant  himself  after  the  divorce
    proceedings were filed.  Given that admission, oral evidence would  not
    have improved  the  appellant's  case:  his  evidence  in  his  witness
    statement was not disputed and none of the documents he  had  submitted
    was treated as unreliable.

37. There is plainly no material error  of  law  in  this  decision  and  I
    dismiss the appeal.



DECISION

38. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law

   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson     Date: 16 September 2019
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
