
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00605/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2020                     |On 19 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                 BRAD DANIEL
                       [ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C Timson, instructed by Manchester Associates
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gould promulgated 12.9.19, dismissing his appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 16 .1.19,  to  refuse  to
    admit him to the UK pursuant to regulation 11 of the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016 (the Regulations).

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    16.1.20 on all grounds, finding it arguable that the  judge  materially
    erred in law in stating at  [24]  of  the  decision  that  "facts  were
    agreed", when it was clear from [14] that they were not.

Error of Law

 3. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 4. The application for entry was refused on the basis that  the  appellant
    would pose a threat to the requirements of public policy  if  admitted,
    and that this was proportionate, and represented a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.

 5. The allegation was that on 16.1.19 when loading his lorry  in  Belgium,
    the appellant, who is a  Romanian  national,  agreed  to  transport  an
    Albanian national to the UK, knowing, having seen his passport, that he
    needed a visa to enter the UK and did not have one.  In  interview,  he
    told the immigration officer that when approaching UK Passport  Control
    the man hid in the bunk behind and he failed to tell the  Border  Force
    officer that there were two people in the cab. He allegedly admitted to
    having transported people in the  same  manner  on  previous  occasions
    because "he just wanted to help."

 6. The grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a  series  of
    "central and core" findings  without  providing  any  or  any  adequate
    reasons for those findings. It is submitted in particular that at  [24]
    the judge was satisfied on the 'agreed' evidence that the appellant was
    prepared to transport a man  to  border  control  without  knowing  his
    identity and/or whether he had documents.  It  is  asserted  that  this
    evidence was  not  agreed  by  the  appellant  or  his  representative,
    pointing to [5] of his witness statement where he alleges that  he  was
    told that the man he transported did  have  documents  which  would  be
    presented to border control. This it is said, "is  a  clear  indication
    that the Judge has made his finding on the flawed basis that the  above
    "evidence" was agreed when clearly it was not.

 7. It is further argued that the judge stated that the appellant had  done
    this once or twice before, but failed to provide  sufficient  reasoning
    for this finding.

 8. However, the grounds are based on a misconstruction or misunderstanding
    of the judge's findings.

 9. At [24] the judge stated:  "I  am  entirely  satisfied  on  the  agreed
    evidence that the appellant was prepared to transport a man into border
    control without knowing his identity or whether he had documents. I  am
    satisfied that the appellant has done this once or twice before.  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant's employment meant he would be  thoroughly
    familiar with  the  requirements  that  those  passing  through  border
    control must have appropriate documentation and that those without  the
    same were attempting to enter the United Kingdom unlawfully." The judge
    went on at [25] to find that on the basis of the finding at  [24]  that
    the appellant was "attempting to facilitate unlawful  immigration  into
    the UK and but for the actions of Border Force it was more likely  than
    not he would have been successful."

10. The judge did not state that the facts were agreed,  but  that  it  was
    found as a fact on the agreed evidence that the appellant had attempted
    to facilitated illegal entry. The appellant did not attend the tribunal
    appeal hearing but was content to rely on  his  bundle,  including  his
    witness statement. He did not present himself for cross-examination  on
    the assertions in his statement. However, from  [19]  of  the  decision
    that "on the appellant's own  admission  he  has  permitted  a  man  he
    encountered at a car park and had never met before to  enter  his  cab.
    The appellant made a  decision  to  help  this  man  enter  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant knew nothing about him and had seen none of  his
    documents - the appellant gave evidence (paragraph 5) that he  said  he
    would present his documents to the border control  and  "I  decided  to
    help without knowing his full situation."" It follows  that  the  first
    sentence of [24] is entirely accurate. The findings, "I  am  satisfied"
    in the remainder of that paragraph were findings open to the judge  and
    based on the evidence before the Tribunal. It is entirely  possible  to
    read [24] as meaning  that  the  first  sentence  only  is  the  agreed
    evidence and the rest is not agreed but  sustainable  findings  on  the
    evidence.

11.  Alternatively,  what  the  judge  intended  by  reference  to  "agreed
    evidence" may merely mean the evidence that was put before the Tribunal
    for consideration and not that the facts asserted by the evidence  were
    agreed by the appellant. It is clear that the judge took  into  account
    both the appellant's witness statement and interview accounts, as  well
    as the submissions of both representatives before making findings which
    were entirely open on the evidence. It is clear that At [17] the  judge
    stated that regard was had to all  of  the  evidence  and  all  of  the
    submissions, not merely those summarised in the decision. It  is  clear
    on a reading of the decision as a whole that the findings commenced  at
    [18] of the decision and were fully reasoned.

12. Mr Timson attempted to make other points on appeal as  to  whether  the
    findings justified the conclusion that refusal to grant entry  met  the
    specific requirements of  the  Regulations.  However,  those  were  not
    grounds pleaded in Mr Timson's grounds and I declined to  hear  him  on
    grounds in respect of which no appeal had been made and  no  permission
    granted.

13. In the circumstances, and for the reasons set out above, I am satisfied
    that there was no error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

14. In VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ  522  at  [12],  LJ  McCombe  stated,
    "Regrettably, there is an increasing  tendency  in  immigration  cases,
    when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining why he
    has  reached  a  particular  decision,  of  seeking   to   burrow   out
    industriously areas of evidence that have been less  fully  dealt  with
    than others and then to use this as a  basis  for  saying  the  judge's
    decision is legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a  particular
    matter more fully. In my judgment, with respect, that is  no  basis  on
    which to sustain a proper challenge to a judge's finding of fact." This
    is such a case.


Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal    remains    dismissed    on    all     grounds.





     Signed
     Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 12 March 2020



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.



     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated: 12 March 2020
