
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00791/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 August 2020                    |On 5 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           BIBI SAMINNEARA HOSANNY
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Mavrantonis, Counsel instructed by ULA
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,
       hereinafter "the claimant", against a decision of the  Secretary  of
       State to refuse her leave to remain  as  the  dependant  of  an  EEA
       national and dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.

    2. The Secretary of State's grounds make  two  points.   The  first  is
       misconceived.  It was identified as  such  in  the  Rule  24  notice
       served by the claimant's solicitors and the point abandoned promptly
       by the Secretary of State.

    3. The  second  is  that  it  is  said  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave
       inadequate reasons for its decision.

    4. Having reflected on this and taken care to consider Mr  Mavrantonis'
       submissions I have concluded that the Secretary of State is right.

    5. The claimant is a national of Mauritius.  She  married  her  current
       partner, who is a British citizen of Kurdish  Iraqi  origin,  at  an
       Islamic ceremony on 18 June 2018.  It is clear that  that  marriage,
       which has no status in English law, is the alleged  start  of  their
       cohabitation and, assuming that is right, clearly  the  cohabitation
       was not long enough to  establish  a  durable  partnership  for  the
       purposes of Appendix FM.

    6. The judge had some regard to the Immigration  Rules  but  little  or
       none to the statutory obligation to consider paragraph 117A  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    7. The particular difficulty that the claimant faces is that, by reason
       of Section 117B(4)(b), when  an  Article  8  balancing  exercise  is
       conducted little weight should be given to  a  relationship  with  a
       qualifying partner established by a person  in  the  United  Kingdom
       unlawfully and it would appear that the claimant is  such  a  person
       although it  may  be  interesting  to  establish  exactly  when  the
       relationship began and what is meant by "a relationship formed".

    8. It is right to note that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted
       evidence that the claimant's apparent partner has long  term  mental
       health issues.  It is conceivable that the appeal might  succeed  on
       human rights grounds outside the Rules if not within  them  and  the
       claimant is at least entitled to a proper  decision.   The  decision
       before me does not show proper regard for the Rules or the  statute.
       It does not show the detailed balancing  exercise  required  of  the
       features identified in the Rules and in the statute.

    9. I take Mr Mavrantonis' point that reference  is  not  necessary  but
       consideration is and things here have not been considered that  need
       to be.  It seems to me that there  is  basic  fact-finding  that  is
       needed as well  as  a  carefully  conducted  balancing  exercise  in
       accordance with the Rules and it is in the claimant's interests that
       the matter is done properly in the First-tier Tribunal.

   10. This is what Mr Melvin asked me to do and on this occasion,  I  find
       his submissions entirely sound.



Notice of Decision

   11. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside its decision  and
       direct that the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 March 2021                   |



