
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/00742/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                 Decision & Reasons     |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 16 March 2018                   |                 On 29 March 2018       |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                     ABDOU GAMIL MAHMOUD MEGAHED ELAMELI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Al-Rashid, Counsel, instructed by Carlton Law
                    Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Davey (the judge), promulgated on 7 March 2017,  in  which
         he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         decision dated 5 January 2016 refusing to  issue  him  a  permanent
         residence card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).



Factual Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Egypt, date of birth 7 January 1976.
         According to his witness statement dated 1 February 2017 he entered
         the UK as a visitor on 8 August 2001. He met Daiva Dzidolikaite,  a
         Lithuanian national, in the summer of 2004. They moved in  together
         in August 2005 and underwent an Islamic  marriage  ceremony  on  10
         September 2006. They did not undertake a legal marriage  recognised
         in the UK. Their child was born on 25 November 2006. On 25  January
         2008 the appellant applied for a residence card on the basis of his
         relationship with Daiva. On 14 July  2010  he  was  issued  with  a
         residence card under the provisions of the 2006 Regulations  as  an
         extended family member as a person in a durable  relationship  with
         an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK. This was  valid
         for 5 years, until 7 July 2015.

      3. On 3 July 2015 the appellant  applied  for  a  permanent  residence
         card. The respondent refused to issue the permanent residence  card
         under regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations.  The  respondent
         was not satisfied the EEA national had resided in  accordance  with
         the  2006  Regulations  during  the  required  5-year  period.  The
         respondent  considered  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
         appellant was an extended family member under regulation 8  of  the
         2006 Regulations but was not satisfied that the appellant was still
         in a durable relationship (regulation 8(5)) as he and Daiva had not
         resided together full time since 2012. Having  concluded  that  the
         relationship was no longer subsisting  the  respondent  refused  to
         issue a permanent residence card.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. On appeal the judge found that Daiva had, at  all  material  times,
         been a qualified person. The judge found that in 2012 the appellant
         and Daiva experienced difficulty in their relationship and that  he
         moved out and rented a room in another property. He continued their
         friendship and maintained an equable relationship in order to  care
         jointly for their child. The judge found,  based  on  the  evidence
         before him, that the appellant and Daiva were essentially separated
         parents caring for their child and sharing that responsibility. The
         judge accepted that the appellant regularly stayed at Davia's  flat
         for days at a time but they did not have a sexual relationship  but
         "... effectively a friendship which is solidified  by  their  joint
         interest in the daughter."

      5. At [14] the judge noted that there was no definition  of  the  term
         'durable relationship' in the 2006 Regulations and that there  were
         no time limits on what could constitute a durable relationship, but
         observed that a durable relationship was probably intended to be  a
         relationship akin to marriage. At [15] the  judge  found  that  the
         appellant and Daiva had not ultimately resolved  their  differences
         and did not wish to be in a permanent  relationship.  At  [16]  the
         judge found that the appellant and Daiva were "simply different and
         best friends" and that they did not "... in  its  true  sense  live
         together or have a romantic relationship."  The  judge  found  that
         their relationship was one of friendship. As to whether or not they
         had plans to live together, it was a possibility but no  more  than
         that and a possibility because of their child. At  [18]  the  judge
         found that the relationship between the appellant and Daiva  was  a
         unity as joint carers of their daughter and, at [19] concluded that
         the  relationship  was  an  enduring  friendship  and  not  one  of
         companionship, noting that they  did  not,  "in  its  true  sense",
         cohabit and that they had no wish to do so.

      6. Having concluded that the appellant and Daiva had  not  been  in  a
         durable relationship since 2012, the judge dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

      7. The 1st ground  contends  that  the  starting  point  in  assessing
         whether the 5 years required  for  permanent  residence  should  be
         calculated by reference to the date that the  durable  relationship
         commenced. As the  appellant  and  Daiva  had  been  in  a  durable
         relationship since around August 2005, and the durable relationship
         has lasted for  12  years  by  mid-2012,  regulation  15(1)(b)  was
         therefore satisfied. Reliance was placed on the decision of Idezuna
         (EEA - permanent residence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00474 (IAC).

      8. The 2nd ground contends that the judge was not lawfully entitled to
         find, on the evidence before him, that the appellant and Daiva were
         no longer in a durable relationship. The appellant  spent  3  to  4
         days a week at Daiva's flat,  he  provided  regular  and  extensive
         financial support, was a joint carer with their daughter with  whom
         he had a very close relationship,  and  there  was  a  prospect  of
         resuming permanent cohabitation. It was submitted that there was  a
         durable relationship despite the absence of sexual intimacy.

      9. Mr Al-Rashid adopted and expanded upon both  grounds  in  his  oral
         submissions. He submitted that the durable  relationship  continued
         at the very least until mid-2012, over 5 years. The judge erred  in
         concluding that the relationship ended in 2012. There was  said  to
         be a limited falling out in 2012 and that the appellant vacated the
         family home, but that he still spent half the week at Daiva's flat.
         It was submitted that the only material change post 2012  was  that
         the appellant lived  in  a  separate  address.  Every  relationship
         fluctuated and there was no requirement that  the  quality  of  the
         relationship had to be maintained  throughout  its  existence.  The
         judge, it was submitted, unlawfully  focused  on  the  end  of  the
         period of permanent cohabitation, that this  was  determinative  in
         his decision, and that it was an error of law because there was  no
         requirement for cohabitation for a durable relationship to exist.

Discussion

     10. Regulation 8(5) indicates that the partner of an EEA national  with
         whom he is in a durable relationship is an extended family  member.
         A person who meets the definition of extended family member may  be
         granted an EEA residence card, after an  extensive  examination  of
         their personal circumstances (regulations  17(4)  and  (5)).  Under
         regulation 7(3), a person who is an extended family member and  has
         been issued with an EEA residence card  shall  be  treated  as  the
         family member of the relevant  EEA  national  for  as  long  as  he
         continues to satisfy the conditions in, inter alia, regulation 8(5)
         in relation to the EEA national, and the  residence  card  has  not
         ceased to be valid or been revoked.

     11. It is readily apparent from the forgoing that  an  extended  family
         member of a relevant EEA national will  only  be  considered  as  a
         family member after the issuance of a  residence  card  (regulation
         7(3)). Unless and until a residence card  is  issued  the  extended
         family member cannot be treated as a family member.

     12. The appellant applied for a  permanent  residence  card.  A  person
         acquires a permanent right of evidence if, inter alia, they  are  a
         family member of an EEA national who is not himself an EEA national
         but who has resided in the UK with the EEA national  in  accordance
         with the 2006 regulations for a continuous period of 5 years.   The
         appellant could only be  treated  as  a  family  member  after  the
         issuance of his residence card. He was issued  with  the  residence
         card on 14 July 2010. Contrary to the first ground,  he  could  not
         therefore have acquired a permanent right of residence by mid-2012.
         The  earliest  possible  date  for  calculating   the   appellant's
         residence as a family member is 14 July 2010. Although he may  well
         have been an extended family member since August 2005,  he  cannot,
         for the purposes of establishing a permanent  right  of  residence,
         have been treated as a family member until 14 July 2010.

     13. The grounds refer to Idezuna (EEA -  permanent  residence)  Nigeria
         but this case did  not  concern  an  extended  family  member.  The
         applicant in Idezuna was legally married to  his  partner,  an  EEA
         national exercising treaty rights, and therefore  had  a  right  of
         residence based on his status as a family member. The appellant  in
         the present appeal could not be treated as a  family  member  until
         his residence card was issued. I consequently  find  that  the  1st
         ground is not made out.

     14. There is no  definition  of  'durable  relationship'  in  the  2006
         regulations. In Rose (Automatic deportation - Exception 3)  Jamaica
         [2011] UKUT 276 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal commented, at [24],

             "There  is  little  case  law  on  the  meaning  of   "durable
             relationship", although we have derived help from the case  of
             YB (EEA reg 17(4) -proper approach) Ivory Coast  [2008]  UKAIT
             00062. It is clear to us that the concept is not  co-terminous
             with "family life" within the meaning of  Article  8.  "Family
             life" may exist even if only for a short period. So  the  fact
             that the FTT accepted that the appellant  had  a  family  life
             relationship or family life relationships does not necessarily
             show that that with his partner was "durable"."

     15. Being  in  a  durable  relationship  does  not  necessarily  entail
         cohabitation: see YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory  Coast
         [2008] UKAIT 00062 and Rose (Automatic deportation -  Exception  3)
         Jamaica [2011] UKUT  276  (IAC)  (at  para  24),  and  Dauhoo  (EEA
         Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 00079 (IAC) (at paragraph  19).
         Nor does the concept of durable relationship impose  a  fixed  time
         limit (YB).

     16.  Ultimately  the  question  whether  a  person  enjoys  a   durable
         relationship with his or her partner is a question of fact,  having
         regard to the natural meaning of the words and  considered  in  the
         context of the purpose of the regulations. While  the  regulations,
         reflecting the Directive 2004/38/EC, distinguish between formalised
         relationships such as marriage and civil partnerships  on  the  one
         hand, and non-formalised relationships on the other, there must  be
         some equivalence between the concept of marriage and that of  being
         a partner in a durable relationship. I  note  that  the  respondent
         refers to durable relationships as being 'akin to marriage' in  her
         guidance 'Free Movement Rights:  extended  family  members  of  EEA
         nationals.' I find that the  judge  was  consequently  entitled  to
         approach the definition of 'durable relationship' as being one that
         is akin to marriage.

     17. There is nothing in his decision to suggest that the judge required
         sexual intimacy as a pre-condition to the existence  of  a  durable
         relationship,  or  that  the  judge  considered  that   a   durable
         relationship could only be established by cohabitation. My  summary
         at paragraphs 4 and 5 of this decision of the judge's assessment of
         the relationship between Daiva and the appellant demonstrates  that
         he gave detailed  and  careful  consideration  to  the  nature  and
         quality  of  the   relationship.   Contrary   to   Mr   Al-Rashid's
         submissions, the judge did not treat the  appellant's  decision  to
         live at a different address in mid-2012 as the determinative factor
         in determining whether  a  durable  relationship  continued.  While
         accepting that the appellant regularly stayed at Daiva's  flat  and
         that he and Daiva were 'best friends',  the  judge  was  rationally
         entitled to conclude that their relationship was essentially one of
         friendship and not companionship, designed to ensure they are  both
         able to care for their daughter. This was a  conclusion  rationally
         open to the judge on the evidence before him and for the reasons he
         gave.

     18. I consequently find that the 2nd ground has not been made out.  The
         appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The judge did not make a material error of law. The appeal is dismissed.


[pic]                               27 March 2018
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
