
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00715/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided on the papers                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 May 2017                       |On 17 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              MR KHURAM SHAHZAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a Pakistani national who applied for  a  residence
    card as the  extended  family  member  of  his  EEA  (German)  national
    sponsor, Mr Ansar Chaudhry who is said to be the  Appellant's  paternal
    uncle. The Appellant appeals against the Respondent's decision dated  6
    August 2015 refusing to issue him with a residence  card.   His  appeal
    was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 September 2016 ("the Decision").

 2. The Judge accepted that the  Appellant  showed  that  he  is  presently
    dependent on the sponsor in the UK but could not  demonstrate  that  he
    was dependent on the sponsor whilst in Pakistan or that he was a member
    of the sponsor's household before he (the Appellant) came  to  the  UK.
    For that reason, he was unable to meet regulation 8 of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 which were those in force  at
    the time of the Appellant's application, the Respondent's decision  and
    the Decision.  Although not strictly relevant to the basis on which the
    appeal  was  dismissed,  the  Judge  also  did  not  accept  that   the
    relationship between the Appellant and the sponsor was as  claimed  and
    expressed some doubt whether the sponsor remained  a  qualified  person
    since he has not worked since about April 2015.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the  Decision  on  the  basis
    that the Decision was "unjustified, arbitrary, wrongful and flawed". It
    was said that the Decision was based on  unsupported  assertions,  that
    the Judge failed to appreciate the evidence showing that the  Appellant
    was entitled to a residence card and that  the  Judge  "ought  to  have
    exercised her  [sic]  discretion  differently  and  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant".  It was asserted that the Judge had simply "rubber-stamped"
    the Respondent's decision.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew by
    a decision said to be dated 5 January 2016 but which clearly should  be
    5 January 2017 as it was sent on 13 January 2017.   The  terms  of  the
    refusal so far as relevant are as follows:-
         "[2] The Grounds are nothing more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
         findings of the Judge, findings open to the Judge on  the  evidence
         before him.  Even if I  were  wrong  about  this  in  view  of  the
         guidance in Sala the Judge had  no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
         appeal."

 5. Permission to appeal was  sought  from  this  Tribunal  by  application
    received  on  23  January  2017.   The  grounds  in  support  of   that
    application  are  those  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal   and,   in
    particular, those  did  not  seek  to  grapple  with  the  question  of
    jurisdiction which was squarely raised in  Judge  Andrew's  refusal  of
    permission.

 6. I took the view however that, because the Judge had no jurisdiction  to
    make the Decision, this amounted to an arguable error  of  law.   If  a
    Judge lacks jurisdiction to make a decision, then the decision is wrong
    in law and should not be allowed  to  stand.   Accordingly,  I  granted
    permission by decision dated 17 February 2017 in  the  following  terms
    (so far as relevant):-
         "[2] This is an appeal which is  affected  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
         decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC).
         In that case, the Upper Tribunal decided that there is no right  of
         appeal in extended family member cases  such  as  this.   As  such,
         there is an arguable error of law disclosed by the Decision because
         the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear and  decide  this  appeal.
         The Judge does not refer to Sala which had been promulgated only  a
         few days prior to the Decision."

 7. I then gave directions as follows:-
         "Unless either party files and serves objections in writing  to  be
         received within 14 days from the date when this decision is sent, I
         propose to find an error of law in the Decision on the  basis  that
         the Judge lacked jurisdiction to make it.  I then  propose  to  set
         aside the Decision and re-make it dismissing the appeal."

 8. By letter dated 27 February 2017 I received the following response from
    the Respondent (again so far as relevant):-
         "[2] The Respondent is in agreement with  the  proposed  course  of
         action outlined by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Smith  in  the  grant  of
         permission.
         [3]  In the alternative if in the interim there is a decision  that
         renders Sala to be longer [sic] good law the respondent will submit
         inter alia that the  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed
         himself appropriately and the grounds amount to a disagreement.
         [4]  The respondent does not request an oral hearing."

 9. There has been no response  from  the  Appellant  to  my  decision  and
    directions.  As indicated in my grant of permission, the Judge made the
    Decision after the decision in Sala was promulgated.    The decision in
    that case was promulgated on 19 August 2016.  I do not need to go  into
    the  substance  of  that  decision  in  detail  because  neither  party
    challenges the decision on the basis that it was wrongly  decided.   In
    short, the Upper Tribunal (Mr CMG  Ockelton,  Vice  President  and  UTJ
    Grubb) concluded that in a case such as this involving the  refusal  to
    issue a first residence permit to an extended family member there is no
    right of appeal against that refusal.  In that case, the Tribunal found
    for that reason that there was an error of law  because  there  was  no
    right of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The Tribunal  therefore
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and  substituted  its  own
    decision finding that there was no valid appeal.

10. As I indicate, neither party challenges the correctness of the decision
    in Sala in this appeal.  For the same reasons as given in Sala, I  find
    that the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision.   I  therefore
    set aside the Decision for that reason.  Since there  is  no  right  of
    appeal to the Tribunal, I have no jurisdiction to decide the appeal.

11. In case Sala falls to be reconsidered at some stage  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal and is  overturned,  I  indicate  that,  were  it  not  for  the
    jurisdiction issue, I would have decided the merits of  the  permission
    application as did Judge Andrews by refusing it  for  the  reasons  she
    gave with which I wholeheartedly concur.

12. However, I do not have jurisdiction to deal  with  the  merits  of  the
    appeal since there is no valid appeal.  For the reasons I have given, I
    find that the Decision discloses an error of law on the basis that  the
    Judge lacked jurisdiction to hear and decide the appeal.   I  therefore
    set the Decision aside and substitute my decision  that  there  was  no
    valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott promulgated on  6  September
2016 discloses an error of law because the Judge did not  have  jurisdiction
to make the Decision as there was no valid appeal before him.   I  therefore
set aside the Decision.  Since there was and is no valid appeal before  this
Tribunal, I re-make the decision by finding that there is no  valid  appeal.



Signed[pic]                         Dated:  12 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

