
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/00018/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2019                   |On 8 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              Md Tanvir Ahamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Burrett, Counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who entered the UK as a
    student in 2009.  In 2017 he married his wife, who is a Bangladeshi
    national with settled status in the UK, and began living with her
    family.  His wife's father is a national of Portugal.

 2. The appellant applied for a residence card under the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations") on
    the basis that he is an extended family member of his father-in-law.
    The application was refused by the respondent.  The appellant appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was heard at Hatton Cross
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thapar ("the judge").  In a
    decision promulgated on 10 July 2019 the judge dismissed the appeal.
    The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

 3. The judge found that the appellant did not meet the definition of an
    extended family member under Regulation 8(2) of the 2016 Regulations
    because he had not been dependent on or a household member of his
    father-in-law prior to his arrival in the UK.

 4. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred by failing to
    appreciate that there is no requirement for the appellant to have been
    dependent on or to have cohabited with his father-in-law (the EEA
    national) prior to coming to the UK, so long as he is able to establish
    dependency at the date of application.  The grounds argue that this
    interpretation is supported by the decision of the European Court of
    Justice in Rahman [2002] CJEU Case 83/11.

 5. Mr Burrett argued that there are conflicting authorities in the Court
    of Appeal on the issue of whether there must have been dependency prior
    to entry to the UK and that I should follow Aladeselu & Ors v SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 144.  He also submitted that Regulation 8 of the 2016
    Regulations must be read in a broad and flexible way in order to cover
    varying circumstances and in particular to ensure that the 2016
    Regulations are interpreted such that an EEA national would not be
    deterred from exercising free movement rights.  He argued that it was
    possible that if the appellant is not treated as an extended family
    member his father-in-law might not feel able to continue living in the
    UK.  He referred to paragraph 8(8) of the 2016 Regulations which
    states:

         "(8) Where an extensive examination of the personal circumstances
             of the applicant is required under these Regulations, it must
             include examination of the following -

               a) the best interests of the applicant, particularly where
                  the applicant is a child,




               b) the character and conduct of the applicant; and


               c) whether an EEA national would be deterred from exercising
                  their free movement rights if the application was
                  refused."

 6. Mr Jarvis' argument, in short, was that Aladeselu did not address the
    issue of prior dependency and therefore is irrelevant and that there is
    no conflict in the authorities, which consistently show that there must
    be prior dependency or household membership prior to entry to the UK.

 7. The 2016 EEA Regulations give direct effect to Directive 2004/38/EC
    ("the 2004 Directive") on the right of EU citizens to move and reside
    freely within the EU.  The material provision of the 2004 Directive is
    Article 3 which provides:
         "1.      This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move
             to or reside in a Member State other than that of which they
             are a national, and to their family members as defined in
             point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them.
         2.   Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence
             the persons concerned may have in their own right, the host
             Member State shall, in accordance with its national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the following
             persons:
             (a)  any other family members, irrespective of their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2
                  of Article 2 who, in the country from which they have
                  come, are dependants or members of the household of the
                  Union citizen having the primary right of residence, or
                  where serious health grounds strictly require the personal
                  care of the family member by the Union citizen." [emphasis
                  added]

 8. The material provision of the 2016 Regulations is Regulation 8(2) which
    provides:

         "(2) The condition in this paragraph is that the person is -

             (a)  a relative of an EEA national; and

             (b)  residing in a country other than the United Kingdom and
                  is dependent upon the EEA national or is a member of the
                  EEA national's household; and either -

                   i) is accompanying the EEA national to the United
                      Kingdom or wants to join the EEA national in the
                      United Kingdom; or

                  ii) has joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and
                      continues to be dependent upon the EEA national, or
                      to be a member of the EEA national's household."

 9. At the start of the hearing I drew to the attention of the parties an
    authority which neither raised but which is plainly relevant to this
    appeal: Alexander Oboh v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1525.  In that judgment
    the Court of Appeal considered the applicability of Article 3 of the
    2004 Directive where an appellant was not dependent on or a household
    member of an EU citizen prior to coming to the UK and concluded that
    the plain and natural meaning of Article 3(2)(a) is that an appellant
    must have been dependent on or a household member of the EU citizen in
    the country from which he came.  At paragraphs 60 to 61 the court
    concluded:
         "60. Furthermore, the language of Article 3(2), and in particular
             the crucial words 'in the country from which they have come'
             can be characterised as limiting words in the sense of
             limiting the scope of the policy, or indeed the scope of the
             aspirations engendered.  The words in question are words
             delimiting a category of person who are to be given privileged
             treatment in order to promote the objectives of free movement
             and residence by EU citizens.  That policy might well be
             advanced if the criteria delimiting the category of other
             family members were set wider.  However, that it not what the
             Directive does.  It uses clear words to set the limits of the
             qualifying category.  We do not consider that it is legitimate
             to use the tool of purposive interpretation to defeat those
             clearly stated limits and to substitute what would be new and
             very different criteria.
         61.  We consider that the combination of the clear language and
             structure of Article 3(2) of the 2004 Directive, the contrast
             with Article 3(1) when read with the definition of 'family
             member' in Article 2", and the clear statement of the CJEU
             that the underlying policy of the Directive is not family
             reunion suffices to justify our giving effect to that clear
             language and not making a reference to the CJEU.  In the
             absence of a clear legislative purpose discernible in either
             the Directive (including its recitals) or the jurisprudence of
             the CJEU requiring us to conclude that the words 'in the
             country from which they have come' do not mean what they
             state, we do not consider that it is justifiable to make a
             reference with the consequent delay to the final determination
             of these appeals and, in all likelihood, other appeals raising
             similar issues."

10. Mr Burrett submitted that Aladeselu is a judgment of the Court of
    Appeal that conflicts with Alexander Oboh and which I should follow.
    This submission is plainly misconceived as the appellants in Aladeselu
    had been financially dependent on the EEA national before they came to
    the UK and at all material times. Indeed, the only relevance of
    Aladeselu to this appeal is that it supports the respondent's position
    because at paragraph 48 there is a reference to it being established
    that there is a need for a situation of dependence in the country from
    which the applicant comes. Mr Burrett's reliance on Rahman is similarly
    misconceived as in that case, too, it was confirmed that there must
    have been dependence in the country from which the applicant came.

11. There is, in my view, no basis for Mr Barrett's submission that there
    is conflicting case law in the Court of Appeal. The Court of appeal is
    consistent and clear that article 3(2)(a) of the 2004 Directive must be
    given its plain meaning and therefore an appellant must show that there
    was dependence or household membership in the country from which he or
    she came.

12. Mr Burrett's submissions in relation to Regulation 8(8) are also
    unpersuasive. Firstly, they were not raised in the grounds. Secondly,
    Regulation 8(8) was added to the 2016 Regulations on 15 August 2019
    which is after the date of the First-tier Tribunal decision which is
    being challenged.  Thirdly, Regulation 8(8) does not amend the plain
    meaning of Regulation 8(2) which in clear terms state a requirement for
    dependency or household membership prior to entering the UK. Fourthly,
    it does not change the meaning of article 3(2)(a) of the 2004
    Directive.

13. The appellant was not dependent on or a household member of his father-
    in-law prior to arriving in the UK and therefore did not satisfy the
    requirements of Article 3 of the 2004 Directive or Regulation 8 of the
    2016 Regulations.  I am satisfied therefore that the decision does not
    contain an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error of law
and stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


|                                      |                               |
|Signed                                |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated: 3 January 2020          |



