
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00182/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |On 12 October 2020                   |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 5 October 2020                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                DOUYE PEREGBA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S. Aziz promulgated on 9 March 2020 to,  dismissing
    his appeal under the Immigration European Area) Regulations  against  a
    decision of the respondent to refuse to issue him with a residence card
    confirming his right of residence as the spouse  of  a  French  citizen
    exercising Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is that he was married to  a  French  National  by
    proxy, the ceremony being carried out in Nigeria.  The  respondent  did
    not accept that the marriage was valid, nor was she satisfied that  the
    appellant's spouse was employed as claimed.

 3. The appeal  was  determined  without  a  hearing.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied by the documentary evidence  provided  that  the  appellant's
    wife is employed as only photocopies has been provided, and  that  even
    had they been originals, he would not have been satisfied that  she  is
    employed as claimed [26]. The judge also found that  the  marriage  was
    not valid, again on the basis that only photocopies  of  documents  had
    been provided and he was not even satisfied that the marriage had taken
    place [28].

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred

      i) In failing to take into account the photocopies as  evidence  given
         that the directions expressly stated that only photocopies were  to
         be send to the First-tier Tribunal;

     ii) In failing to note that the respondent had not submitted  a  bundle
         and so reached a decision without taking into account all  relevant
         material; and,

    iii) Raising a new issue - whether the marriage  ceremony  had  in  fact
         taken place - when the only issue  was  whether  the  marriage  was
         valid.

 5. On 18 May 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  granted  permission  to
    appeal on all grounds.

 6. Subsequent to the grant of permission, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
    made directions in this case on 4 May 2020 which provided:

          1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the  light  of  the
             present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-
             19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the  Procedure
             Rules[1], I have reached the provisional view,  that it  would
             in  this  case  be  appropriate  to  determine  the  following
             questions without a hearing:


               a) whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
                  involved the making of an error of law, and, if so


               b) whether that decision should be set aside.


          2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:


               i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of
                  the assertion of an error of  law,  and  on  the  question
                  whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set
                  aside if error of law is found, to be filed and served  on
                  all other parties no later than 14 days after this  notice
                  is sent out (the date of sending is on the covering letter
                  or covering email);


              ii)  Any  other  party  may  file  and  serve  submissions  in
                  response, no later than 21 days after this notice is  sent
                  out;


             iii) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph  (ii)
                  above the party who sought permission to appeal  may  file
                  and serve a reply no later than 28 days after this  notice
                  is sent out.


              iv) All submissions that rely on any document  not  previously
                  provided to all other parties in electronic form  must  be
                  accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.


          3. Any party who considers that despite the foregoing  directions
             a hearing is necessary to consider the questions  set  out  in
             paragraph 1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons  for
             that view no later than 21 days after this notice is sent  out
             and they will be taken into  account  by  the  Tribunal.   The
             directions in paragraph 2 above must be complied with in every
             case.


          4. If this Tribunal decides to set  aside  the  decision  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal for error of law, further directions  will
             accompany the notice of that decision.


          5.  Documents  and  submissions  filed  in  response   to   these
             directions may be sent by, or attached to, an email to [email]
             using the Tribunal's reference number (found  at  the  top  of
             these directions) as the subject line.  Attachments  must  not
             exceed 15 MB.  This address is not generally available for the
             filing of documents.  Service on the Secretary of State may be
             to [email] and to the original appellant, in  the  absence  of
             any contrary instruction, by use of any address apparent  from
             the service of these directions.


 7. There was no response from the appellant but in  submissions  dated  11
    August 2020, the respondent accepted that it was procedurally unfair to
    hold against the appellant the fact  that  only  photocopies  had  been
    supplied when that is what the directions required; that  the  Tribunal
    did not have all the relevant material before it, there being no bundle
    from the respondent, and in raising a new issue.

 8. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Given that no objection to this course of
    action has been raised, and bearing in mind the overriding objective in
    Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,  I
    am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of this case where no
    objection to a decision being made in the absence of a hearing that  it
    would be right to do so.

 9. In the light of the  concise  and  sensible  concessions  made  by  the
    respondent, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    did involve the making of an error of law in the errors  identified  in
    the grounds. It  was  unfair  and  perverse  to  hold  it  against  the
    appellant that he had provided only photocopies when that was what  the
    directions instructed him to provide. It was also unfair and a  serious
    procedural error to raise an issue which had  been  issue  between  the
    parties and make a decision on it without the  parties  being  able  to
    make  submissions  on  it.  It  was  also  a  serious  error  to  reach
    conclusions where clearly not  all  the  relevant  documents  had  been
    provided.

10. For these reasons, the decision involved the making of an error of  law
    as claimed and I set it aside. Given all the procedural  flaws,  it  is
    abundantly clear that the appellant did not receive a fair hearing, and
    so I consider that it is in the interests  of  justice  to  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.

Notice of Decision
      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
         on all issues, to be head by a judge other than FtTJ  S  Aziz.  For
         the avoidance of doubt none of his findings are preserved.




Signed                                  Date 6 October 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

