
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00433/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th February  2018                      |On 7th February 2018           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                 MAMUN AHMED
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 28th December 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor gave the  following
    directions:-


         1.   In the light of the decision in Khan v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the  First-tier  Tribunal
         was wrong in law to follow the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  Sala
         and conclude that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.


         2.   The Tribunal is minded to find an error of law, set aside  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the case to the First-
         tier Tribunal.


         3.   A party who is opposed to this course is  directed  to  inform
         the Tribunal in writing (giving reasons), not later than 7  working
         days from the date this decision is sent  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         Following that period, the Upper Tribunal will issue its decision.


 2. There has been  no  response  to  these  directions  by  either  party.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that neither party objects  to  the  matter
    being determined without a hearing and has nothing further to say. I am
    satisfied that that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law for the reasons  set  out  above,
    and must therefore be set aside.  Given the  nature  of  the  error,  I
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  determination
    on all issues.

Summary of conclusions

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of law and I set it aside.


      2. I remit the  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         decision on all issues



Signed                              Date 5th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
