
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/00682/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 September 2017                 |On 14 November 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           EMMANUEL AMAECHI UDUMA
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

1.    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  I  have  not
      been asked to make one and see no reason to do so.

Background

2.     The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO)appeals  against  the  decision,
      promulgated on 7 December 2016, of Judge D H Clapham  (hereafter  "the
      judge"), allowing the appeal of Mr Emmanuel Uduma against the decision
      of the ECO of 15 December 2015 refusing to issue An EEA Family  Permit
      contrary to regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations  2006  (as   they   then   were)   (hereafter   "the   EEA
      Regulations"). From herein, I shall refer to the parties as they  were
      before the judge, Mr Uduma  as  the  Appellant  and  the  ECO  as  the
      Respondent.

3.    The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 27 April  1998.  On  14
      November 2015 he applied for an EEA Family Permit as the family member
      of Rita Nwadike, his claimed mother, who is married to an EEA national
      Mr Elvis Ozah - a German national (the sponsor). The  application  was
      refused because the ECO was not satisfied the Appellant was related as
      claimed  to  Ms  Nwadike.  The  ECO  observed  the  birth  certificate
      purporting to confirm the relationship was not contemporaneous to  the
      time of birth and  there  was  no  satisfactory  explanation  for  the
      significant delay in registration (over 17 years). In the  absence  of
      further evidence such as family photographs, health and school records
      relating to the Appellant's early years, the ECO stated that she could
      not be satisfied of the relationship. The application was  accordingly
      refused.

4.    The Appellant duly appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (IAC).  In  the
      Notice of Appeal, the Appellant waived his right to  an  oral  hearing
      and elected a paper hearing.

       The hearing before the judge

5.    The judge decided the appeal on  the  papers  and  had  before  him  a
      bundle filed by the Appellant. The judge noted  that  the  sole  issue
      before him was whether the  relationship  is  as  claimed.  The  judge
      considered the birth certificate and noted the delay in  registration,
      but stated that it was "within judicial knowledge  that  this  is  not
      uncommon". The judge compared this with  the  date  of  birth  in  the
      Appellant's passport and concluded that "this together with the letter
      from the hospital, and all of the other documentation in the round,  I
      am satisfied  that  the  Appellant  is  related  to  Rita  Nwadike  as
      claimed". The judge further accepted the Appellant  resided  with  his
      grandmother who could no longer care for him. Accordingly,  the  judge
      allowed the appeal.

       The grounds of application and permission to appeal

6.    In the grounds seeking permission, the ECO argued that  the  delay  in
      registration could  not  be  a  matter  of  "judicial  knowledge"  and
      complained that the judge's reasoning  was  inadequate,  and  that  he
      applied the wrong standard of proof.

7.    Permission was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but  subsequently
      granted by the Upper Tribunal on 7 August  2017  finding  all  grounds
      arguable.

       The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

8.    A Notice of Hearing was effectively served  on  the  parties  and  the
      sponsor of the date, time and venue of the  hearing.  At  the  hearing
      before me, the Respondent was represented by Mr Staunton. There was no
      appearance on behalf of the  Appellant  and  no  explanation  for  the
      sponsor's absence. Accordingly, I proceeded with the hearing.

9.    Mr Staunton in reliance on the grounds submitted the  judge  erred  in
      law. I indicated that there was no merit  in  the  standard  of  proof
      ground; the judge clearly applied this correctly, but  I  agreed  with
      his submissions that the judge's decision was inadequately reasoned. I
      thus decided to set aside the decision of the judge for the  following
      reasons.

Decision on Error of Law

10.   The grounds complain the judge erred in not  giving  adequate  reasons
      for finding the Appellant was related as  claimed  to  Ms  Nwadike.  I
      agree.  Given  the  considerable  delay  between  the  date   of   the
      Appellant's birth and its subsequent registration  with  the  Nigerian
      authorities, the ECO's concerns about the relationship  were  entirely
      legitimate. Despite being put on notice  of  the  ECO's  concerns  the
      Appellant failed to provide an explanation for the  delay,  a  failing
      which the judge  did  not  consider,  and  the  judge's  reference  to
      "judicial knowledge" was insufficient to dispose of the point  without
      further comment. There was  no  elaboration  for  the  basis  of  that
      knowledge or whether it was supported by background evidence. Further,
      the Decision is bereft of any reasoning as to why the hospital  letter
      and  all  the  other  documentation  was  sufficient  to   prove   the
      relationship.

11.   Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the judge.

       Re-making the Decision

12.   At the hearing, Mr Staunton was content for  the  Tribunal  to  remake
      the decision on the evidence. As the Appellant elected a paper hearing
      it was appropriate to do so. In re-making the decision,  I  considered
      the evidence in the Upper Tribunal's bundle prepared for the  purposes
      of this hearing, which  contains  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
      Respondent, and the bundle filed on behalf of the  Appellant.  I  have
      assessed the evidence as at the date of hearing and applied the  civil
      standard of proof.

13.   On 15 December 2015, the Appellant applied for an  EEA  family  permit
      to join his claimed mother and stepfather in the UK.

14.   In order to prove the relationship, the Appellant relies  on  a  birth
      certificate issued over seventeen years after  his  birth.  The  delay
      raised a legitimate concern by the ECO as to why that was  so  in  the
      absence of evidence of how that  certificate  was  obtained  and  what
      information was presented to  obtain  it.  The  Appellant  has  failed
      directly  to  grapple  with  the  issue  and  provide   a   reasonable
      explanation for the delay. He states the ECO's approach is unfair, but
      I discern no unfairness or impropriety in the approach  taken  by  the
      ECO. There is no evidence to indicate that delays in  registration  of
      births is a fact that is so notoriously well known  that  I  can  take
      judicial notice of it and I remind myself that the burden  remains  on
      the Appellant to prove that this is the case. In the circumstances,  I
      am not satisfied that I can attach any weight to the birth certificate
      as evidence of the relationship.

15.   As for the other documentary evidence I find as follows.

16.   I consider that the hospital letter is not  sufficient  to  prove  the
      relationship. As noted by the ECO this is  not  an  official  document
      and, in my judgement, there is reason to doubt its  reliability  given
      that it contains significant  spelling  mistakes  ("Certifiicate"  and
      "certiify").

17.   While I acknowledge the evidence of school  reports/letter  from  2014
      and 2015 and a letter of attestation, these documents do  not  name  a
      parent or guardian, and the evidence of the stated mother's travel  to
      Nigeria in 2015, photographs including one of  an  unidentified  woman
      holding a child and a few select money transfer receipts for 2014  and
      2015, is not sufficient to prove the relationship is as claimed.

18.   Weighing into the balance all the above, I find the Appellant has  not
      proved the relationship is as claimed. Thus, I find  that  he  is  not
      entitled to an EEA Family Permit. Accordingly, the appeal fails  under
      the EEA Regulations.

19.   Article 8 of the ECHR is raised  by  the  Appellant  in  the  skeleton
      argument. Considering the decision in Amirteymour [2015] UKUT 00466; I
      cannot consider human rights matters in this appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.

Signed      Date: 11 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.

Signed      Date: 11 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

