

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/00015/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 10th January 2018                  |            On 25th January 2018      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Matthias Emeka Ifejika
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Harding of Counsel instructed by OTS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge M  A  Khan
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 26th April 2017  in
    which the FTT allowed the Claimant's appeal against the decision of the
    Secretary of State to refuse his application for permanent residence as
    the family member of an EEA national.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the  Claimant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a Nigerian citizen born 11th May 1977.   On  10th  July
    2015 the Claimant applied for permanent residence  in  the  UK  as  the
    family member of an EEA national.

 4. The application was made on the  basis  that  the  Claimant  was  in  a
    durable relationship with Rebecca Kung a  French  citizen,  to  whom  I
    shall refer as the Sponsor, who had been exercising  treaty  rights  in
    the UK.

 5. The Claimant explained that the Sponsor had  been  working  in  the  UK
    between April 2006 and April 2011 when she moved to  Switzerland.   The
    couple had resided together for that five year period, and remained  in
    a relationship.

 6. The application was refused on 11th December 2015 with reference to the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    Regulations).  The Secretary of State issued a  notice  of  immigration
    decision specifically referring to regulations 6, 7(3), 8(5), 15(1)(b),
    and 15(2).  In summary the Secretary of  State's  reasons  for  refusal
    letter did not accept that evidence had been provided to prove that the
    Sponsor had acquired permanent residence in the UK, not accepting  that
    the Sponsor  had  been  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of five years.

 7. The Secretary of State pointed out that if, which was not accepted, the
    Sponsor had acquired permanent residence by 2011, because she  has  not
    been residing in the UK since that date, a right to permanent residence
    would have been lost by virtue of regulation  15(2)  as  she  had  been
    absent from the UK for a period exceeding two consecutive years.

 8. The Secretary of State contended that when the Sponsor  ceased  working
    in the UK in 2011, the Claimant ceased to be  residing  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the 2006 Regulations.

 9. It was not accepted that the Claimant and Sponsor had continued  to  be
    in a durable relationship.  It was accepted that the Claimant had  been
    issued  a  residence  card  in  2010  on  the  basis  of  his   durable
    relationship with the Sponsor, but it was  not  accepted  that  he  was
    still entitled to a residence card, as the Sponsor was no longer in the
    UK, and it was not accepted that  he  had  resided  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous  period  of  five  years  in  accordance   with   the   2006
    Regulations.

10. The Claimant appealed to the FTT and the appeal was heard on 11th April
    2017.  The Secretary of State was not represented at the hearing.   The
    FTT heard evidence from the Claimant and Sponsor and  found  that  they
    had been living together since March or April 2006  until  the  Sponsor
    left the UK to relocate in Switzerland.  The FTT found that the Sponsor
    had been exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of five years
    from 10th  April  2006  until  10th  April  2011.   The  FTT  therefore
    concluded that the requirements of regulations 6, 7, 8(5), and 15(1)(b)
    of the 2006 Regulations were satisfied.  The FTT was satisfied that the
    Claimant and Sponsor were in a durable relationship between April  2006
    and April 2011, and they continued "to be in a relationship even though
    the EEA national lives in Switzerland, she  returns  to  the  UK  on  a
    monthly basis."  The FTT allowed the appeal.

11. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the FTT had erred by making
    a material misdirection of law.  The Secretary  of  State  pointed  out
    that the Claimant was issued with a residence card on the basis of  his
    durable relationship with the Sponsor on 14th July 2010.  There was  no
    evidence that they had ever married.  It was contended that the FTT was
    wrong in law in finding that the Claimant satisfied regulation 15(1)(b)
    as he had not resided in the UK as a family member of an  EEA  national
    in accordance with the regulations for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years.

12. The Secretary of State referred to regulation 7(3) which provides  that
    an extended family member is to be regarded as a family  member  of  an
    EEA national if he or she has been issued with an EEA family permit,  a
    registration certificate, or a residence card.  The Secretary of  State
    made the point that an  extended  family  member  cannot  benefit  from
    family member status until issued with one of the documents referred to
    above.   The  issue  of   residence   documentation   does   not   have
    retrospective effect.   The  Appellant  only  became  a  family  member
    pursuant to regulation 7, once he had been issued  with  the  residence
    card on 14th July 2010,  and  therefore  would  not  acquire  permanent
    residence until 14th July 2015.

13. It was submitted that  the  Claimant  was  not  entitled  to  permanent
    residence, because the Sponsor had left the UK in April  2011  and  was
    resident in Switzerland, and was therefore not exercising treaty rights
    in the UK, and not residing with the Claimant  in  the  UK.   The  only
    evidence of contact between the parties after  April  2011  was  e-mail
    communication.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Kelly  of  the  FTT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  It is arguable that the Tribunal erred  in  law  by  impliedly
             treating the Appellant as the family member of his EEA partner
             (to whom he is not and has never been married)  prior  to  the
             time when (on 14th July 2010)  he  was  issued  with  his  EEA
             residence card, and that this was material to the  outcome  of
             the appeal given that the EEA Sponsor returned to  Switzerland
             in March 2011 where she has  since  remained.   Permission  to
             appeal is accordingly granted."

15. Following the grant of permission the Claimant did not lodge a response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

16. Mr Tarlow relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission  to  appeal,  submitting  that  those  grounds  displayed  a
    material error of law, which meant that the FTT decision  must  be  set
    aside.

17. Mr Harding disagreed and submitted that there was some ambiguity as  to
    the  meaning  of  regulation  7(3).   Mr  Harding  submitted  that  the
    interpretation of the FTT was correct, and it was not necessary for  an
    extended family member to have to  wait  until  a  residence  card  was
    issued, before accruing five years' residence in  accordance  with  the
    regulations.  I was asked to find that the FTT was entitled to conclude
    that the Claimant should be granted permanent residence, because he had
    been issued with a residence card, in July 2010, and prior to that  had
    resided with the Sponsor in accordance with the 2006 regulations.

18. Neither representative relied upon any case law on this issue, and when
    I indicated that I intended to reserve my decision, both  agreed  there
    would be no need for a further hearing.  If I accepted the  submissions
    made by Mr Tarlow, the decision of the FTT must be set aside and remade
    and dismissed, and if I accepted Mr Harding's submissions, the decision
    of the FTT stood, and subject to any further appeal, the Claimant would
    be entitled permanent residence.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. In my view the FTT materially erred in law and I  therefore  set  aside
    the decision for the following reasons.

20. There is no dispute that the Sponsor is a French citizen and  that  she
    exercised treaty rights in the UK between 3rd April 2006 and 10th April
    2011.  She was employed by Bloomberg LP in London during  that  period.
    Therefore the Sponsor was exercising treaty  rights  as  a  worker  and
    satisfied regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.

21. There was no challenge to the finding made by the FTT that the Claimant
    and  Sponsor  resided  together  in  a  durable  relationship   between
    March/April  2006  and  April  2011  when  the  Sponsor  relocated   to
    Switzerland.  It is common ground that the couple were not  married  at
    that time, and are still not married.  It is also  common  ground  that
    the Claimant was issued with a residence card on 14th July 2010, on the
    basis of his durable relationship with the Sponsor.  This means that at
    that time the Secretary of State accepted the Claimant was the extended
    family member of the Sponsor pursuant to regulation 8(5).

22. In order to be granted permanent residence the  Claimant  must  satisfy
    regulation 15(1)(b) which is set out below;

         "15(1)   The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
                  the United Kingdom permanently -

                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                      an EEA national but who has  resided  in  the  United
                      Kingdom with the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with
                      these Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five
                      years;"

23. If the Claimant and Sponsor were  married,  the  Claimant  would  be  a
    family member of the Sponsor pursuant to regulation 7, as  her  spouse.
    That however is not the case here.

24. It therefore must be  considered  whether  the  Claimant  is  a  family
    member, as he must be a family member rather than  an  extended  family
    member to qualify pursuant to regulation 15(1)(b).

25. It is therefore relevant to consider regulation 7 which is set  out  in
    part below;

         "7   (1) Subject to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
                  regulations the following persons shall be treated as  the
                  family members of another person -

             (3)  Subject to paragraph (4), a person  who  is  an  extended
                  family member and has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family
                  permit, a registration certificate  or  a  residence  card
                  shall be treated as the family member of the relevant  EEA
                  national for as  long  as  he  continues  to  satisfy  the
                  conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation
                  to that EEA national and the permit, certificate  or  card
                  has not ceased to be valid or been revoked."

26. I conclude that the FTT materially erred in law  in  finding  that  the
    Claimant was entitled to permanent residence because he resided  as  an
    extended family member, with the Sponsor between April 2006  and  April
    2011.  The error is that the Claimant did not become  a  family  member
    pursuant to regulation 7(3) until he was issued with a  residence  card
    on 14th July 2010.  For that reason the decision  of  the  FTT  is  set
    aside.

27. I remake the decision by dismissing the Claimant's appeal.  My view  is
    that in order to acquire permanent  residence  pursuant  to  regulation
    15(1)(b) the Claimant must  reside  in  the  UK  with  the  Sponsor  in
    accordance with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous  period  of  five
    years beginning with the time when he became a family member as opposed
    to an extended family member, which was 14th July 2010.

28. The Claimant has not resided with the Sponsor in  accordance  with  the
    2006 Regulations for a continuous period of five years since July 2010,
    as it is accepted that the Sponsor relocated to  Switzerland  in  April
    2011, and has been living and working in Switzerland since  that  date.
    The Sponsor has not been exercising treaty rights in the UK since April
    2011.

29. Therefore the Claimant cannot satisfy regulation 15(1)(b) which is  why
    the appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

30. The FTT erred in  law.  The  decision  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
    decision.  The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FTT made no anonymity direction.  There has been no request made to  the
Upper Tribunal for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an  anonymity
direction.




Signed                              Date 10th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 10th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





