

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  EA/00563/2018 & EA/00249/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 January 2019                      |On 16 January 2019                |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                            JUNO [F] & JASON [W]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Pryde
Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decisions dated  7  December  2017,  declining  to
         issue the appellants with derivative rights of residence  cards  as
         the primary carers of a self-sufficient EEA national child.

     ii) The appellants' grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge J C  Grant-Hutchison,  promulgated  on  8
         August 2018.

     iv) The appellants'  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 20 March 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 13 September 2018.

     vi) The respondent's rule 24 response, dated 22 October  2018,  to  the
         grant of permission.

 2. The grant of permission observed that if the  appellants  had  provided
    evidence at the FtT which the respondent conceded to  be  satisfactory,
    then arguably the judge erred by not  admitting  it  and  allowing  the
    appeals.  It was suggested that the appellants'  representatives  might
    re-send the documents to the respondent and invite  withdrawal  of  the
    respondent's decision, rather  than  wasting  resources  on  a  further
    hearing.

 3. During  the  hearing  on  4  January  the  appellant's  representatives
    produced a copy of their letter to the respondent dated 1 October 2018,
    written along the lines suggested above.

 4. Mr Govan explained that the rule 24 response was framed  to  deal  with
    that matter.  It was accepted that the FtT should have  considered  the
    evidence and resolved the appeal accordingly, and so the decision  fell
    to be set aside.  However, the concession made in the FtT was not  that
    the evidence served to substantiate the appeals; it was only  that  the
    EEA  national  was  self-sufficient  and  had  comprehensive   sickness
    insurance.

 5. It was common ground that on 17 September 2018, after the date  of  the
    hearing in the FtT, the EEA national was  issued  with  a  registration
    certificate, and that a fresh decision fell to be made on the evidence,
    not as matters stood at the date of the  respondent's  decisions.  That
    left two issues, as stated in the rule  24  response.   The  respondent
    maintained that the evidence failed to show in terms of  regulation  16
    (b) (iii) that the EEA national "would be unable to remain in  the  UK"
    if the first appellant "left the UK for  an  indefinite  period".   The
    second appellant is a 23-year-old adult, is not an EEA  national  or  a
    carer for the EEA national in terms of  the  regulations,  and  has  no
    apparent basis of claim.  The  respondent's  position  was  that  there
    should be a remit to the FtT so that  the  appellants  might  have  the
    opportunity to make out any case they had on those issues, but that  in
    absence of further evidence, both appeals should be dismissed.

 6. The appellants did not seek a remit.  The argument on their behalf  was
    that both appeals should be allowed on  the  evidence  which  had  been
    before the FtT.   The following items were founded upon.


 7. The EEA national child lives in Airdrie and his father in London.  Item
    10 of the FtT inventory of productions is his father's brief  affidavit
    dated 29 November 2017.  He  says  that  the  first  appellant  is  the
    primary carer for the child, and that in the event of her  leaving  the
    UK for an indefinite period, he would be unable to care  for  his  son.
    There is no elaboration on that matter.

 8. Item 12 is a psychological report, which shows the child to  have  some
    learning needs, such as to be considered as a child with dyslexia,  and
    some need for support.

 9. Item 14 is an extract of  a  decree  of  the  Sheriff  Court  dated  14
    February 2017, finding the first appellant (the defender)  entitled  to
    residence with the child and the child's father (the pursuer)  entitled
    to residential contact every second weekend and for 4 weeks a  year  of
    holidays.

10. The second appellant is the son of the first appellant  and  the  half-
    brother of the EEA national child.  His statement at item 23  was  said
    to establish that he is a family member.

11. The first appellant's  case  was  that  she  met  the  requirements  of
    regulation 16 (b) (iii).  The second appellant's case was advanced  not
    under the regulations but under article 8 of the ECHR.

12. I reserved my decision.

13. The grounds of appeal to the UT vastly overstated the  concession  made
    by the respondent in the FtT.  That false impression led to  the  grant
    of permission being made in the terms it was,  and  to  the  appellants
    being given hope of an easy outcome.   Any  such  impression,  however,
    should have been extinguished on sight of the rule 24 response.

14. The evidence suggests that the EEA  national's  father  cares  for  him
    directly every second weekend and  for  4  weeks  annually.   There  is
    nothing to support the bland assertion of "inability to care",  if  the
    other were to leave.  The present situation may well  be  preferred  by
    both parents, but that is a different matter.

15. The case of the first appellant  is  not  made  out  in  terms  of  the
    regulations.

16. Article 8 of the ECHR is irrelevant to both appeals.  Any case on  that
    basis needs to begin with an application to the respondent, and is  not
    within the scope of these proceedings.

17. The second appellant, as correctly conceded, has no case to advance  in
    terms of the regulations.


18. In the wider, non-legal, sense of the term, the second appellant  is  a
    member of a family which includes  his  mother  and  his  half-brother.
    However, he is an adult, and there is little  in  his  statement  which
    might lead to a finding that he has family life with  them  within  the
    narrower scope of article 8.

19. Even if the second appellant has family life in that  sense,  there  is
    nothing to show that the  respondent's  decision  interferes  with  the
    article 8 rights of anyone to a disproportionate extent.

20. By concession and agreement, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
    set aside.  The decision substituted is that both appeals,  as  brought
    to the FtT, are dismissed.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      Dated 7 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




