
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00102/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 March 2018                       |On 19 April 2018                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Solomon [O]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Osifeso, instructed by Lannex Immigration and
Legal Aid


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor  House  hearing  centre)  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against her decision  that  he  is  not  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain as a family  member  who  has  retained  the
    right  of  residence  after  a  divorce  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (as amended).

 2. It is unclear when the claimant first entered the United  Kingdom.   In
    his oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal and his witness statement,
    he said he had done so on a visit visa.  He  first  came  to  attention
    when he married his French wife on 12 August 2004.

 3. On 9 February 2005, the claimant made an application  for  a  residence
    document as an EEA spouse, which was  granted  on  21  May  2005.   The
    spouse residence document was to have expired on 21 May 2010.   However
    in  2008,  unhappy  difficulties  between  the  parties,   which   were
    acrimonious but short of domestic violence, caused the marriage to fail
    and a petition for divorce was filed.  The copy of the divorce petition
    on the file is undated, but bears a 2008 file number, establishing  the
    year in which it was filed.

 4. On 14 January 2009, Bromley County Court granted the claimant a  decree
    nisi of divorce which became a decree absolute on 2 April  2009.   That
    is the date on which the applicant claims that became a  family  member
    who has retained the right of residence.  There is  evidence  that  the
    wife was working on that date but no evidence that he was doing so.

 5. There have been two previous applications for permanent residence.  The
    first on 29 June 2010, for which the claimant  had  a  full  in-country
    right of appeal on which he was appeal rights exhausted on  7  February
    2011.  The second application was made almost immediately on  12  April
    2011, and was refused with no right of  appeal  initially,  but  on  25
    October 2011, the claimant received a revised refusal letter with an in-
    country right of appeal.   He did not exercise that right of appeal.

 6. The circumstances which ensued are summarised in the First-tier Judge's
    decision.  She accepted at [12] that the divorce had  been  acrimonious
    and that the wife had  refused  to  hand  over  her  documents  showing
    whether and when she had exercised Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.
     The claimant had not produced evidence establishing that his wife  was
    exercising Treaty rights on 2 April 2009,  the  date  of  the  divorce.
    There are a few wage slips in the bundle for each of the parties, and a
    contract of employment, but not enough to discharge the burden of proof
    on the claimant.

 7. At  paragraph  14  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  the  Judge
    summarised her findings in  relation  to  the  claimant's  own  alleged
    employment in the United Kingdom:

         "14. ... I find that the [claimant] has not produced a  profit  and
             loss account despite stating  in  his  evidence  that  he  has
             accountants in Woolwich.  Nor has  he  produced  any  business
             receipts  to  corroborate  his  evidence  that  he  was  self-
             employed.  Whilst I find that prior to the  divorce  in  April
             2009 the [claimant] had periods of  employment,  I  find  that
             there are significant gaps in his employment since the date of
             the divorce.  I find that the documentary evidence shows  that
             the [claimant] was employed as a worker for periods in 2010 to
             May 2011 which are referred to in the [Secretary  of  State's]
             refusal letter.  However there  is  little  credible  evidence
             that he was self-employed from either February  or  June  2011
             until February 2015.  In cross-examination the [claimant] said
             that he could have been self-employed  from  June  2011  until
             February 2015."

 8. The reason for the vagueness of the claimant's response is that he  has
    had alcohol problems which have, as Mr Osifeso  vividly  described  it,
    resulted in his life being in tatters and his living like a tramp.   It
    is also the case that since his arrest for overstaying on  10  February
    2015, the claimant had completely stopped working and has  been  living
    with a supportive aunt.

 9. It follows that when the present application was made  on  21  February
    2015, the claimant was definitely not working and  could  not  at  that
    point, even allowing for any extension  under  Regulation  10(6),  show
    five years in which he had continuously lived in the United Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Regulations.  The Secretary of  State  refused  his
    application, and there was a subsequent judicial review which  resulted
    in reconsideration and a decision on 7 December 2015 refusing permanent
    residence with an in-country right of appeal.

10. At the end of her decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge said this:

         "15. Regulation 15(f) states that the applicant must  have  resided
             in the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for a
             continuous period of five years and must have been at the  end
             of that period a family member who has retained the  right  of
             residence.  It is common ground that the [claimant]  has  been
             in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  five  years.
             I find that up to the date of divorce, that is 2 April 2009 he
             was employed.  I take into account that the  [claimant]  moved
             addresses and had problems  with  alcohol  abuse.   Given  his
             difficult personal circumstances, I accept his  evidence  that
             he has not been able to provide all the  documentary  evidence
             to demonstrate that he has been  a  worker  for  a  continuous
             period of five years.  On a balance of  probabilities  I  find
             that the [claimant]  has  lived  continuously  in  the  United
             Kingdom for five years and has worked.  Consequently he  meets
             the requirements of Regulations 15(1)(f) and Regulation  10(6)
             of the 2006 Regulations." (Emphasis added)

11. For the claimant, Mr Osifeso relied on an European  Operational  Policy
    Team document, revised 4 August 2011, concerning a  pragmatic  approach
    in cases where an applicant is  unable  to  provide  required  evidence
    (Pragmatic Approach Guidance Note).  The Home Office Presenting Officer
    at the First-tier Tribunal hearing verified that the policy  was  still
    in effect.

12. The policy begins by stating that it is intended to clarify the process
    which caseworkers must follow when a family member of an  EEA  national
    applies for a residence card under the EEA Regulations, but  is  unable
    to demonstrate that they meet  all  of  the  requirements  due  to  the
    exceptional circumstances of the application.  That would appear to  be
    the position here.  Paragraphs 4 to 8 of the Note deal exclusively with
    domestic violence, which is not relevant to this appeal.

13. So far as relevant, the Pragmatic Approach Guidance Note is as follows:

         "2.  Applications received on the basis that the  applicant  has  a
             retained right to reside in accordance with regulation  10  of
             the Regulations, should be treated pragmatically  where  there
             has been a breakdown in the relationship between the applicant
             and their EEA national sponsor.  This is because it may not be
             possible for the applicant to provide the  required  documents
             to support their application.  Examples of  this  may  include
             ... where the applicant's relationship has ended acrimoniously
             but they have provided evidence to show that  they  have  made
             every effort to provide the required documents.  For  example,
             attempts to make contact with the EEA national sponsor  during
             divorce proceedings.

         3.   Caseworkers must look at each case according to its individual
             merits and where they are satisfied  that  there  is  a  valid
             reason why  the  applicant  is  unable  to  get  the  required
             evidence, enquiries must be made on behalf  of  the  applicant
             where possible.  ...

         Applications for registration certificates or  residence  cards  or
         permanent residence

         9.   ...the applicant will be expected to provide as much detail as
             they can about the sponsor ..."

    Paragraphs 9 to 17 then go on to provide for  certain  enquiries  which
    may be made.

14. For the claimant, Mr Osifeso was unable to take me to any  evidence  of
    the applicant making "every effort to provide the required  documents",
    for example by making contact with  the  EEA  national  sponsor  during
    divorce proceedings or contacting her employer directly, the name being
    clearly displayed on her pay slips.  This  is  not  a  case  where  the
    caseworker got the agreement of a senior  caseworker  to  make  further
    direct enquiries or indeed one where the caseworker was asked to do  so
    by those representing the claimant.

15. On that basis the provisions of paragraph 9  to  17  of  the  Pragmatic
    Approach Guidance Note are not triggered and the Secretary of State was
    not required to make further enquiries.  In any event, so  far  as  the
    applicant is concerned, the HMRC documents which were disclosed show  a
    pattern of failing to make returns and failing to  pay  monies  due  to
    HMRC by way of instalments and the  claimant's  own  evidence  is  that
    between June 2011 and February 2015, he cannot be  certain  whether  he
    was self-employed or not working.  On the basis of that  evidence,  and
    of the clear findings in paragraph 14, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in law in concluding that the requirements of paragraph  15  were
    met.

16. At 15(1)(f), in order to obtain the  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom permanently an applicant must show that they  have  resided  in
    the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for a  continuous
    period of five years and were at the end of that period a family member
    who retained the right of residence.

17. On the date when the application was made the applicant was  no  longer
    working.  He cannot show that he has resided in the United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Regulations for any continuous period of five years
    and in those circumstances this application should not  have  succeeded
    and cannot succeed on remaking.

18. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the appeal.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date: 18 April 2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
