
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL/FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00919/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 March 2021                           |On 14 June 2021                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                   M B A N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Metzer QC, instructed by Sterling Lawyers
Limited
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Canada.  He appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 13 January 2020  refusing
    his application for a residence card in accordance with the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  An anonymity order has been
    made in this case and that order is maintained.

2.   The  facts  of  this  case  are  not  without  complexity.   After  the
    breakdown of an earlier marriage,  in  2004,  the  appellant  formed  a
    relationship with another Canadian national  with  whom  he  had  three
    children.  His case was that he lived with the mother of  the  children
    until 2012.  He began a relationship with his EEA spouse, the  sponsor,
    in  2013  after  the  breakdown  of  the  previous  relationship.   The
    appellant and the  sponsor  were  married  on  3  April  2014  and  the
    appellant's EEA residence card was issued on 21 February 2015.  At this
    time the respondent accepted that the marriage was genuine.

3.   The appellant's evidence was that he found it difficult to  live  apart
    from his children and the children also had difficulties.  The children
    and their mother stayed with the appellant and  the  sponsor  over  the
    summer of 2015 and, on the appellant's case, it was agreed between  the
    three adults that it would be better  for  the  children  to  have  the
    support of both parents and that the sponsor would also  care  for  the
    children as their stepmother.

4.   The sponsor's evidence was that  she  found  the  appellant's  frequent
    visits to Canada difficult and she separated  from  him  for  some  two
    months from February 2016 and there was a further period of  separation
    in early 2017, at a time when the children and their mother had arrived
    in the United Kingdom for the first time.  The children had come to the
    United Kingdom with their mother in February 2017, returned  to  Canada
    and re-entered the United Kingdom in September 2017 with the  intention
    of staying permanently.  The children's residence permits were  granted
    in March 2018 and the mother was granted further  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds in September 2018.  This application was supported
    by the sponsor.

5.   In January 2017 the appellant had rented a property at  Sovereign  Mews
    for the children and their mother and they moved into that property  as
    soon as they entered  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  lived  at
    Sovereign Mews during the period of separation from the sponsor.

6.   In December 2018 the sponsor visited Slovakia her home country and  the
    appellant invited the children and their mother to celebrate New Year's
    Eve.  On his evidence he and the mother had a one night stand and their
    fourth child was conceived.  The sponsor found the situation  difficult
    but decided to forgive the appellant and accepted the fourth  child  as
    her stepson.

7.   The respondent, as noted above, initially accepted  that  the  marriage
    was genuine.  However subsequent concerns have led her to  revise  that
    view.  Hence the refusal which led to the  appeal.   The  documentation
    submitted with the appellant's application for  a  permanent  residence
    card, dated 7 October  2019,  indicated  to  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's primary residence was Sovereign Mews, rather than with  the
    sponsor at her address at Bounds  Green  Road.   The  application  also
    included a letter explaining that there was a separate  house  for  the
    appellant's children at Sovereign  Mews.   The  2019  application  also
    included  an  application  for  the  appellant's  fourth  child.    The
    respondent noted that the mother of this child was not the  appellant's
    wife but the mother of the appellant's three other children.  She  also
    noted that the sponsor had been claiming benefits as a  single  person.
    She also considered there to be a  contradiction  between  her  records
    showing that in interview the children's mother  in  2015  claimed  the
    relationship with the appellant had ended in 2014 while  the  appellant
    said it had ended in 2012 and his relationship with the  sponsor  began
    in 2013.

8.   A further complication which the judge had to deal with and appears  to
    have managed particularly well, was the fact that  the  appellant,  his
    wife and the mother of his children are all profoundly deaf  and  there
    had to be a face  to  face  hearing  with  two  British  sign  language
    interpreters.

9.   The judge reminded herself at  various  points  in  her  decision,  for
    example at paragraphs 27, 31, 61 and 62 that the burden of proving that
    the marriage was  one  of  convenience  was  on  the  respondent.   She
    considered the evidence under a number of headings, first  the  tenancy
    at Bounds Green Road, second the council tax documentation,  third  the
    benefit claims, fourth Sovereign  Mews,  fifth  holidays,  sixth  other
    evidence, seventh birth of the appellant's fourth child.   She  made  a
    number of adverse findings and concluded that the  Secretary  of  State
    had discharged the burden on her.

10.  In his grounds of appeal,  which  he  adopted  in  the  course  of  his
    submissions, Mr Metzer QC argued first that the judge had reversed  the
    burden of proof, for example at paragraph 33, not  accepting  that  the
    sponsor had moved into the Bounds Green Road with the appellant when he
    secured the tenancy on 16 January 2015, finding that the appellant  and
    sponsor were claiming benefits as single occupants from April 2016, not
    accepting that the appellant and the sponsor would have been advised to
    claim benefits separately in respect of Bounds Green Road and Sovereign
    Mews, finding the appellant lived at Sovereign Mews and in  particular,
    at paragraph 60, not accepting the appellant's claim  that  the  fourth
    child was conceived as a result of a one night stand.   The  fact  that
    the judge said she had  assessed  the  evidence  holistically  did  not
    assist.  The burden was on the respondent and  the  judge  should  have
    applied that throughout to her assessment of the evidence.

11.  The second ground, which Mr Metzer acknowledged  was  one  that  had  a
    high threshold, was the argument that the judge's decision was infected
    by perversity in that she  had  not  considered  any  period  but  that
    subsequent to the marriage, rather than being required  to  assess  the
    evidence as a whole.  She had rejected the  submission  that  the  only
    relevant period was that prior to the marriage and considered that  her
    task was to consider the totality of the evidence, but she had not done
    so and  she  had  effectively  limited  herself  to  the  post-marriage
    evidence.

12.  It was also argued on the appellant's  behalf  that  she  had  come  to
    findings of fact contrary to evidence that  had  not  been  challenged.
    The respondent had not challenged the evidence of the  three  witnesses
    who had attended court, nevertheless the judge had taken that  evidence
    into account in finding against the appellant on points of  credibility
    in concluding that it did not follow that  the  marriage  was  genuine.
    She expressed the view that the witness statements  were  difficult  in
    that they contradicted evidence of the appellant but did not put  those
    alleged contradictions to the appellant who was  therefore  denied  the
    opportunity to provide clarification.  She said at paragraph 59 that no
    live evidence had been heard on the issue of the "one night stand"  and
    yet there had been live  evidence  in  that  the  adoption  of  witness
    statement evidence into the record was live evidence.  This appeared to
    be a matter to which the judge had attached especial weight.  This  was
    contrary to the guidance in authorities such as AM  [2015]  UKUT  00656
    (IAC) with regard to the conduct  required  for  there  to  be  a  fair
    hearing.

13.  In her submissions Ms Cunha relied on the response of 2  November  2020
    and developed points made there.  She argued that  the  judge  had  not
    made findings on the genuineness of  the  marriage  until  as  late  as
    paragraph 60.  What she had said for example at paragraph 33 where  she
    found the sponsor  did  not  move  into  Bounds  Green  Road  with  the
    appellant when he secured the tenancy on 16  January  2015  was  not  a
    finding but a  statement  of  evidence.   Greater  clarity  might  have
    assisted as had been acknowledged in the response, but the  matter  was
    to be looked at holistically.  With regard  to  paragraph  60  and  the
    finding about the claimed one night stand the judge might have erred in
    not taking into account evidence of what happened on 31 December  2019
    but it was clear law that the judge  was  assessing  credibility  as  a
    whole and  relying  on  the  lack  of  supporting  evidence.   She  had
    considered the evidence concerning the situation prior to the  marriage
    at paragraphs 28 and 29 even if she had made no findings  on  it.   She
    possibly needed to be more careful with regard to the assertion she had
    made about the one night stand given the witness statements  concerning
    that but was nevertheless entitled to make the finding when approaching
    the evidence as a whole.

14.  It was clear that disbelief did not have to be suspended  just  because
    something was said consistently.  The decision was clearly reasoned.

15.  Ground 2 properly acknowledged the high threshold where perversity  was
    alleged.  It was argued that the  challenge  was  simply  a  matter  of
    disagreement.  The judge had  assessed  the  evidence  as  to  how  the
    relationship  existed  and  the  contradictions  in  respect   of   the
    relationship with the ex-wife and that these were points raised in  the
    refusal letter.

16.  With regard to ground 3 it might be that on the face of  it  the  judge
    did not accept the one night stand and probably should not have  stated
    that conclusion without reasons.   Live  evidence  had  been  given  to
    explain what happened but that had to be taken as part of the  evidence
    as a whole and there were a lot of contradictions.  However, there were
    the issues of the two different addresses, the  bases  for  the  income
    support applications.  Taken as a whole it was understandable  why  the
    judge concluded as she did.

17.  With respect to what the judge said at paragraph 56,  if  evidence  was
    being challenged in a witness statement then the opportunity should  be
    given to provide a challenge and it was assumed that the contradictions
    were not put to the witnesses since there was no record that  that  had
    been done.  Considered as a  whole  this  only  affected  part  of  the
    evidence and would not lead to  a  different  outcome,  though  it  was
    accepted the Tribunal might not agree.

18.  By way of reply Mr Metzer argued that in effect it  had  been  accepted
    on behalf of the respondent that  there  were  errors  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and he asked that  the  appeal  be  allowed.   It  was
    common ground between him and Ms Cunha that if the Tribunal  were  with
    him then the matter would need to be reconsidered in full in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

19.  I reserved my decision.

20.  As regards ground 1 I consider on balance that the judge  did  not  err
    as contended or at all.  She had to assess the  evidence  as  she  went
    along and she was conscious as she regularly reminded  herself  of  the
    fact of the burden being on the respondent and she brought the evidence
    together in concluding  as  she  did  that  the  burden  had  not  been
    satisfied bearing in mind the various findings she  had  made  on  that
    evidence.

21.  However I do consider that there is merit  in  grounds  2  and  3.   In
    effect the judge only considered the evidence of  the  situation  after
    the marriage.  The consideration at  paragraphs  28  to  31  is  almost
    exclusively  concerned  with  post-marriage  evidence   and   all   the
    consideration thereafter is also in that  regard.   Clearly  since  the
    respondent's case was that the marriage was  one  of  convenience  when
    entered into on 3 April 2014 it was necessary to consider the  evidence
    contemporaneous with and prior to the marriage.  The judge did  not  do
    so and I consider that that amounted to an error of law.

22.  I also agree that the judge erred with regard to  her  failure  to  put
    her concerns about matters of live  evidence  to  the  appellant.   She
    clearly attached significant weight to the one  night  stand  issue  on
    which the evidence had been consistent and did not put her concerns  to
    the parties who were therefore denied the opportunity  to  address  the
    concerns  she  had.   That  goes  to  the  fairness  of  the   hearing.
    Accordingly I find that the judge did err in law as  contended  for  at
    grounds 2 and 3.  The extent of reconsideration that will  have  to  be
    done is such that there will have to be a full rehearing of this matter
    and that will have to be in the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross
    before a judge other than Judge Moon.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed   Date 7 April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
