
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00148/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2018                         |On 18th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              mr MAJID HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andonian, promulgated on 3rd September 2018, following a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 17th August 2018.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and  was  born  on  3rd
    September 1986.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim  is  that  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship previously with a Latvian national, whom he had married in
    a religious ceremony on 13th September 2009.  He claimed  that  he  had
    five years of continuous residence in this country from September  2009
    when the cohabitation started  (and  not  11th  August  2011  when  the
    Secretary of State granted the Appellant a  five  year  residence  card
    until August 2016), so that if the period is taken from September  2009
    until  14th  September  2014,  he  would  have  completed  five   years
    cohabitation, and was entitled now to a permanent residence  card,  for
    which he had now applied.  This was notwithstanding the fact  that  the
    relationship broke down thereafter.  The Appellant claimed  that  there
    had been a break in his  relationship  earlier  from  June  2015  until
    September 2015, because the parties were not getting on, but  they  had
    subsequently  then  come  together  again,  after  September  2015  and
    remained together until January 2017,  when  the  relationship  finally
    broke down completely.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  credible
    relationship as maintained.  This is clear from his concluding remarks.
     These are as follows:

         "I do not believe that the Appellant has had a durable relationship
         with his partner for a five year period from the date of the  grant
         of the residence card in August  2011  qualify  for  the  grant  of
         permanent residence.  I do believe that the time starts clocking up
         for the five year residence from the date of the resident's permit,
         here 11th August 2011.  I do not believe that the Appellant has had
         five years habitation  with  the  Appellant  as  partners  akin  to
         marriage.  I did not find this  evidence  credible.   I  found  his
         evidence and  the  evidence  of  his  brother  contradictory.   His
         brother had also referred to himself as the Appellant's  cousin  in
         the Explanatory Statement of 15th August 2015.  I did not  find  Mr
         Latif a credible witness.  He had not seen  the  Appellant  in  all
         practical reality since 2011, and he was confirming to me that  the
         Appellant had been in a genuine relationship, until they  broke  up
         in 2017.  I do not believe  that  the  burden  of  proof  has  been
         discharged by the Appellant on the civil balance of probabilities."

 5. The judge was of the  view  that  to  take  the  five  year  period  as
    beginning from September 2009 when the cohabitation  started,  and  not
    from 11th August 2011 as maintained by the Secretary  of  State,  would
    not be technically correct as this would

         "... make a mockery of the Regulations and the law,  if  the  start
         date for cohabitation was the date when  the  Appellant  states  he
         first started cohabiting from September  2009  to  September  2014,
         because this would imply that  anything  that  happened  after  and
         between August 2011 when the residence card was issued  and  always
         2016 when it expired, some of the period in between was  irrelevant
         in terms of what happened to the relationship, as  the  five  years
         had been clocked up by September 2014" (see paragraph 14).

 6. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the Appellant could complete  the
    five year continuous residence period if the starting date was taken by
    13th September 2009.  This  is  because  on  13th  September  2009  the
    Appellant performed an Islamic marriage  with  his  partner.   He  then
    entered into a durable relationship.  He completed his continuous  five
    years of residence on 13th September 2014.

 8. On 24th October 2018 permission to appeal was granted by  the  Tribunal
    on the basis that there may be some merit in the  submission  that  the
    Appellant may well have completed a 5-year period  of  cohabitation  in
    accordance with the Regulations as a family member of an  EEA  national
    before the expiry of the residence permit, but that  this  will  depend
    very much on the underlying  evidence  put  before  the  judge,  as  to
    residence in  accordance  with  the  Regulations,  from  November  2009
    onwards.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me, Ms Asanovic, appearing as Counsel  on  behalf
    of the Appellant, handed up a well-crafted and a very helpful  skeleton
    argument.  Basing her submissions on this.  She stated that there  were
    three grounds of application before this Tribunal.

10. First, there was the question of the Appellant's relationship with  the
    Latvian national.  The Appellant's application for permanent  residence
    had been refused on the basis that the  relationship  had  broken  down
    after three years and ten months, after the Appellant was issued with a
    residence card on 16th August 2011 (which was in June 2015), but it had
    to be borne in  mind  that  there  had  been  no  allegation  that  the
    relationship had never  subsisted  or  that  it  had  been  false.   Ms
    Asanovic submitted that the proper time for the  purpose  of  assessing
    the period as a durable partner started from the date of the issuing of
    the  residence  card  in  June  2015.   It  was  not  correct  that  an
    alternative period prior to the issue of a residence card could not  be
    taken  into  account  because  this  would  "make  a  mockery  of   the
    Regulations and the law" (see paragraphs 14 to 15).

11. This conclusion arose, submitted Ms Asanovic, from the Court of  Appeal
    judgment in Macastena [2018] EWCA Civ 1558, where the  question  before
    the Court of Appeal was that there  had  been  no  applications  for  a
    residence card, and the period spent in a durable  relationship,  stood
    to be taken into account.  Longmore LJ stated that,

         "It may well  be  that,  if  Mr  Macastena  had  applied  for  (and
         received) a residence card as an extended family member pursuant to
         Regulations 17(4) and (5) of the 2006 Regulations on the  basis  of
         his new relationship with Ms L, the time of that  new  relationship
         could  count  towards  an  acquisition  of   permanent   right   of
         residence".

12. Ms Asanovic submitted that what was  not  addressed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal was whether time spent in a durable relationship  prior  to  the
    issuing of a residence card, as in the case of  this  Appellant,  could
    count towards the finding in favour of the Appellant, that  he  was  in
    compliance with EEA law.  In this case the judge had made  no  findings
    as to whether the couple were in  a  durable  relationship  since  13th
    September  2009  (the  date  of  the  Islamic  marriage  or  any  other
    alternative dates).

13.  Second,  submitted  Ms  Asanovic,  the  judge  had  made  an   adverse
    credibility  finding  against  the  Appellant   as   to   whether   the
    relationship continued after September  2015  (at  paragraph  8).   The
    evidence before  the  judge  was  not  summarised  or  explained  in  a
    comprehensive and organised fashion.  The judge placed  weight  on  the
    failure of the Appellant to apply for permanent residence in 2014,  and
    yet he ruled as a matter of law, that  the  correct  qualifying  period
    would have been one which with the issue of the residence card  between
    August 2011 and 11th August 2016 (which was in line with  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State as set out in  the  refusal  letter  of  28th
    November 2017).

14. However, if the judge was  correct  about  this  then  the  absence  of
    application in 2014 was immaterial.  The judge has also criticised  the
    Appellant on the basis that there  was  an  inconsistency  between  the
    Appellant's witness statement of 11th August 2018, where he had  stated
    that he had lived and remained with his partner between 2009 and  2017,
    but which overlooked two  parts  of  the  statement.   The  first  part
    adopted the content of the  previous  statement  and  the  second  part
    described the nature  of  the  difficulties  in  the  relationship  (at
    paragraph 7) such that there would be  no  inconsistency,  because  the
    Appellant had explained that there had  been  an  interruption  in  the
    relationship.

15. The judge had also referred to evidence that was  not  before  him  "in
    other places in his interview" (at paragraph 61), which was  perplexing
    as there were no interviews before the judge, and  the  judge  had  two
    witness statements by the Appellant, the first was submitted  with  the
    application on which the refusal of 28th November 2017 was based, after
    the Appellant had been issued a residence card on 16th August 2011.

16. Third, in relation to the interruption of cohabitation, the  judge  had
    erred in treating this to be a  cessation  of  the  relationship.   The
    judge had ruled with respect to the Appellant  that,  "if  during  that
    period he  cannot  show  cohabitation,  then  he  is  not  entitled  to
    permanent residency" (paragraph 16) when referring  to  the  five  year
    period between 11th August 2011 and 11th August 2016 (at paragraph  8),
    the focus of cohabitation aims to give effect to the  requirement  that
    the judge had to assess the totality of  the  circumstances  so  as  to
    establish whether the relationship was a durable one.

17. Even if the  relationship  had  entered  into  difficulties  for  three
    months, the assessment of the totality of the circumstances,  was  such
    that it would have led the Appellant to have concluded that  the  break
    of the relationship was not dispositive  since  the  absence  of  three
    months would not have had an impact on residence.

18. For his part, Mr Kandola made the  following  submissions.   First,  in
    relation to reliance being  placed  upon  Macastena  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal, Mr Kandola submitted that this case was not  relevant  for  two
    reasons.  First, that Macastena was a case where the person in question
    had applied as an extended family member.  The  present  case  did  not
    involve a "extended" family member but a "family member".  Second,  and
    in any event, whereas Ms Asanovic relied upon paragraph  15,  the  real
    answer lay at paragraph 17, when Longmore LJ explained that,

         "An extended family member can only be issued with a residence card
         on the basis of his durable relationship with an  EEA  national  if
         the Secretary of State has undertaken 'an extensive examination  of
         the personal circumstances  of  the  applicant'.   That  has  never
         happened and can only happen after an application for  a  residence
         card is made.  Merely notifying the Secretary of State that one  is
         in an open relationship is nowhere near enough either to constitute
         such extensive examination or to require such an examination to  be
         undertaken" (paragraph 17).

19. Second, there was no automatic right to  a  permanent  residence  card,
    even if there had previously  been  the  grant  of  a  residence  card,
    because it was very much a matter of proof as to whether the  Appellant
    had been in a durable relationship.   The  judge's  clear  finding  (at
    paragraph 82) was that he did not find the witnesses  appearing  before
    him to be credible and that the Appellant had not  been  in  a  durable
    relationship.  That was a finding that the judge was entitled to  make,
    notwithstanding anything that was set out in the refusal letter.

20. Third, in relation to the question that the judge's assessment  of  the
    evidence was such that he had not found the Appellant to  be  credible,
    in a determination where the evidence had not been properly  summarised
    or explained, containing inconsistencies  of  approach,  the  following
    would be said.  This is that there was an immigration report  from  the
    airport, which the judge referred to specifically under  a  heading  in
    the determination (at paragraph 21).

21. In a separate section, what the judge had said under the heading of The
    Introduction of refusal/cancellation of leave  to  enter/remain  report
    that an immigration report from the airport (which it was  now  claimed
    has come as a surprise to the Appellant on the day of the hearing), had
    shown that the Appellant and his former partner were not in  a  durable
    relationship

         "... and that the UK  Border  Force  officials  had  verified,  the
         position and was satisfied that the Appellant's application to  the
         Home Office in 2011 for a residence card of a family member  of  an
         EEA national indicated that  they  were  no  longer  in  a  durable
         relationship" (paragraph 21).

    The judge had taken the view that this was

         "A relevant matter which I was entitled to  take  into  account  in
         this EEA appeal".  The judge  observed  that,  "although  therefore
         there was some mistakes in the refusal letter, they were not fatal,
         and in fact dealt with  the  reason  why  the  Appellant  had  been
         refused permanent residence, and it was a relevant factor for me to
         take into account the statement of  15th  August  2015  by  the  UK
         Border Agency Immigration Service following the  interview  of  the
         Appellant in January 2015 when his residence card issued in  August
         2011 was revoked".

22. The judge considered the argument that the  Appellant  claimed  not  to
    know anything of this.  He claimed  not  to  know  anything  about  the
    residence permit having been revoked, "as there was no mention of  this
    in the refusal letter of November 2017".  The Appellant had  maintained
    that the UK Border Agency had not informed him of the revocation of his
    residence card.  However, as the judge went on  to  say  this  was  not
    credible  because,  "he  withdrew  his  appeal  without  any   credible
    explanation.  The appeal therefore did not go ahead" (paragraph 21).

23. Fourth, as for Ground 3 that had been put forward by  Ms  Asanovic,  Mr
    Kandola submitted that there was no substance in this either.   It  was
    being said that the judge had failed to take into account the break  of
    three months in the relationship of the  Appellant  which  had  started
    soon after his Islamic religious ceremony marriage  on  30th  September
    2009, and after he had shifted  in  with  his  Latin  partner  on  15th
    September 2009.  In discussion, however, about when the  relevant  five
    year period should be taken into account, and whether it could  predate
    the grant or revocation of the residence card, as the case may be,  was
    irrelevant.   This  was  because  the  judge  had  come  to  the   firm
    conclusion, on the basis of evidence that he had  looked  at,  and  not
    least on the basis of evidence from the UK Border Force  officials  (at
    paragraph  21),  that  the  Appellant  had  never  been  in  a  durable
    relationship with his Latvian national partner.  He did  not  find  the
    Appellant to be credible.  He did not find his cousin as a  witness  to
    be credible.  Therefore, any consideration of the situation  after  the
    temporary interruption in January 2015 was otiose and irrelevant.   One
    had to start with the issuance of the residence permit in August  2011,
    in fact, and any other suggestion was not defensible  as  a  matter  of
    law.

24. In the reply, Ms Asanovic submitted that there  had  actually  been  no
    revocation of the residence card.  The judge  had  in  fact  recognised
    this (see paragraph  22).   In  these  circumstances,  the  credibility
    findings mattered, because if the Appellant could then have been  found
    credible, on the relevant issues that he required a decision  on,  then
    he would succeed.

No Error of Law

25. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I come  to  this
    conclusion  notwithstanding  Ms  Asanovic's  measured   and   carefully
    constructed submissions before me.

26. This is a case where the Appellant had been  issued  with  a  residence
    card on 11th August 2011 such that it stood to expire on 13th September
    2016.  The issue was whether the Appellant and his Latvian partner were
    in a durable relationship.  Whatever may have been the position at  the
    time of the grant of the residence card, by the time  that  the  appeal
    arose before the judge, there was evidence in the form of the UK Border
    Force Official's report, which cast a flood of light on the Appellant's
    application to the Home Office in 2011  for  a  residence  card,  which
    strongly pointed to this not being a durable relationship.   The  judge
    was entitled to take this report into account because it  was  relevant
    and because there had been no application on the part of the  Appellant
    for an adjournment to take time to consider such a report.

27. On the contrary,  the  Appellant  had  appealed  the  decision  on  2nd
    February 2015 that it had been made against  him,  and  this  suggested
    that the Appellant was fully aware  of  the  allegations  made  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State against  him.   Remarkably,  however,  he
    then went on to withdraw the appeal  in  circumstances,  which  as  the
    judge explained, were "without  any  credible  explanation"  (paragraph
    21).

28. Second, the fundamental issue here is whether there  is  a  "qualifying
    period" on the basis of which the Appellant can apply for  a  permanent
    residence card.   For  the  reasons  that  the  judge  has  given,  the
    Appellant is unable to demonstrate that this is s case, when his entire
    relationship has been thrown into question by the judge, on  the  basis
    that the Appellant was not in a durable relationship.

29. Third, the judge is correct to conclude that the proper period to  take
    into account for the purposes of a durable relationship is "for a  five
    year period from the date of the  grant  of  residence  card  in  2011"
    (paragraph 82).

30. Fourth, any suggestion that a three month gap in the Appellant and  his
    partner's  relationship,  which  indicated  an  interregnum,  could  be
    properly  taken  into  account,  as  not  being  dispositive   of   the
    Appellant's case, is irrelevant, given that the judge  had  found  that
    the relationship was not a genuine one.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  determination.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is refused.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th January 2019

