
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00770/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd March 2018                      |On 24th April 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                              Mohamed chakroun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Aitken instructed by Ozoran Turkan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Row promulgated on 9 May 2017, in which the Appellant's appeal  against
    the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his  application  for  an  EEA
    Residence Card dated 5 January 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of  Morocco,  born  on  14  May  1982,  who
    applied to the Respondent on 10 June 2016 for an EEA Residence Card  as
    confirmation  of  a  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was on the basis that he and his British  citizen  sponsor,
    Zaynab Achghaf, had resided  in  and  exercised  their  right  to  free
    movement in Spain immediately before returning to the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 5 January 2017 on  the  basis
    that the  conditions  in  Regulations  9  and  17  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  had  not  been  met.   In
    particular,  consideration  was  given  as  to  whether  the  sponsor's
    residence in Spain was genuine but it was  not  accepted  that  it  was
    because the centre of the sponsor's life had not transferred to  Spain;
    there was no significant degree of integration there; and there was  no
    evidence that the Appellant's  residence  in  Spain  was  lawful.   The
    Respondent considered that the Appellant's and the sponsor's  residence
    in Spain was for the purpose  of  circumventing  the  United  Kingdom's
    domestic Immigration Rules or other immigration law.

 4. Judge Row dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 9 May  2017
    following consideration of the appeal on the  papers.   No  bundle  had
    been provided by the Respondent for the  purposes  of  the  appeal  and
    although there  were  some  additional  documents  submitted  from  the
    Appellant it was noted that there was no statement  from  him  and  the
    documents that were available either did not  go  to  the  question  of
    residence in Spain or were inconsistent  as  to  dates  of  travel  and
    residence.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on two grounds.  First, that there was a  failure
    by the First-tier Tribunal to  obtain  the  Respondent's  bundle,  with
    reliance placed on the Upper Tribunal's decision in Cvetkovs (visa - no
    file produced - directions) Latvia [2011] UKUT 00212 (IAC).   Secondly,
    that the Respondent's bundle, if it had  been  made  available  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, contained the Appellant's EEA family permit issued
    in Spain in 2015 and the Respondent's decision (and also therefore  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal) was made on the wrong  basis.   In
    accordance with the Upper Tribunal decision in Ewulo (effect of  family
    permit - OFM) [2012] UKUT 00238 (IAC), that where a family  permit  has
    been issued under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 and used to enter the United Kingdom, a subsequent application for
    a Residence Card is to be determined under Regulation 7(3) of the same.
     If a family permit has not been revoked, the issue  is  whether  there
    has been a material change of circumstances since arrival such that  an
    applicant no longer qualifies as an extended family member.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Gleeson on 8 January 2017  on
    all grounds.

Findings and reasons

 1. At the outset of the oral hearing, Mr Duffy conceded on behalf  of  the
    Respondent that there was a material error of law in  the  decision  of
    Judge Row and that the appeal should be allowed and  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal rehearing.   The  Appellant  agreed  with  that
    proposed course of action.

 2. I find the Respondent's concession to be appropriately made, and in the
    circumstances, I  give  only  summary  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  a  material
    error of law such that it is necessary to set aside the decision.

 3.  Paragraph  24  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  includes  the  requirement
    for the Respondent to provide the First-tier  Tribunal  with  specified
    documents in relation to the  decision  under  appeal,  which  was  not
    complied with by the Respondent in the present case with  no  documents
    at all being received from the Respondent.   The  Appellant  wished  to
    rely on the issue of an EEA family permit to  him  by  the  Respondent,
    which was contained within  his  passport.   The  Respondent  held  the
    Applicant's passport and a copy of this would usually  be  included  in
    any bundle provided by the Respondent for the purposes of an appeal.

 4. Although Judge Row acknowledged there was no bundle of  documents  from
    the Respondent no further consideration was given  as  to  whether  the
    case should be adjourned for this to be obtained and when  noting  that
    the Appellant had  not  produced  his  EEA  family  permit,  failed  to
    recognise that this would be in his passport in the possession  of  the
    Respondent.

 5.  The  procedural  error  by  the  Respondent  and   lack   of   further
    consideration of this omission or its possible  consequences  by  Judge
    Row was material in the present case because the existence  of  an  EEA
    family permit being issued  to  the  Appellant  prior  to  his  present
    application means that his  application  should  have  been  considered
    under Regulation 7(3), not Regulation 9 of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, as set  out  in  Ewulo.   The  further
    error of law is therefore that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  applied  the
    wrong provision of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006 when determining the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal (Birmingham hearing  centre)  to  be  heard  by  any
Judge except Judge Row.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]         Date         19th April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
