

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: eA/00694/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2017                         |On 5 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AMINATA BA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dinwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Sponsor in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I refer to the Appellant in this appeal as the Secretary of State and  to
   the Respondent as the Claimant. The Claimant is a Sengalese national  who
   was born on 31 December 1986. Her application for entry clearance as  the
   spouse of an EEA national Mr Malam Sano was refused on 27 July 2015.  She
   appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal and her  appeal
   was allowed under Regulation 7  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
   Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA  Regulations")  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Trevaskis in a decision promulgated on 28 July 2016.


2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal against that  decision
   and First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
   decision on 1 November 2016. Permission was granted on the  grounds  that
   there was an arguable error of law in failing to consider Portuguese  law
   in determining the validity of the marriage.


3. The Secretary of State  argues  in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
   appeal that the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard  to  two  Upper
   Tribunal decisions, namely Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT
   21, and TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014]  UKUT  00316.   The
   Secretary of State argues that the Judge ought to have considered whether
   the Claimant's proxy marriage was valid under Portuguese law, the country
   of her EEA sponsor's nationality.


4. I heard from Mr Diwnycz  who  conceded  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
   position as set out in the grounds of appeal could not be  maintained  in
   view of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Albert Awuku v SSHD [2017]
   EWCA Civ 178.


Discussion

5. In the case of Awuku the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  nationality  and
   marital status  are  clearly  distinguishable.  Marital  status  and  its
   recognition in any given case are matters in respect of  which  Directive
   2004/38/EC (" the  Citizens  Directive")  contemplates  that  the  Member
   States may take different views. As a result, there is no need  to  defer
   to the  law  of  the  State  of  nationality  of  the  EU  national  when
   determining the marital status of his or her spouse or  partner  for  the
   purposes of the Citizens Directive. The Tribunal in Kareem had created  a
   new rule of private international law requiring reference to the  law  of
   the State of the EU national.


6. The Claimant and her EEA spouse  contracted  a  customary  marriage.  The
   Secretary of State did not dispute the  validity  of  that  marriage  and
   Judge  Trevaskis  found  that  the  marriage  met  the  requirements  for
   recognition in CB (validity of marriage; proxy  marriage)  Brazil  [2008]
   UKIAT 00080. The Secretary of State's case was the marriage  was  one  of
   convenience. Judge Trevaskis found that  the  marriage  was  not  one  of
   convenience and was a genuine one. No  issue  was  taken  in  with  those
   findings the grounds seeking permission to appeal.


7. The law of England and Wales recognises proxy marriage if  valid  by  the
   lex loci celebrationis. As there was no issue in  this  appeal  regarding
   the validity of the Claimant's marriage and in  light  of  the  Court  of
   Appeal authority I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and I do not set it aside.

I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Dated 31 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

