
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00404/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th August 2017                      |On 26th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                            Mr Michael Anuebunwa
                        (NO aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Waithe of Counsel, instructed by SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 25th November  1979.   On
    31st January 2011 he was  issued  with  an  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 which was due  to
    expire on 31st January 2016.  On 29th June 2015 he sought re-entry into
    the United Kingdom under the said residence  card  but  the  respondent
    revoked that card and  refused  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with Regulation 9.  The detailed reasons are set out in  the
    Notice of Immigration Decision dated 29th  June  2015.   The  appellant
    sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge on 4th November 2016.  In a determination dated 2nd
    December 2016 the appeal was dismissed.   The  appellant  appeals  with
    leave against that decision to the Upper Tribunal on the general  basis
    that the Judge overlooked or misinterpreted key evidence.

2.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine the issue  as  to  whether
    there is in fact any error of law in the decision.

3.   The starting point clearly is the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated
    29th June 2015 and it is in these terms:-

         "You have sought admission to the United Kingdom under  EC  law  in
         accordance with Regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 on the ground that you are the family member
         of Sabrina Chaudhry, a German national.  You  were  issued  with  a
         residence card by the Home Office on 31st January 2011 valid  until
         31st January 2016.  However, on your arrival  back  in  the  United
         Kingdom on 20th January 2013 your spouse could  not  be  contacted.
         Further  enquiries  have  lead  me  to  be  satisfied   that   your
         relationship with Ms Chaudhry is no longer subsisting, as she is no
         longer in the United Kingdom exercising her treaty rights and  that
         by your own admission you are now in another  relationship  with  a
         different person.  In light of the fact that you no longer  qualify
         as an EEA family member of an EEA national, I revoke your residence
         card and refuse you admission to the United Kingdom  in  accordance
         with Regulation 19."


4.   The notice specifies  that  an  appeal  can  only  be  brought  on  the
    following ground, namely that "the decision to remove you breaches your
    rights under the EU Treaties in relation to entry to, or residence  in,
    the United Kingdom".

5.   Mr Clarke, on behalf of the respondent, raises concerns as  to  whether
    the context of that decision was fully appreciated  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.   The  Judge  has  indicated  in  paragraph  4  of  the
    determination that the appellant bears the legal burden of  proof  from
    start to finish and  the  standard  of  proof  is  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  This is course is a decision of the respondent  and  it
    is for the respondent to justify the matter,  particularly  should  the
    appellant raise a prima facie case, showing that indeed he does qualify
    for residence.

6.   The point at issue is, by consent, a very narrow one.  He  was  married
    to Ms Chaudhry and divorced from her by decree absolute  on  11th  June
    2014.  The issue is whether at the time  of  divorce  Ms  Chaudhry  was
    exercising EEA treaty rights.  If so then  under  the  Regulations  the
    appellant gained a right of residence.  The marriage must have been  in
    existence for three years prior to the divorce although it  was  not  a
    requirement that the appellant have lived with the  sponsor  throughout
    that period.  The judge in the determination seems to be concerned with
    whether or not Ms  Chaudhry  exercised  her  treaty  rights  over  that
    period.  That is not a requirement  upon  the  narrow  basis  which  is
    relied upon.

7.   The criticism is made of the determination that the  Judge  has  failed
    to appreciate the narrow issue, namely whether Ms Chaudhry was  in  the
    United Kingdom and exercising her treaty rights  at  the  time  of  the
    decree absolute, and has in the circumstances, and in any event, failed
    to consider all the evidence that has been presented.  Mr Clarke fairly
    concedes that that is a meritorious challenge to the decision such that
    it should be remade in any event.

8.   Thus the real question  which  falls  to  be  considered  upon  such  a
    rehearing of the appeal is whether or course Ms  Chaudhry  was  in  the
    United Kingdom at the time of the divorce and if  so  whether  she  was
    exercising her treaty rights.  If the appellant raises  a  prima  facie
    case upon the  evidence  that  such  is  so  the  burden  is  upon  the
    respondent to justify why the decision is to be  maintained  under  the
    Regulations.

9.   In all the circumstances I set aside the decision  to  be  remade.   In
    accordance with the Senior President  of  the  Tribunal's  direction  I
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing,  no  facts
    to be preserved.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed in the Upper Tribunal to the extent that the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside, the appeal is to  be  reheard
in the First-tier Tribunal and a fresh decision made.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed            [pic]                      Date 22 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
