
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00225/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2020                  |On 30 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           Ionel Gabriel Bornagel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing
    his appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing him
    admission to the United Kingdom in accordance with Regulation 11 of the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 2. The short point is that the appellant was intercepted at Calais on his
    way to the United Kingdom when a dog handling team were attracted to
    his vehicle by reason of the activities of a dog and a person was found
    in the back of a vehicle driven by the appellant.

 3. The officers conducting the investigation were attentive to the details
    of the vehicle, particularly how it was secured, and they could not see
    any way in which a person could have got into the vehicle through the
    back secretively.  The only way into the vehicle that they could
    establish was through the front of the vehicle and it was hard to see
    how that could happen without the appellant knowing that it had
    occurred.  Of course, nobody suggests that this is necessarily
    absolutely conclusive proof of the appellant's knowledge but it was
    supported by the limited facts and no contrary explanation presented
    itself.

 4. The appellant appealed and that was his opportunity to present a
    contrary explanation.  There was a statement which added little to what
    I have indicated and nothing that gave flesh to the underlying
    contention that he was ignorant of the matters that had taken place and
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was given by an experienced
    First-tier Judge whose reasons for giving permission can be described
    fairly as exceedingly tentative. She was concerned that the appellant
    complained that his case had just not been put, possibly because of
    solicitors being inept, and feared that there may have been a
    procedural irregularity amounting to an error of law.

 6. The notice of hearing before me was sent out on 12 October 2020. The
    hearing was on 16 November, so there was an abundance of time for the
    Notice of Hearing to have arrived. The Notice included Directions
    requiring the appellant to tell the Tribunal a contact address so that
    arrangements could be made for a video link to today's hearing.  I am
    told by my usher who has made enquiries that there is nothing to
    suggest that there was ever any request made in response to those
    directions.  It follows therefore that on the information before me the
    appellant is on notice and has chosen not to take advantage of the
    opportunity to give anything that fleshed out his concerns in the
    appeal. In the circumstances I decided to continue with the hearing in
    the absence of the appellant.

 7. The grounds promise a defence bundle mentioning lots of facts pertinent
    to the case but there is nothing before me that I have been able to
    find that was not before the First-tier Tribunal.  The decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal was wholly cogent on the material that was there.
    The reason for granting permission was that there was a procedural
    irregularity.  There is nothing before me that establishes the
    procedural irregularity.  On the information before me the appeal must
    be dismissed.

 8. It follows that I find no material error of law and I dismiss the
    appeal.



Notice of Decision

 9. This appeal is dismissed.

                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 November 2020               |

