
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00836/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 August 2017                            |On 9 October 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                          Kikelomo Queen Akinnuoye
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rene, Counsel, Dorcas Funmi & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  22  May  1978.   On  15
    September 2015 she was  issued  with  an  EEA  residence  card  as  the
    extended family member of her brother who is an  Irish  national.   She
    applied for a permanent residence card as a confirmation of  the  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.  That was refused by a decision  dated
    13 January 2016 because it  was  not  accepted  that  her  sponsor  had
    exercised his treaty rights in the UK for a continuous period  of  five
    years.

2.   An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was made  against  that  decision.
    On 8 February 2017 the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided  that  in  the
    light of the case of Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) Albania  [2016]  UKUT
    00411 (IAC) the appellant did not have a right of appeal and  the  case
    was dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

3.   That decision was then appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  In the  grounds
    it is  stated  that  the  case  of  Sala  was  not  applicable  to  the
    appellant's case because the decision  in  that  case  related  to  the
    discretionary grant of a residence card.  The appellant  in  this  case
    appealed  against  the  decision  to  refuse  the  grant  of  permanent
    residence and in those circumstances a right of appeal exists since  no
    exercise  of  discretion  is  involved.  This  was  confirmed  by   the
    respondent's own guidance: "Home Office Extended Family Members of  EEA
    nationals - V3.0 - September 2016".  In accordance with that  document,
    the decision letter itself acknowledged that the appellant had a  right
    of appeal.

4.   In introducing this appeal before us, both parties  accepted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in her decision that there  was  no
    jurisdiction.  The case did not fall within the scope of  the  decision
    of Sala for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.

5.   In the circumstances we allowed the appeal and we  remit  the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal in order that the decision on this  appeal  can
    be remade.


Signed                                  Date: 3 October 2017

Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

