
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00650/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 December 2017                           |On 13 December 2017          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                        Appellant
                                    -and-

                                DOZIEM OKORO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Khan of counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 History of Appeal


   1. The Respondent, who was born on 19 December  1974,  is  a  citizen  of
      Nigeria.  On 21 June 2011 the Respondent was issued with  a  residence
      card as the family member of an EEA national, which was valid until 21
      June 2016. On 16 June 2015 the  Respondent  applied  for  a  permanent
      residence card as a confirmation of his right to remain in the  United
      Kingdom. His application was refused on 7 January 2016.

   2. The Respondent appealed against this decision and First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Majid allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on  20  March
      2017. The Appellant appealed  against  this  decision  and  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Ford granted her permission to appeal on  25  September
      2017 on the  basis  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  had  not
      identified the evidence  on  which  he  based  his  finding  that  the
      Respondent's former spouse had been exercising her  Treaty  rights  at
      relevant times and over relevant periods of time.

Error of Law Hearing




   3. The Home Office Presenting Officer and Counsel for the Respondent made
      oral submissions and I  have  referred  to  their  submissions,  where
      relevant, in my findings below.

Findings

   4. On 15 June 2015 the Respondent had applied for a  permanent  residence
      card on the basis that he had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
      continuous period of five years and at the end of this period of  time
      he had retained a right  of  residence.  The  Respondent  married  his
      French wife on 29 May 2010 and a  decree  absolute  was  made  at  the
      Family Court at Bromley on 28 May 2015. The skeleton  argument,  dated
      17 January 2017, indicates that this was the basis upon which his case
      was argued at the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid.
  5.h
   5. However, this was not apparent from the decision reached by the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge. In paragraph 2 of his decision he did not provide
      any particulars of the refusal  letter  and  in  paragraph  3  of  his
      decision he made a general reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  as
      opposed to the EEA Regulations.


   6. In order to qualify for a retained right of residence under regulation
      10(5) of  the  EEA  Regulations,  on  account  of  this  divorce,  the
      Respondent had to establish that he had been married to his EEA spouse
      for at least three years and there was no dispute that  this  was  the
      case. In addition, he had to show that they  had  both  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom for at least a year of this time. At the hearing before
      me counsel for the Respondent referred to a  tenancy  agreement  which
      was at page 423 of the Respondent's Bundle. This  was  dated  1  March
      2014 and named  both  the  Respondent  and  his  wife.  However,  this
      evidence was not referred to by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid in his
      decision and, therefore, it was not possible to ascertain  whether  he
      accepted that this evidence was reliable and relevant.


   7. In addition, in paragraph 12 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Majid stated that there were only two issues in the appeal  -  whether
      the [Respondent] was exercising his right  of  movement  as  a  treaty
      worker and whether his wife  was  covered  by  this  right  under  the
      Regulations. This indicated a fundamental misapprehension on the  part
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, as it was the Respondent's wife  who
      was said to be exercising her Treaty rights and the Respondent's right
      to a residence card was dependent upon her doing so.


   8. Firs-tier Tribunal Judge Majid also had to consider  whether  she  had
      been exercising her Treaty rights for the requisite period of time and
      also whether she had  been  exercising  them  at  the  date  of  their
      divorce. There is nothing in the decision to confirm that he  came  to
      any decision on  these  issues.  At  most,  in  paragraph  13  of  his
      decision, he stated that the Respondent's counsel had  indicated  that
      the required evidence was on pages  6  -  79  [of  the  [Respondent's]
      Bundle] showing that the  spouse  was  working  at  the  time  of  the
      divorce. However, as he did not refer to any particular  evidence,  it
      was not possible to ascertain whether his assertion was correct.


   9. Furthermore,  he  did  not  identity  any  particular  evidence  which
      indicated that she had been  exercising  her  Treaty  rights  for  the
      requisite time to entitle the Respondent to  a retained  or  permanent
      right of residence. At today's hearing,  counsel  for  the  Respondent
      sought to rely on the  totality  of  the  evidence  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Majid. However, as the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
      failed to address all the matters in issue and had  not  provided  any
      reasons for finding that the Respondent had met  the  requirements  of
      the EEA Regulations, his decision was  not  sustainable  and  did  not
      indicate that  he  had  properly  applied  the  EEA  Regulations  when
      reaching his decision.


  10. It was not sufficient for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to state  that
      he had read all the documents and taken into account oral evidence and
      submissions, when there was  no  reference  to  the  content  of  this
      evidence or the submissions. I accept  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge does not have to refer to every piece of evidence  but  he  does
      have to indicate his findings in relation to  the  evidence  which  is
      relevant to the basis upon which the appeal was allowed.


  11. Furthermore, it  was  also  unclear  what  discretion  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was referring to in paragraph 16 of his decision or the
      basis for finding in paragraph 19 of his decision that  "wherever  one
      feels that the cases misses the point marginally  judicial  discretion
      should help him in light of the factors detailed above".


  12. As a consequence, I find that there were arguable  errors  of  law  in
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid's decision.

Decision


  13. The appeal is allowed.


  14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de  novo
      by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Majid.


Date: 11 December 2017

     Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
