
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00704/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2019                    |On 30 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               Kawsar Sulaiman
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who  is  married  to  a  British
         citizen ('the sponsor').  The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) sent on 16 April 2019, in
         which it dismissed her appeal on EEA grounds.

FTT decision

      2. At the beginning of  the  hearing  before  the  FTT  there  was  an
         agreement reached regarding the disputed issues.  The  FTT  records
         that agreement in the following way at [3]:

             "The main issue in this  case  is  whether  the  appellant  is
             entitled to a UK residence card and meets the requirements  of
             paragraph  9  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2016 hereinafter the Regulations.  At  the  outset
             of the hearing Mr Hogg on behalf of the respondent stated that
             he was not relying upon Regulation 26 which  is  misuse  of  a
             right to reside.  It was agreed that my primary  focus  should
             be in  relation  to  Regulation  9.   However  in  considering
             Regulation 9 I have  to  take  into  account  the  immigration
             history and background to  this  case  which  will  inevitably
             involve some consideration of the alleged fraudulent activity.
              Those instructing Mr Holmes have  written  a  letter  to  the
             Presenting  Officers'  Unit  setting  out   further   evidence
             required which in the  circumstances  it  was  agreed  is  not
             necessary to obtain given the main focus of the appeal."

      3. The FTT then heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
         before setting out its findings.  The FTT found that there  was  no
         evidence that the centre  of  the  sponsor's  life  transferred  to
         Ireland.  The FTT then went on to find that it could  not  be  said
         that when the sponsor was unable to work as  a  result  of  illness
         when he was in Ireland that that was on a temporary basis.  The FTT
         then  concluded  having  taken   into   account   the   appellant's
         immigration history and the fact that the family  moved  from  Iraq
         straight to Ireland, in all the circumstances the  purpose  of  the
         family's residence in Ireland, was as a means of circumventing  any
         immigration laws applying to non-EEA nationals in relation to leave
         to enter or remain in the  UK  -  see  Regulation  9(4)(a)  of  the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016  Regulations').   The
         FTT dismissed the appeal for those reasons.

Grounds of appeal

      4. In comprehensive  and  carefully  drafted  grounds  of  appeal  the
         appellant relied upon six  grounds  labelled  E  to  F.   Ground  A
         asserted that the FTT failed to apply the correct legal  test  when
         determining whether or not Treaty rights were exercised in  Ireland
         and referred to the case of O v Minister Voor  Immigratie  Case  C-
         456/12.  Ground B submitted that in determining  that  the  sponsor
         could not be said to be temporarily unable to work when in Ireland,
         the FTT failed to take into account the guidance  set  out  in  FMB
         (EEA Reg 6(2)(a) - 'temporarily unable to work') Uganda [2010] UKUT
         447 (IAC).  Ground C submits that the FTT failed  to  identify  and
         apply the correct burden of proof in abuse of rights cases.  Ground
         D submits that the FTT failed  to  apply  the  correct  authorities
         relating to abuse of rights in particular that of  Akrich  C-109/01
         in which it is said that the motives that  a  worker  may  have  in
         seeking employment in another  Member  State  are  of  no  account,
         provided that he pursues or  wishes  to  pursue  an  effective  and
         genuine activity.  Ground  E  submits  that  there  was  procedural
         unfairness at the hearing.  It says this:

             "19. The appellant respectfully submits that the  judge  below
             has erred in going behind the agreed position adopted  at  the
             hearing.  That the allegations of deception all  similar  made
             by the respondent were not relevant to  the  consideration  of
             the appellant's case under the Surinder Singh route.   It  was
             on this basis that the appellant did not  pursue  the  request
             for information and evidence  set  out  in  a  letter  to  the
             respondent as recorded in paragraph 3 of the judge's decision.



             20.  Having agreed that this was not relevant to the questions
             to be determined as part of  the  appeal  it  is  respectfully
             submitted that it was unfair of the judge to  move  away  from
             that position without notice as  it  prevented  the  appellant
             from  seeking  material  to  challenge  those  assertions  and
             testing the evidence against it."

      5. Ground F finally submits that the FTT failed  to  provide  adequate
         reasons for its finding that the appellant  and  the  sponsor  were
         involved in any fraudulent or deception activity.

      6. In a decision dated 16 May 2019 FTT Judge Adio  granted  permission
         to appeal and made the following observation:

             "The judge appears to have  considered  issues  of  fraud  and
             dishonesty and it is quite clear that the judge had set out at
             paragraph 3  of  the  decision  the  concession  made  by  the
             Presenting Officer that there was no reliance upon  Regulation
             26 which is the misuse of a right to reside.  It is  therefore
             arguable that the judge went behind  an  agreement  which  had
             been made at the hearing.  There are also arguable grounds put
             forward  with  regard  to  the  application  of  some  of  the
             authorities in this area as set out by the  representative  in
             the application for grounds to appeal namely the correct legal
             test and  the  binding  authority  on  the  interpretation  of
             Regulation 6(2).  Cumulatively  these  issues  raise  arguable
             errors of law  and  for  those  reasons  leave  to  appeal  is
             granted."

      7. The respondent has not provided a Rule 24 notice.

Hearing

      8. At the beginning of the hearing I asked Mr Holmes to identify  what
         was contained in the letter referred to  at  paragraph  19  of  his
         ground  E.   He  clarified  that  this  contained  a  request   for
         information and evidence regarding the contention in  the  decision
         letter that the appellant and her  husband  had  been  involved  in
         fraudulent  or  deceptive  activity  during  the  course   of   the
         appellant's immigration history and had been abusive in residing in
         Ireland.

      9. I then turned to Mr Bates and  asked  him  whether  there  was  any
         reason to go behind the assertions set out within ground E at  [19]
         and [20] of the grounds of appeal, bearing in mind the  absence  of
         any Rule 24 notice.  Mr Bates considered the  Presenting  Officer's
         minute and confirmed that it appeared that the focus on  behalf  of
         the respondent before the FTT was in relation to  the  exercise  of
         Treaty rights in Ireland and whether or not the  husband  could  be
         said to have only temporarily  ceased  work.   Mr  Bates  therefore
         confirmed that there was no reason to dispute what was set  out  at
         paragraph 19.  He  however  submitted  that  one  had  to  consider
         whether or not that was a material error because the FTT went on to
         find at [15] that it was unlikely that the husband could be said to
         have only been temporarily unable to work when  he  was  unable  to
         work for a period of eighteen months.

     10. Mr  Bates  acknowledged  that  the  FTT  said  that  there  was  no
         definition of the word "temporarily" in Regulation  6(2)  and  that
         was inconsistent with the definition that the Upper  Tribunal  have
         provided in the case of FMB (supra).

     11. Having heard from Mr Bates I indicated to the parties  that  I  was
         satisfied that the FTT had acted procedurally  unfairly  and  there
         was a material error in relation  to  the  FTT's  approach  to  the
         sponsor's exercise of Treaty rights in Ireland.

Error of law discussion

     12. The FTT appears to have recorded an agreement that the focus of the
         appeal should be on Regulation 9 of the  2016  Regulations  and  to
         have interpreted that as  including  Regulation  9(4).   Regulation
         9(4) says this:

             "This Regulation does not apply -

             (a)  where the purpose of the residence in the EEA  State  was
                  as a means for circumventing any immigration laws applying
                  to non-EEA nationals to which F would otherwise be subject
                  (such as any applicable requirement under the 1971 Act  to
                  have leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom);

             ..."

     13. There are clear links between Regulation 9(4) and Regulation 26  of
         the 2016 Regulations, which addresses the  misuse  of  a  right  to
         reside.  The agreement between the parties  appears  to  have  been
         misinterpreted by the FTT.  The parties agreed that that the  focus
         should be on Regulation 9(3), that is whether or not  there  was  a
         genuine use of Treaty rights in Ireland  and  whether  or  not  the
         husband could be said to have been temporarily unable  to  work  or
         not.  In going behind that agreement without given the appellant  a
         clear  opportunity  to  address  it,  the  FTT  acted  procedurally
         unfairly.  Had the appellant  been  aware  that  the  FTT  remained
         concerned regarding the appellant's immigration  history  then  her
         Counsel may have approached the appeal  differently  and  may  have
         pursued the request that was made in the letter to  the  Presenting
         Officer.

     14. I agree with Mr Bates that that may not have been a material  error
         if the FTT was entitled to reach the conclusion  that  the  sponsor
         could not be said to be temporarily unable to work as a  result  of
         his illness.  However, the FTT erred in law in saying at [15]  that
         there is no definition of the word "temporarily" when the  guidance
         in FMB says this:

             "A state of affairs is 'temporary' if  it  is  not  permanent.
             Accordingly, for the purposes of  Regulation  6(2)(a)  of  the
             Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  a
             person whose inability to work  as  a  result  of  illness  or
             accident is not permanent is temporarily unable to work."

     15. Had the FTT applied that guidance  to  its  factual  findings,  its
         decision may well have been different.  Although  the  sponsor  was
         unable to work for eighteen months in Ireland, the FTT  noted  that
         on returning to the UK he found work in a pizza business for twenty
         hours a week.

     16. That is sufficient to dispose of the appeal and I need not go on to
         deal with the remaining grounds of appeal.  I have found that there
         has been procedural unfairness and there is a material error of law
         in the assessment of the exercise of Treaty rights.   The  decision
         will therefore have to be remade entirely.

Disposal

     17. As there has been procedural unfairness before the  FTT  and  there
         will have to be completely new findings of  fact,  I  am  satisfied
         that this is an appropriate  case  bearing  in  mind  the  relevant
         Practice Direction, to remit to the FTT.

Notice of decision

     18. The FTT decision contains a material error of law and is set aside.
          The decision will be remade by the FTT by a judge other than Judge
         Taylor.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 23 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
