
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00644/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2019                      |On 1 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                               MR MYKOLA KHOMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel instructed by L S Legal,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  O'Rourke  promulgated  on  15  May  2019   ("the   Decision")
       dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  23
       January 2019 refusing to issue a document certifying  his  right  to
       permanent residence in  the  UK  based  on  his  retained  right  of
       residence following a dissolved marriage to an EEA national, Ms [A].


    2. The Decision was made following a consideration on the papers.   The
       Judge accepted that Ms [A] had been exercising Treaty rights at  all
       relevant times, that the Appellant also had been  working  and  that
       the marriage had subsisted for the necessary  period  ([6]).   Those
       matters were not contested by the Respondent.  However, although the
       Judge accepted that the Appellant had petitioned for divorce in July
       2018, he did not accept that the marriage had come to an end  as  he
       said that there was no decree absolute before him ([10]).


    3. The other issue taken by the Respondent was that the  Appellant  had
       not produced Ms [A]'s original passport or ID document.   The  Judge
       concluded at [11] of the Decision, that he did not  need  to  decide
       whether  the  Appellant  could  rely  on  regulation  42(1)  of  the
       Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  EEA
       Regulations") as the Appellant could not show that he  was  entitled
       to a retained right of residence under regulation 10  in  any  event
       (due to the lack of a decree absolute).


    4. The Appellant appealed on the  basis  that  the  Judge  had  wrongly
       failed to consider regulation 42(1) of the EEA Regulations  and  had
       failed to note that the decree absolute was in the bundle before the
       Judge ([AB/1046]).


    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge  Shaerf  on  17
       June 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:


           "...The Appellant's bundle at page 1046 contained a copy of  the
           decree absolute of 26 March 2019.  The Judge arguably  erred  in
           his findings at paragraph 10 of his decision in not taking  this
           into account.
           The Judge has not  addressed  the  fact  that  the  Respondent's
           decision does not  state  that  the  Respondent  has  considered
           whether  to  exercise  his  discretion  under  Reg.17   of   the
           Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 in relation to production  of
           an original document to show his former wife is an EEA  national
           in the light that it will have previously been produced when the
           Appellant was first issued with a residence card.
           These are arguable errors of law and  permission  to  appeal  is
           granted on both grounds."


    6. The matter comes before us to decide whether  there  is  a  material
       error of law in the Decision and, if we so find, to either remit the
       appeal to the First-tier Tribunal or re-make the  Decision  in  this
       Tribunal.


      ERROR OF LAW


    7. Mr Avery accepted that there is indeed a copy of the decree absolute
       in  the  Appellant's  bundle  at  [AB/1046].  That  shows  that  the
       Appellants' marriage was finally dissolved on  26  March  2019.  The
       Appellant's bundle runs to well over one thousand pages and there is
       no index.  The Judge was expected to find a one-page  document  with
       very little assistance and on the papers  without  oral  submissions
       (although we accept that the skeleton argument with the bundle  does
       make reference to the document).


    8. However, the failure to have regard to this document is  clearly  an
       error of law.  The document is clearly relevant, indeed  central  to
       the  Judge's  finding  as  to  whether  regulation  10  of  the  EEA
       Regulations could be met.


    9. That then brings us on to the other reason why the  application  was
       refused by the Respondent, namely the Appellant's failure to provide
       his ex-wife's original passport or ID document.  The Judge  did  not
       deal with this issue as he did not consider it necessary  to  do  so
       because of his finding in relation to the decree absolute.  Since we
       have found an error of law in the latter regard, it follows that  we
       also find an error of law in relation to what the Judge  says  about
       the failure to provide the identity document.


   10. For those reasons, we set aside the  Decision.   We  see  no  reason
       however to set aside the Judge's finding  at  [6]  that,  aside  the
       failure to produce the decree absolute and  identity  document,  the
       Appellant otherwise met the requirements for  a  retained  right  of
       residence.  That finding was not put in issue by the Respondent.  We
       therefore preserve that finding.


    RE-MAKING OF DECISION


   11. Mr Avery quite properly conceded the error of law in relation to the
       production of the decree absolute.  He also accepted that  he  could
       not realistically argue that the Appellant should  fail  because  he
       had not produced his ex-wife's identity document given what is  said
       by this  Tribunal  in  Rehman  (EEA  Regulations  2016  -  specified
       evidence) [2019] UKUT 000195 (IAC), in particular at  [20]  of  that
       decision referring to Barnett and Others  (EEA  Regulations;  rights
       and documentation) [2012] UKUT 00142 concerning the  proof  required
       and whether the  Respondent  can  refuse  an  application  for  that
       reason.  As the Tribunal there made clear, in particular in  a  case
       where permanent residence is sought, it would be unlawful to  refuse
       an application for failure to provide such documentation "given that
       there  is  likely  to  be  relevant  material   relating   to   such
       documentation on file from  a  previous,  successful,  application".
       That is, as Mr Avery confirmed, the situation in this case.


   12. Although Mr Avery submitted that the fact that  the  Respondent  had
       not refused the application for any other reason did not necessarily
       mean  that  it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  met  the  other
       requirements of the relevant regulation, we have already pointed out
       that the Judge made a finding that those requirements were  met  and
       the Respondent has not taken issue with that finding.  Mr Avery  did
       not make any submissions that the Appellant  failed  for  any  other
       reason.


   13. As Ms Solanki pointed out, the application made by the Appellant was
       for permanent residence based on a retained right of  residence  and
       not simply for a retained right of  residence.   The  Appellant  was
       given a residence card on 4 December 2013  valid  until  4  December
       2018.  He made the application leading to the Respondent's  decision
       under appeal on 5 December 2018 by which time he had completed  five
       years' residence in accordance with the EEA Regulations.
   14. For the above reasons, the Appellant is entitled to a residence card
       certifying  his  right  to  permanent  residence  under   regulation
       15(1)(f) of the EEA Regulations 2016.  Accordingly, we  re-make  the
       decision and we allow this appeal.



      DECISION
    We are satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law. We
    set aside the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C  H  O'Rourke
    promulgated on 15 May 2019.
    We re-make the decision.  We allow the Appellant's appeal on the  basis
    that he is entitled  to  a  residence  card  certifying  his  right  to
    permanent residence under regulation 15 of the  EEA  Regulations  2016.




    The appeal is allowed.


      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  23 July 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
