
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
eA/00620/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 November 2017                       |On 05 December 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Miss mariam raymonde sabine soro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Ms A.Fijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr T. Ogunnubi, Legal Representative, TM
Legal Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid
    promulgated on 9 March 2017 following a hearing at Taylor House  on  11
    January 2017.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the claimant  requires  anonymity
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Cote D'Ivoire whose date of  birth  is  7
    January 1994.  On 31 July 2015 she applied for  a  permanent  residence
    card as the  dependent  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  who  had
    exercised treaty rights in the UK  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years.

 3. On 3 January 2016 the Secretary of State ("SSHD") refused to issue  her
    with a permanent residence card as  she  had  not  provided  sufficient
    documentary evidence to show that her  sponsor  had  been  continuously
    self-employed  for  five  years,  including  working  as  a  registered
    childminder  since  26  January  2011,  or  that  she   was   currently
    economically active. So the SSHD declined to give her the  confirmation
    she sought with reference to Regulation 15 (1)(b) or Regulation 14.

 4. Judge Majid allowed the claimant's appeal, concluding at paragraph [27]
    that the Claimant came,  "within  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  as
    amended and should have the benefit of  discretion".  His  reasons  for
    finding for the  Claimant  included  the  following  reasons  given  in
    paragraphs [12] and [13}:

          a) The claimant's dependence on her mother was apparent from  the
             documents;

          b) It cannot be fair to separate this daughter from her mother;

          c) Given the closeness of the relationship, her  evidence  should
             have been accepted, but the person at the Home Office  dealing
             with her case was over-suspicious;

          d) It would not be fair to only go with the  view  taken  by  the
             SSHD as this would mean depriving the Claimant of  her  appeal
             right.

Reasons for Finding an Error of law

 5. In South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33 Lord  Brown
    said at [26]:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration.

 6. Mr Ogunnubi initially sought to defend the decision of Judge Majid, but
    when I drew his attention  to  paragraphs  [12]  and  [13]  he  rightly
    conceded defeat.

 7. The reasons for the decision are not  intelligible  and  they  are  not
    adequate. The Judge did  not  reach  a  conclusion  on  "the  principal
    important controversial issue", which was the exercise of treaty rights
    by  the  claimant's   mother.   The   Judge's   reasoning   betrays   a
    misunderstanding of the issues which he was required  to  resolve.  The
    Judge did not reach a rational decision on relevant grounds.

 8. For the above reasons, the decision is vitiated  by  a  material  error
    such that it must be set aside in its entirety and remade.

Reasons for Remitting the Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. Following my error of law ruling, Mr Ogunnobi sought to persuade me  to
    proceed at the same hearing to remake the decision, taking into account
    an updated bundle of documents, which included documents which were not
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Ms  Fijiwala  opposed  this  course.  I
    ruled in favour of the SSHD on the ground that both  parties  had  been
    deprived of a fair hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  therefore
    this was not an appropriate case to be retained by the  Upper  Tribunal
    for remaking. I directed that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a hearing de novo.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,
    which requires the decision to be set aside in its entirety and remade.

Directions

11. The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House
    for a fresh hearing (Judge Majid not compatible).





Signed                              Date 02 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson











