
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00787/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 20th October 2016               |on 28th November 2016              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between
                          MR. MOHAMMAD RASHED AHMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

No application for anonymity was made and there is no  apparent  reason  for
anonymity.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     MAC Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R.Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh. He applied for a residence
      card under European Treaty provisions. This was on the basis he was an
      extended family member of his brother-in-law, an Italian citizen,
      hereinafter referred to as his sponsor.


   2. His application was refused and he appealed. His appeal was heard by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle at North Shields on 21 April 2016. In
      a decision promulgated on 27 April 2016 his appeal was dismissed.

   3. The judge found that the appellant entered the United Kingdom in
      October 2010 with entry clearance as a student valid until December
      2012, subsequently extended to May 2015. In July 2015 he applied for a
      residence card on the basis he lived with and was dependent upon his
      sponsor.

   4.  His sponsor had lived with his wife, the appellant's sister, in Italy
      until November 2010 when they came to the United Kingdom. He is
      working part-time.

   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle found that the appellant was not
      living as part of his sponsor's household; having concluded he lived
      in London whereas the sponsor lived in Newcastle. Furthermore, the
      judge did not consider him to be dependent upon his sponsor.

   6. The appellant's application for leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      was rejected on the grounds advanced. However, since the appeal the
      decision of Sala (EFM's: Right of Appeal: Albania [2016] UKUT 411(IAC)
      was promulgated. This decided that there was no right of appeal
      against the refusal to grant a residence card to a person claiming to
      be an extended family member. Consequently, permission to appeal was
      granted on the basis that it was arguable that First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Doyle did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

   7. The respondent has made a response under rule 24, submitting that the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle materially erred in law
      and that the decision should be set aside and remade, dismissing the
      appeal for want of jurisdiction.

The Upper Tribunal

   8. At hearing, the appellant's representative sought to argue that the
      decision of Sala (EFM's: Right of Appeal: Albania [2016] UKUT 411(IAC)
      did not apply to the appellant's appeal. His first point was that the
      decision did not have retrospective effect. The next point was that
      the appeal here was under regulation 26 (3) of the immigration EEA
      regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations) rather than Reg 26(2A) which
      applied in Sala.


   9. Mrs R.Petersen submitted that the decision of Sala (EFM's: Right of
      Appeal: Albania [2016] UKUT 411(IAC) was declaratory of the law and
      did not change it.


Consideration

  10.  The decision of Sala postdates the First-tier Tribunal. The decision
      does not change the law but is declaratory of what the law is.
      Consequently, as it does not change the law the argument that it is
      not retrospective is misconceived.

  11. Sala is not concerned was the appeal rights of family members as
      defined in regulation 7. Rather, it concerns the appeal rights of
      extended family members as defined in regulation 8. The appellant is
      clearly not a family member of his sponsor as defined in regulation 7.
      Regulation 8 defines an extended family member as someone who
      satisfies regulation 8(2), (3) or (4). In Sala it was found by the
      First-tier Judge that the appellant was an extended family member is
      defined in regulation 8(5), namely as a partner. The claim in the
      present appeal is based on the appellant being a dependent relative
      and a member of the sponsor's household. Consequently regulation 8(2)
      is the relevant provision. On the facts however, First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Doyle found he was not a dependant or household member.

  12. Sala considered the rights of appeal to extended family members within
      regulation 26. The Upper Tribunal compared regulation 26(2A) with
      regulation 26(3). The former was inserted by way of an amendment from
      8 November 2012 and was concerned with a claim by a person to be in a
      durable relationship with an EEA national. Regulation 26(3) concerned
      the appeal rights of someone claiming to be a family member or
      relative of an EEA national to whom paragraph 26(2) did not apply. Reg
      26(2) concerned  someone claiming to be an EEA national.

  13. Regulation 26(3) is as follows (my italics ):

         (3) If a person to whom paragraph (2) does not apply claims to be a
         family member who has retained the right of residence or the family
         member or relative of an EEA national he may not appeal under these
         Regulations unless he produces-
         (a)a passport; and
         (b)either-
         (i)an EEA family permit;
         (ia)a qualifying EEA State residence card;
         (ii) proof that he is the family member or relative of an EEA
         national; or
         (iii) in the case of a person claiming to be a family member who
         has retained the right of residence, proof that he was a family
         member of the relevant person.


  14. The Upper Tribunal at paragraph of Sala 35 stated:

         The  reference  to  a  "relative"  (which  has  existed  since  the
         Regulations were enacted) may to be a reference  to  a  person  who
         claims to be a "relative" of an EEA national, his spouse  or  civil
         partner and, for example, claims to be a dependent or member of the
         household of the EEA national and, as such, is an EFM by virtue  of
         reg 8(2) (see also reg 8(3) and (4) for other 'relative' EFMs).

  15.  Regulation  2  defined  an  EEA  decision  as  including  a  decision
      concerning the right to have a residence  card  (2(1)(b)).  The  Upper
      Tribunal considered the meaning of an EEA decision and  in  particular
      whether the term `entitlement' included a decision  which  entailed  a
      discretionary element as in the case of extended  family  members.  At
      paragraph 62 the Upper Tribunal stated:

         ... we see nothing  in  reg  26(3)  to  displace  the  natural  and
         ordinary meaning of the definition of an EEA decision  set  out  in
         reg 2(1) point (b) that a decision under reg  17(4)  to  refuse  to
         issue a residence card to an EFM does not give rise to a  right  of
         appeal.

Conclusion

  16. In light of the decision of Sala,  notwithstanding  the  inclusion  of
      `relative' in regulation 26(3) in relation  to  appeal  rights,  I  am
      driven to conclude that this appellant has no right of appeal. This is
      because of the  Upper  Tribunal's  analysis  of  an`EEA  decision'  in
      regulation 2(1)(b). I see nothing which distinguishes this  case  from
      the principle set out in Sala.Consequently,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal and erred in law in doing so.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle dismissing the appeal
contains a material error of law and cannot stand. This is because there
was no jurisdiction to hear the appeal. I set the decision aside and
substitute a decision that there was no valid appeal before the First-tier
Tribunal.



 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


