

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00435/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|2 February 2018                     |6 February 2018                       |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                    Khan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

    1. On 22 December  2017,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum,  following  the
       decision of the Court of Appeal in Khan v. the  Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 proposed that the First-
       tier Tribunal was wrong in law to conclude  that  it  did  not  have
       jurisdiction. The Judge was minded to set aside the decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal and remit the case to be re-made in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. He directed that either party had 7  days  to  oppose
       his proposal. Since no objection was received within the  period  or
       at all, I can determine this appeal without  a  hearing  by  finding
       that there was an error of law, set aside the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal and direct that the appeal is heard by the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    2. Notwithstanding the above, the appeal was set down for hearing on  7
       February 2018.

    3. By letter dated 30 January 2018, the appellant wrote to the Tribunal
       requesting an adjournment. This is no longer necessary and I  direct
       that the hearing fixed for 7 February 2018 in the Upper Tribunal  is
       vacated.

    4. The parties will be informed of the hearing  before  the  first-tier
       Tribunal  in  due  course.  Notwithstanding  the  absence   of   the
       appellant's partner, it is expected that the parties will  be  ready
       to proceed at the next hearing.


DECISION


 1. The Judge made an error on a point of law and I set aside his decision.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-
    made.

 3. I direct that the hearing fixed for 7 February 2018 be vacated.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL







