
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00542/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2020                    |On 19 August 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                               RANA UMER RAZA

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Mr M Iqbal of Counsel instructed by NR Legal
Solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale on 14 January  2020
         against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge T  Lawrence,
         promulgated on 22 April 2020 following a hearing at Taylor House on
         13 December 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 14 November 1988.  He
         entered the UK as a student and subsequently claimed  asylum  as  a
         gay man before marrying a Romanian national shortly  thereafter  in
         an Islamic ceremony and making an application for a residence card.
         He and his partner were interviewed and the application was refused
         on 24 January  2019  because  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
         appellant had entered into a sham marriage.

      3.  The  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Lawrence.
         Following oral evidence from  the  appellant,  the  sponsor  and  a
         family friend and submissions from the parties, the judge dismissed
         the appeal.

    Covid-19 crisis

      4. Ordinarily, the appeal would have been listed for hearing following
         the grant of permission to appeal but due to the Covid-19  pandemic
         and need to take precautions  against  its  spread,  this  did  not
         happen and directions were sent to the parties on 9 June 2020. They
         were asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt with
         on the papers and to make any further submissions on the  error  of
         law issue within certain time limits.

      5. The Tribunal has received written submissions  from  both  parties.
         Both parties have agreed to the  matter  being  considered  on  the
         papers and in the current circumstances I agree that that course of
         action is appropriate.

      6. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      7. I take into account that a full account of the facts are set out in
         the papers, that the arguments for and against the  appellant  have
         been clearly set  out  and  that  the  issues  to  be  decided  are
         straightforward and have been fully addressed  in  the  submissions
         made. There are no matters arising  from  the  papers  which  would
         require clarification and so an oral hearing would  not  be  needed
         for that purpose. I have regard to the importance of the matter  to
         the appellant and consider that  a  speedy  determination  of  this
         matter is in his best interests. I am satisfied that I am  able  to
         fairly and justly deal with this matter on the papers before me and
         I now proceed to do so.

    Submissions

      8. The respondent's submissions are dated 15 June 2020. They were made
         in compliance with the directions of the Upper Tribunal.

      9. Mr Kotas notes that the grounds put forward by the appellant are  a
         rationality challenge and he relies on the guidance in VV  (grounds
         of appeal) [2016] UKUT 53 (IAC)  (at  paragraphs  23  and  24).  He
         submits that applying the guidance given, the suggestion that there
         was a lack of reasoning in  the  determination  is  unarguable.  He
         submits that the judge dealt with all matters  that  went  both  in
         favour and against the appellant and, having considered  in  detail
         the evidence, he properly decided that on balance the marriage  was
         one of convenience. He submits that  what  the  judge  did  was  to
         attach significant weight to the fact that the appellant  had  been
         prepared to lie to the immigration authorities by  making  a  false
         asylum claim on the basis of his  sexuality  and  that  his  spouse
         showed no apparent interest in  finding  out  the  reason  why  her
         husband feared returning to his home country. He submits  that  the
         judge was entitled to place substantial weight on these matters and
         that the argument that the appellant should succeed if  there  were
         numerically  more  findings  in  favour   than   against   him   is
         misconceived. It is submitted  that  some  evidence  will  be  more
         probative than other  evidence  and  that  the  exceptionally  high
         threshold for a rationality challenge had not been met.

     10. The appellant's submissions prepared by Counsel are dated  24  July
         2020. An extension of time  is  sought  on  the  basis  that  Judge
         Nightingale's permission decision had only been received two  weeks
         earlier.

     11. In his written submissions, Mr Iqbal submits that the  only  ground
         of appeal is that on the available evidence it was not open to  the
         judge to reach the findings he did. The submissions then expand  on
         the grounds and maintain that trivial inconsistencies are a  common
         feature in almost every genuine couple's replies and that  as  long
         as there  is  consistency  in  most  of  their  answers,  then  the
         inconsistencies can safely be ignored. It is pointed out  that  the
         appellant and his wife were asked questions on  over  25  different
         topics and that they  gave  consistent  answers  on  at  least  23.
         Additionally, there was evidence that they were registered for  IVF
         treatment and that they shared a joint bank account. It is  pointed
         out that three of the criticisms relied on by the respondent in her
         decision letter were not upheld by the judge. It is submitted  that
         there were 27 or 28 positive findings and on the other  hand  there
         were only two negative findings against  the  appellant  and  that,
         therefore, it was not open to the judge to find as he  did.  It  is
         submitted that the judge was required to give reasons as to why the
         two issues relied on outweighed  the  consistent  evidence.  It  is
         maintained that  the  appellant's  case  is  not  restricted  to  a
         rationality challenge but is about applying too high  a  threshold,
         failing to appreciate the cumulative weight of consistent evidence,
         failing to appreciate that the appellant's evidence is not required
         to be 100% consistent with his wife's evidence  and  a  failure  to
         give  reasons  as  to  why  inconsistent  evidence  outweighed  the
         consistent evidence. It is submitted that the respondent completely
         misunderstood the appellant's case. Questions are then  put  as  to
         why  more  weight  was  given  to  inconsistent  answers  than  two
         consistent ones. The Tribunal is asked to set aside the decision.

    The legal framework

     12. The judge properly took  into  account  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2016 and the  appropriate  case  law  at
         paragraphs 37-38 of his  determination.  Regulation  2(1)  provides
         that the interpretation of a "marriage of convenience"  includes  a
         marriage entered into for the purpose of using  those  Regulations,
         or any other right conferred by the EU  treaties,  as  a  means  to
         circumvent: (a) immigration rules  applying  to  non-EEA  nationals
         (such as any applicable requirement under  the  1971  Act  to  have
         leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or (b)  any  other
         criteria that the  party  to  the  marriage  of  convenience  would
         otherwise have to meet in order to enjoy a right  to  reside  under
         the Regulations or the EU treaties. The judge acknowledged that the
         evidential burden was on the respondent to show that  the  marriage
         is one of convenience, on  a  balance  of  probabilities:  Sadovska
         [2017] UKSC 54.

    Discussion and Conclusions

     13. I have considered all the evidence, the determination of the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge, the grounds for permission and the submissions
         made by both parties.

     14. I grant the appellant's request for an extension of time and  admit
         his submissions. The respondent is not disadvantaged by  the  delay
         and the submissions assist the Tribunal in its decision.

     15. This is a  case  where  the  judge's  reasoning  is  criticised  as
         inadequate essentially because he reached  the  adverse  conclusion
         that the appellant had entered into a sham marriage to  a  Romanian
         national on the basis of a limited number of negative  findings  as
         opposed to several more positive findings.

     16. Contrary to what the appellant's grounds argue, the simple issue of
         numbers on one side of the scale as opposed to those on  the  other
         cannot determine the outcome of an appeal and to put forward such a
         simplistic argument is unhelpful. As the respondent properly points
         out, there will be matters that carry more weight so that even  one
         issue may outweigh several  on  the  positive  side  of  the  scale
         depending on the nature of the issue and the weight given to it  by
         the judge.

     17. There can be no possible argument in this case that  the  appellant
         did not know why the judge made the findings he did or reached  the
         conclusion he reached. Nor can it be  reasonably  argued  that  the
         judge's decision making was flawed or that there was an  inadequacy
         of reasoning. The judge methodically goes through the evidence  and
         clearly sets out the weight he ascribes to various factors. So, for
         example, the consistent  evidence  summarised  by  Counsel  in  his
         submissions and in the grounds and the evidence of cohabitation  is
         given a particular weight  (at 40  and  43),  photographs  and  the
         untested evidence of a friend is given minimal weight  (at  41  and
         42), inconsistent evidence on whether or not the  sponsor's  family
         members were invited to the wedding is considered as going  neither
         one way or another (at 44) and the sponsor's lack of  knowledge  as
         to the appellant's studies is given a low level of weight (at  45).
         The sponsor's  lack  of  interest  in  whether  the  appellant  was
         attending  his  asylum  interview  appointments  was  given  medium
         importance (at 46). The judge, however, gave  high  importance  and
         accordingly attached much greater weight to the sponsor's ignorance
         as to why the appellant feared returning to Pakistan and  her  lack
         of interest in his claim  which  she  claimed  she  maintained  she
         considered to be genuine (at 47). He found that this detracted from
         the claim that they enjoyed a genuine relationship.

     18. The judge also considered the appellant's shifting evidence on  the
         asylum claim. His evidence was contradictory and was  found  to  be
         lacking in credibility (at 49). The  judge  noted  the  appellant's
         attempt to shift the blame for making a bogus asylum claim  to  his
         representatives and also took account of the fact that he had  been
         willing to seek to deceive the immigration authorities by  pursuing
         a claim to be a gay  man  which  he  subsequently  admitted  was  a
         "mistake" (ibid). having assessed all the matters raised and having
         ascribed weight to the various  factors  and  evidence,  the  judge
         concluded that the respondent had shown that the marriage  was  one
         of convenience  (at  50).  That  decision  was  reached  after  the
         evidence was carefully considered and assessed and was a conclusion
         the judge was entitled to reach. It cannot be said that "there is a
         gap in the reasoning" (VV op cit at 24) or that the "decision is so
         outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral  standards
         that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to
         be decided could have arrived at  it"  (Council  of  Civil  Service
         Unions v  Minister  for  the  Civil  Service  [1984]  UKHL  9;  see
         respondent's submissions at 8).  Accordingly, it was  open  to  the
         judge to dismiss the  appeal  and  his  determination  contains  no
         errors of law.




         Decision

     19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error
         of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.

         Anonymity

     20. No request for an anonymity order has been made  at  any  stage  of
         these proceedings and I see no reason to make one.




    Signed


    R. Keki?


    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 14 August 2020


