
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00724/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 29th January 2018                 |On 26th February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            Emil Cosmin Boltasiu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Romania born  on  8th  August  1986.   He
    claims to have resided in the United Kingdom since  January  2007.   On
    12th October 2016 he applied for a residence card under the  provisions
    of Regulations 6 and 15 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 on the basis that he qualified  under  the  five  year
    residence Rule.  That application was refused for the reasons given  in
    a Notice of Decision dated 9th January 2017.  The  Appellant  appealed,
    and his appeal was decided without a  hearing  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gibbs (the Judge) at Hatton Cross.  He  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeal for the reasons given in his Decision dated 27th March 2017.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's case was that he was permanently incapacitated and  not
    able to work during the qualifying period from  12th  October  2011  to
    12th October 2016.  The Appellant did however produce payslips  showing
    he was employed between  March  2015  and  February  2016.   The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal because the  documents  produced  to  him  by  the
    Appellant did not show that he had been certified unfit to  work  by  a
    medical professional, and that he had not produced  payslips  or  other
    documents to show that he had been otherwise  employed  throughout  the
    qualifying period.

 4. At the hearing before me, the Appellant appeared unrepresented.  He did
    not apply for an adjournment, and indicated that he wished  the  appeal
    to proceed without his representation.

 5. He referred to the grounds of application and argued that the Judge had
    erred in law in coming to his decision because he had not taken account
    of all the documents produced to him.  However, in reply to questioning
    by me, the Appellant revealed that the documents proving his employment
    had not been submitted with the original application, and had been sent
    to the Respondent after the appeal had been decided  on  28th  February
    2017.  He said he had worked for Thorn International between  2009  and
    2011, and thereafter until 2015 with Global Traders.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there had been no such error of law as the  Judge  had  considered  and
    dealt with all the documents  before  him.   The  documents  which  the
    Appellant complained had not been considered by the Judge had not  been
    submitted to the Tribunal before the appeal had been decided.   In  any
    event, the Appellant had said in his application form that he had  been
    incapacitated and incapable of work, which  contradicted  what  he  had
    said today.

 7. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge.   It  is
    now clear that the documents which the  Appellant  said  had  not  been
    dealt with by the Judge had not been before the Judge.  They  had  been
    sent to the Respondent after the Judge had  decided  the  appeal.   The
    Judge had considered and dealt with all the documents before him.  They
    did not show that the Appellant had been in employment or incapable  of
    work throughout the qualifying period.

 8. For these reasons, I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.



Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

10. I do not set aside that decision.

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 21st February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
