
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00458/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers on 17 June 2020        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 26 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             EUNICE LETITIA [G]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 27 March 2019, a judge of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal to issue her  a
        Residence Card as confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United
        Kingdom as the family member of an EEA national  exercising  treaty
        rights. The EEA national is a Mr [VK] a citizen of Lithuania.
     2. That decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal at a  hearing  on
        12 July 2019 on the basis of a fairness argument.  Directions  were
        given for a Resumed Hearing which was listed for 8 January 2020  in
        Birmingham. That hearing was adjourned as the EEA  national  wished
        to give evidence, had been very ill with bowel cancer in  the  past
        and continues to receive treatment, and was unable  to  attend  the
        hearing in Birmingham.  Further directions were given providing  an
        extended time period for the appellant to comply with the direction
        made at the error of law hearing for the provision of all  evidence
        she was seeking to rely upon, and for  arrangements  made  for  the
        hearing to be transferred  to  Nottingham  to  facilitate  the  EEA
        nationals attendance.
     3. The hearing was listed on 27 March 2020 at Nottingham  but  vacated
        as a  result  of  the  Covid  19  pandemic.  Directions  were  sent
        canvassing the parties opinion upon a remote hearing as a result of
        which the appellant contacted the Upper Tribunal indicating the EEA
        national would not attend any hearing due to his health  needs  and
        that she was happy for the matter to be determined on the papers.
     4. The respondent's representative accepted if the appellant  was  not
        going to attend there was very little else that could be  done  and
        made further submissions which are set out below.
     5. I find it is appropriate to determine the merits of the substantive
        appeal on the papers in  light  of  the  position  adopted  by  the
        appellant in response to directions.
     6. The issue in the appeal is whether the appellant's marriage to  the
        EEA national, which was found by the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  to
        be a valid proxy marriage was,  nevertheless,  a  marriage  entered
        into solely for the purposes of obtaining and immigration advantage
        and therefore a marriage of convenience.




Burden of Proof



     7. The European Commission has produced a Handbook which can be  found
        at                           the                            website
        (http://ec.europa.eu/justice/citizen/files/swd_2014_284_en.pdf).
        This indicates that the Commission are of the view that the  burden
        of proof rests on the national authorities to prove the marriage is
        one of convenience.
     8. In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 it was held that the legal burden was on
        the SSHD to prove that an otherwise valid marriage was  a  marriage
        of convenience so as to justify the refusal  of  a  residence  card
        under the EEA Regulations. The legal burden of proof in relation to
        marriage lay on the Secretary of State, but if she adduced evidence
        capable of pointing to the conclusion that the marriage was one  of
        convenience, the evidential burden shifted to the applicant  (paras
        24 - 27).
     9. That the burden of proof is on the respondent  is  now  put  beyond
        doubt by Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54 an appeal  from  the  First
        Division of the Inner House of the Court of Session.



The law


    10. The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  at
        regulation 2  defines  a  marriage  of  convenience:  "marriage  of
        convenience" includes a marriage entered into for  the  purpose  of
        using these Regulations, or any other right  conferred  by  the  EU
        treaties, as a means to circumvent - (a) immigration rules applying
        to non-EEA nationals (such as any applicable requirement under  the
        1971 Act to have leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom);
        or (b) any other  criteria  that  the  party  to  the  marriage  of
        convenience would otherwise have to meet in order to enjoy a  right
        to reside under these Regulations or the EU treaties."
    11. In Molina, R (On the Application Of) v The Secretary of  State  for
        the Home Department [2017] EWHC 1730 (Admin) (12  July  2017))  the
        High Court considered whether there  was  a  difference  between  a
        'sham marriage' and a 'marriage of convenience'. Deputy Judge Grubb
        considered the statutory definition of 'sham marriage'  in  section
        24(5) of the Immigration Act 1999, which requires:
        -  The absence of a genuine relationship
        -  One or  both  parties  to  enter  into  the  marriage  to  avoid
        immigration law or the Immigration Rules and/or to obtain  a  right
        conferred by law or those Rules to reside in the UK
        -  One or both parties to be a citizen of a country other than  the
        UK, an EEA state or Switzerland.
    12. The Deputy Judge then considered the definitions  of  'marriage  of
        convenience' in the EEA Regulations  2016  and  the  definition  in
        Article 1 of Council  Resolution  12337/97',  which  refers  to  'a
        marriage concluded...with the sole aim of circumventing  the  rules
        on entry and residence of third-country nationals and obtaining...a
        residence permit or authority to reside'. The latter definition had
        been applied by the House of Lords in R (Baiai) v SSHD [2009] 1  AC
        287 and the Court of Appeal in Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.
    13. The Deputy Judge concluded that  a  'sham  marriage'  can  only  be
        established  if  there  is  no  genuine  relationship  between  the
        parties; whereas the 'hallmark of a marriage of convenience is  one
        that has been  entered  into...  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  an
        immigration advantage' [para. 64]. This means that a  'marriage  of
        convenience' may exist where there is a genuine relationship if the
        sole aim of at least one of the parties is to gain  an  immigration
        advantage [para. 73].
    14. In Sadovska & Anor v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
        (Scotland) [2017] UKSC 54 Baroness Hale considered the approach  to
        marriages of convenience, finding that earlier definitions had been
        moderated  by  the  Commission's  2014  Handbook,  such  that   the
        predominant, rather than sole, purpose of the marriage should be to
        gain rights of entry/ residence. Incidental immigration  and  other
        benefits (e.g. tax advantages) that a marriage may  bring  are  not
        relevant, if this is not the predominant purpose of  at  least  one
        party to the marriage [para. 29].



Discussion



    15. The application was refused by the respondent on  15  January  2019
        for the following reasons:

             Your application has been considered  under  regulation(s):  7
             and 18 with reference to 22(4)(b) of the Immigration (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2016.


             We  have  determined  that  you  have  not  provided  adequate
             evidence to show that you qualify for a right of residence  as
             the family member of your EEA sponsor.


             You have not provided adequate evidence to prove that you  are
             direct family member of an EEA or Swiss national and that  you
             are related as claimed.


             To enable the Secretary of State reconsider your  application,
             you and your EEA or Swiss national spouse/civil partner,  [VK]
             were invited to attend a marriage interview.


             Invitation letters were sent on 5 November  2018  to  [private
             email address] which you listed as our email  address  on  the
             application form.


             You failed to attend this interview and did not give the  Home
             Office any/a good reason for this failure.


             The Home Office invited  you  to  a  second  interview  on  22
             November 2018. This invitation was sent to email address.


             The Home Office then invited you to a third  interview  on  10
             December 2018. This invitation was sent to email address.


             Again, you failed to attend this interview.


             Whilst you have stated  that  you  could  not  attend  due  to
             medical reasons and have sent  pictures  of  letter  detailing
             your prescriptions, you have  not  provided  written  evidence
             from a relevant GP or doctor stating  that  you  were  or  are
             unable to travel for these interviews.


    16. At the error of law hearing on 12 July 2019 the appellant,  through
        her then representative, confirmed that she and the   EEA  national
        sponsor were willing to attend a marriage interview  but  had  been
        unable to attend the earlier interviews as  a  result  of  the  EEA
        sponsor's medical issues. When specifically asked whether  the  EEA
        national and the appellant were capable of attending the  interview
        the Tribunal was advised that the answer in respect of both of them
        was "Yes". Sufficient time was  therefore  provided  to  arrange  a
        further marriage interview which was offered by the respondent  but
        which, again, the appellant and  EEA  national  sponsor  failed  to
        attend.
    17. No issue has been taken concerning  the  sponsor's  status  in  the
        United Kingdom. He has provided a copy Residence  Document  in  the
        form of a Registration Certificate issued on 16 October 2018. It is
        also not disputed the EEA national sponsor is unwell.
    18. In relation to the EEA nationals health a number of documents  have
        been provided form 2019, the latest of which is a letter  dated  16
        March 2020 written by an NHS GP based at Peterborough in  Cambridge
        in the following terms:

             Letter Confirming Patient Illness


             To whom it may concern


             This letter confirms that Mr [VK (d. o. b.)] has been under my
             consultation for  several  years  now  with  bowel  cancer  is
             progressively  getting  worse  without  no  improvement.   Our
             initial  aim  was  to  maintain  remission,  which  has   been
             unsuccessful as he still suffers from  severe  diarrhoea  with
             rectal bleeding, incontinence, and extreme stomach discomfort.
             I can confirm that he is still unable to carry out any  normal
             activities and he currently struggles with breathing.  Mr [VK]
             is unable to walk 15 m without exhibiting symptoms  of  wheeze
             and shortness of breath. He is currently on inhalers for these
             symptoms.


             Recent biopsy results show progressive stage 4 cancer that  is
             responsive to treatment, therefore our overall aim is to treat
             symptoms and support him with pain management where  possible.
             Mr [VK] is currently being supported by his  local  palliative
             care team at home and Macmillan Cancer support group. Based on
             the above Mr [VK] is  aware  of  his  current  situation  that
             things will get progressively worse as he is at the end  stage
             of his cancer. We are here to provide all the medical  support
             he needs during this difficult time.


    19. The address given on the letter from the GP is that in Peterborough
        where  the  EEA  national  and  the  appellant  are  said  to  have
        previously resided. The letter refers to support being provided  by
        the GP in Peterborough and support by a local palliative care team.
        The appellant has, however, now moved to an address at  Long  Eaton
        in Nottingham and a letter written by  the  EEA  national  dated  8
        January 2020 refers to that address.
    20. Although the EEA national claims to have been unable to attend  the
        marriage interviews as a result of his medical  problems  there  is
        nothing to indicate the appellant herself was unable to attend.
    21. The EEA national has set out his position in  an  undated  document
        written in the following terms:


           My plea letter to the court as dictated to my wife (Letitia [G])


           This letter outlines the reasons why I cannot attend  the  court
           proceedings with my wife. It also contains my plea to the courts
           asking for compassionately grant my wife  had  documentation  to
           stay in the UK.


           As you are aware, I have  been  unwell  for  several  years  now
           furring from bowel cancer.
           Firstly, I must apologise to the court and Home Office  for  not
           being able to attend with my dear wife Leticia  [G].  If  I  had
           been in good  health  and  capable  of  mobility  I  would  have
           physically supported her all through this journey.  I  am  aware
           that my health is deteriorating, and I will not  get  better  as
           this could possibly be the end  of  my  life.  My  plea  to  the
           Tribunal courts or whoever is dealing with  my  wife's  case  to
           grant her legal documentations; be the  determining  factor.  My
           wife has been nothing but supportive to me, she has been my rock
           by my side when I needed her the most.


           It has been  an  emotional  roller-coaster  trying  to  get  her
           documentations.  My  final  plea  would  be  to  grant  my  wife
           documentations. I hope this please enough  as  a  final  request
           from possibly my last moments with her on this earth.


           Thank you very much for understanding


           Yours sincerely


           Mr [VK]


    22. The appellant's immigration history reads:


           13 April 1969   Appellant born in Sierra Leone


           2 October 2000  Appellant applied for  student  Visa  which  was
                         initially refused but granted on appeal valid  from
                         15 August 2002 to 30 September 2003.


           19 November 2002    Appellant entered the UK with student visa.
           26 September 2003   Appellant granted further leave as a student
                         nurse.


           29 October 2004 Appellant granted further leave to remain.


           14 November 2005     Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
                         remain which was refused.


           22 May 2006     Appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain
                         which was refused.


           14 July 2015    Appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain
                         outside the Immigration Rules which was refused.


           30 August 2016  Appellant applied for further leave to remain on
                         the basis of  her  family/private  life  which  was
                         refused.


           22 October 2017 Appellant married EEA sponsor.


           11 August 2018  Appellant applied  for  residence  card  as  the
                         source of an EEA national which was refused  on  15
                         January 2019.


    23. The appellant has been an overstay with no valid leave since 2006.
    24. In her witness statement of 14 March 2019 the  appellant  expresses
        disagreement with the  refusal  but  in  addition  to  the  alleged
        failure to attend an interview the decision-maker writes:

             You claim to have met your partner in December 2016, entered a
             relationship with them  in  December  2016  and  began  living
             together in September 2017. However,


                   . There is limited evidence of cohabitation and you  have
                     provided no  tenancy  agreements  or  more  letters  to
                     support your application.
                   .     There     is     no     evidence      of      joint
                     finances/commitments/responsibilities - you  are  named
                     solely on NPOWER bills provided and  have  provided  no
                     joint bank statements or  other  bills  where  you  are
                     jointly named.
                   . The provided photographs are not evidence of a durable,
                     subsisting relationship.
                   . You have failed to provide  any  accommodating  letters
                     for relevant issuing authority to confirm the  legality
                     of your marriage by proxy.


    25. Further documents provided by the appellant to the  Upper  Tribunal
        include Npower utility bills dated 4th September, 28 October, and 4
        December 2019 in the joint  names  of  the  EEA  national  and  the
        appellant in relation to the property in Peterborough and an Npower
        bill dated 21 January 2020 also in  joint  names  relating  to  the
        property in Long Eaton. It appears this is a response to the issues
        raised in the refusal letter.
    26. Photographs have been provided showing  the  appellant  purportedly
        with the EEA national but an issue was raised before the First-tier
        Tribunal as there was no evidence the man in the photograph was the
        EEA national and that judge was clearly of  the  opinion  that  the
        photographs had been  staged  for  the  purposes  of  demonstrating
        intimacy when showing the appellant purportedly in bed with the EEA
        national; in a selfie in which the  appellant  is  clearly  wrapped
        tightly in the quilt but the EEA national not. No further  evidence
        has been provided by the appellant in  relation  to  this  specific
        issue.
    27. It is not explained by the appellant why the evidence  provided  to
        establish her claim is so limited.  Following  the  finding  of  an
        Error of Law a direction was given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
        following terms:

             The appellant shall no later than 4 PM 13 December  2019  file
             with  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  send  to   the   respondent's
             representative  a  consolidated,  indexed,  paginated   bundle
             containing all the documentary evidence upon which she intends
             to rely in support of the appeal. Witness  statements  in  the
             bundle must be signed, dated, and  contain  a  declaration  of
             truth and shall stand as the evidence in chief  of  the  maker
             who shall  be  made  available  for  the  purposes  of  cross-
             examination and re-examination only.

    28. The time limit was  extended  to  5  February  2020  following  the
        adjournment of the hearing  and  direction  for  the  relisting  in
        Nottingham.  The  only  evidence  additional  evidence  is  a  copy
        prescription for the appellant indicating she herself is  receiving
        medication, and the Npower bills referred to above,  which  are  of
        limited use in establishing the appellant's claim.
    29. The Respondent's position set out in an email is as follows:


           "Following A statement she will not attend a hearing  -  I  have
           now seen the appellant's response to my last submissions. I have
           also seen copy of evidence that the appellant is receiving anti-
           depressant medication. However, there is no evidence in the form
           of a medical report which sets out that  the  appellant  or  her
           husband are unfit to give evidence remotely.


           In any event, as the appellant insists that the decision  should
           be made on the papers, the  respondent  has  no  choice  but  to
           agree. On that basis, the respondent asks that the  UT  draw  an
           adverse inference from the  fact  that  the  appellant  and  her
           husband have failed to give live evidence, especially given  the
           live issue in this case, the  failure  to  attend  all  previous
           interviews invited to and the husband's failure  to  attend  all
           hearings listed. It has been  impossible  to  ascertain  whether
           their marriage was entered into for genuine reasons.


           I have now received the medical letter dated 16/3/20 in  respect
           of the appellant's claimed husband. I have  noted  its  contents
           and would submit that there  is  no  mention  of  the  appellant
           within that documents in respect of living with or attending  to
           the care of her husband. Further, the appellant  has  failed  to
           address why she and her husband cannot attend a remote  hearing,
           given the fact that the medical letter states that  her  husband
           is unable to walk  even  15  metres  without  requiring  medical
           assistance, a remote hearing can take care from their home.


           The respondent is still a  of the opinion that  a  remote  video
           hearing in respect of this appeal  should  be  conducted.  If  a
           remote video hearing is conducted the appellant and her  partner
           will not need to travel anywhere, which appears to have been the
           difficulty  previously  described  in  not   attending   the   5
           interviews that the appellant and her partner have been  invited
           to by the Home Office and the partner being unable to attend all
           3 hearings at the tribunals. The appellant
           has not addressed in her submission as to why a  remote  hearing
           cannot take place, allowing both her and  her  partner  to  give
           evidence. Given the main issue in this case  is  in  respect  of
           whether their marriage is a marriage of  convenience  and  given
           that they have not  attended  all  interviews  invited  to,  the
           respondent has not been afforded the opportunity to  test  their
           evidence in respect of their claimed relationship.


           In spite of the above, if the tribunal is still minded to decide
           this appeal on the papers, the respondent continues to  rely  on
           the refusal letter dated 15 January 2019.  In  addition  to  the
           letter the respondent  asserts  that  the  appellant  failed  to
           provide clear evidence as to  why  her  partner  was  unable  to
           attend the further 2 interviews they were invited to  after  the
           error  of  law  hearing.  It  is  asserted  that  the   evidence
           concerning the appellant's husband's health has been extremely
           vague and although he may have had more severe medical  problems
           in the past, the appellant has failed to  show  how  these  have
           affected him over the last year when he  failed  to  attend  the
           interviews  and  the  further  hearing  which  was   listed   in
           Birmingham IAC on 10 January 2020.


           No further evidence in respect  of  cohabitation  or  any  joint
           household bills have  been  provided  to  shed  light  on  their
           relationship. As per Rosa it is accepted that the tribunal  must
           consider the intention of the  parties  at  the  time  when  the
           marriage was entered into and subsequent evidence is capable  of
           shedding light on that. It is asserted that limited evidence has
           been provided to show that this marriage has ever been  genuine.
           Photographs in themselves do not indicate that
           a marriage in or has ever been genuine, all that photographs are
           capable of showing is that the parties know each other.


           It is also accepted that the legal burden of proving a  marriage
           of convenience is on the respondent, however it is asserted that
           the respondent  discharged  the  initial  evidential  burden  by
           showing that the appellant and  her  partner  failed  to  attend
           multiple interviews with  the  Home  Office  and  only  provided
           limited evidence in respect of their relationship. This  refusal
           to attend interviews and now hearings within the  tribunals  has
           continued,  without  good  excuse   or  reasonable  evidence  to
           show failure to attend. In addition to that, the  appellant  has
           failed to set out why they cannot now attend a  remote  hearing.
           The appellant has failed to  rebut  the  inference  drawn  under
           Regulation  22(4)(b).  Despite  the  appellant's   reliance   on
           Regulation  22(6)  and  (7),  the  regulation  is  not   invoked
           systematically, and the decision was not  based  merely  on  the
           failure to attend  the interviews, the SSHD also referred to the
           limited evidence provided and  now  provides  further  reasoning
           above to support the decision taken.


           The respondent continues to rely on the submissions of Ms Sandal
           to the FTT in respect of the documents that were before the  FTT
           and in  respect  of  the  appellant's  oral  evidence.  The  FTT
           decision notes that a  full  record  of  those  submissions  are
           contained in the record of proceedings.


           The respondent maintains her submissions dated 21 May  2020  and
           invites the UT to either direct  a  remote  hearing  or  make  a
           decision on the papers  in  respect  of  submissions  from  both
           parties.


    30. The key issue is whether at the date the appellant entered into the
        marriage  it  was  not  a  genuine  marriage  but  a  marriage   of
        convenience. The appellant's  immigration  history  shows  numerous
        attempts to secure status in the United Kingdom  once  her  student
        leave expired. Even discounting the failure to attend the  marriage
        interview together, on the  basis  of  the  EEA  nationals  medical
        condition, there is nothing to suggest the appellant herself  could
        not have attended and there is arguable merit in  the  respondent's
        contention that the reasons why the marriage  interviews  were  not
        attended was not properly explained to the respondent.
    31. Despite the appellant being aware of the concerns regarding lack of
        relevant evidence there has  been  a  failure  by  her  to  provide
        anything of worth to show the marriage was entered into because  it
        is a genuine  marriage  and  was  not  a  marriage  to  enable  the
        appellant to obtain an immigration advantage.
    32. It is not disputed the appellant may be providing  support  to  the
        EEA national who may be extremely grateful for the same in light of
        his own medical difficulties. It may be that the utility bills have
        been put into joint names of the appellant and  the  EEA  national,
        but the GP provides an address in Peterborough for the EEA national
        and refers to local support services assisting.
    33. As noted by the respondent in the submissions there is insufficient
        evidence to  enable  a  finding  to  be  made  on  the  balance  of
        probabilities that this is a genuine marriage and not a marriage of
        convenience. I have given very careful consideration to the limited
        evidence available and I find the  respondent  has  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon her to the required standard to prove this  is
        a  marriage  of  convenience.  The  appellant  was  aware  of   the
        respondent's concerns but fails to rebut them by the  provision  of
        sufficient  cogent  evidence  despite   having   been   given   the
        opportunity to do so on numerous occasions.

 Decision

    34. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    35. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 June 2020












