
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00057/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2019                          |On 27 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                 Rotimi [A]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant challenged the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herlihy promulgated on 17th July 2019 refusing his appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State on 12th December 2019 to  issue  him
    with  a  derivative  residence  card  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of
    Regulation 16(5) and 20 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 (the EEA Regulations).

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge at section 6 of her decision set out  the
    following findings

          "6.1    The Respondent has refused the Appellant's application for
             a  derivative  residence   card   because   she   finds   that
             insufficient evidence has  been  produced  to  show  that  the
             Appellant shares that care of his son and that his  son  would
             be unable to remain in the United  Kingdom  if  the  Appellant
             were forced to leave the UK.  The Respondent is  of  the  view
             that there is another parent  who  would  be  able  to  assume
             caring responsibilities for the Appellant's  son;  namely  his
             mother with whom he has lived since  his  birth  and  who  has
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom until May 2020.

         6.2      It is the Appellant's evidence that he shares the care  of
             his son with his wife and that he is responsible for  his  day
             to day care when his wife is working although  his  son  lives
             with his mother. The Appellant says that he is  not  permitted
             to live with his wife and children as they have been  provided
             with emergency housing accommodation and at the time,  he  did
             not have an outstanding application to  the  Home  Office  and
             could not be  included  in  the  tenancy  agreement.  He  says
             however that he spends most of his days with  his  family  and
             stays over some nights.

         6.3      It is not disputed that the Appellant  is  the  biological
             father of a minor British child. I see no reason to doubt  the
             Appellant's claim that he shares the  care  of  his  children,
             including his son O with his wife and that the  children  live
             with her and have done so since they were born.  It  is  quite
             clear that the Appellant is unable to work and I see no reason
             to doubt his claim that he is involved in his children's  life
             and is the first point of contact for his children's school.

         6.4      In  considering  the  evidence  in  the  round  I  am  not
             satisfied the  Appellant  does  satisfy  the  requirements  of
             Regulation 16(5) for the issue of a derivative residence  card
             as I am not satisfied that he has established that O's  mother
             would be unable to care  for  him  as  she  has  been  granted
             discretionary leave to remain until May 2020 so that there  is
             no evidence that son O would be forced  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom with the Appellant".

 3. The grounds of appeal set out the following:

      1) it was not disputed that the appellant was the biological father of
         the British minor child;

      2) it was not disputed that his son was born in the United Kingdom and
         still lives in the United Kingdom;

      3) the judge saw no  reason  to  doubt  the  appellant  shared  caring
         responsibilities with the sponsor mother, inclusive of  involvement
         in the children's life and siblings, as well  as  being  the  first
         point of contact for the children regarding their  school  affairs,
         as well as general welfare;

      4) she acknowledged he had no right to work and thus spent  more  time
         with the children and enabled the mother to be in employment;

      5) in considering her final verdict the judge merely  stated  that  he
         did not satisfy the requirements of Regulation  16(5)  of  the  EEA
         Regulations because the child's mother could look after the  child.



      6) The background to the claim was  as  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
         appeal.  The mother was granted 30 months' discretionary  leave  to
         remain and thus neither parent was exempt persons from being issued
         a residence permit and thus were not excluded from  Regulation  16.



      7) The appellant had stated he has established an integral family life
         with his children and mother since 2006 and continued to do so.

      8) Should he be granted a residence permit they would as still married
         continue to live life lawfully and responsibly under one roof  with
         the children.

      9) The approach of the judge disclosed an error of law

 4. Analysis

    The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016  set  out  as
follows:

      Derivative right to reside
      16.-
      (1) A person has a derivative right to reside during  any  period  in
      which the person-
                 (a)is not an exempt person; and
                 (b)satisfies each of the criteria in one or more of
           paragraphs (2) to (6).
      (2) The criteria in this paragraph are that-
           (a)the person is the primary carer of an EEA national; and
           (b)the EEA national-
                 (i)is under the age of 18;
                 (ii)resides in the United Kingdom as a self-sufficient
           person; and
                 (iii)would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if the
                 person left the United Kingdom for an indefinite period.
      (3) The criteria in this paragraph are that-
             (a)any of the person's parents ("PP") is an EEA national who
             resides or has resided in the United Kingdom;
             (b)both the person and PP reside or have resided in the United
             Kingdom at the same time, and during such a period of
             residence, PP has been a worker in the United Kingdom; and
             (c)the person is in education in the United Kingdom.
      (4) The criteria in this paragraph are that-
             (a)the person is the primary carer of a person satisfying the
             criteria in paragraph (3) ("PPP"); and
             (b)PPP would be unable to continue to be educated in the
             United Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for an
             indefinite period.
      (5) The criteria in this paragraph are that-
           (a)the person is the primary carer of a British citizen ("BC");
           (b)BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and
           (c)BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or in
           another EEA State if the person left the United Kingdom for an
           indefinite period.
      (6) The criteria in this paragraph are that-
           (a)the person is under the age of 18;
           (b)the person does not have leave to enter, or remain in, the
           United Kingdom under the 1971 Act (but see Paragraph 7A);
           (c)the person's primary carer is entitled to a derivative right
           to reside in the United Kingdom under paragraph (2), (4) or (5);
           and
           (d)the primary carer would be prevented from residing in the
           United Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for an
           indefinite period.
      (7) In this regulation-
           (a)"education" excludes nursery education but does not exclude
           education received before the compulsory school age where that
           education is equivalent to the education received at or after
           the compulsory school age;
           (b)"worker" does not include a jobseeker or a person treated as
           a worker under regulation 6(2);
           (c)an "exempt person" is a person-
                 (i)who has a right to reside under another provision of
           these Regulations;
                 (ii)who has the right of abode under section 2 of the 1971
           Act;
                 (iii)to whom section 8 of the 1971 Act, or an order made
                 under subsection (2) of that section, applies; or
                 (iv)who has indefinite leave to enter or remain in the
                 United Kingdom (but see paragraph 7A).
      (7A) Leave to enter, or remain in, the United Kingdom under the 1971
      Act which has been granted by virtue of Appendix EU to the immigration
      rules is not to be treated as leave for the purposes of paragraph 6(b)
      or (7)(c)(iv).
      (8) A person is the "primary carer" of another person ("AP") if-
           (a)the person is a direct relative or a legal guardian of AP;
      and
           (b)either-
                 (i)the person has primary responsibility for AP's care; or
                 (ii)shares equally the responsibility for AP's care with
                 one other person who is not an exempt person.
      (9) In paragraph (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) or (5)(c), if the role of primary
      carer is shared with  another  person  in  accordance  with  paragraph
      (8)(b)(ii), the words "the person" are to be  read  as  "both  primary
      carers".
      (10) Paragraph (9) does not  apply  if  the  person  with  whom  care
      responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to reside in  the
      United Kingdom as a result of  this  regulation  prior  to  the  other
      person's assumption of equal care responsibility.
      (11) A person is not be regarded as having responsibility for another
      person's care for the purpose of paragraph (8) on the sole basis of  a
      financial contribution towards that person's care.
      (12) A person does not have a derivative right to  reside  where  the
      Secretary of State or an immigration officer has made a decision under
      regulation  23(6)(b),  24(1),  25(1),  26(3)  or  31(1),  unless  that
      decision is set aside or otherwise no longer has effect.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Clarke conceded  that  the  judge  had  not
    appreciated the import of the Regulation 16(5) and gave  no  reasoning,
    bearing in mind his findings as to the part that the  appellant  played
    in the primary care of the child, for refusing the appeal.

 6. I note Regulation 16(8) and the definition  of  a  "primary  carer"  of
    another person ("AP").  The Secretary of State's Guidance on derivative
    rights of residence issued in May 2019 included a  section  on  "shared
    responsibility" in relation to Regulation 16(8)(b)(ii).   The  guidance
    states that following the  Court  of  Justice  on  the  European  Union
    judgment in Chavez-Vilchez  C-133/15  on  10th  May  2017,  it  is  not
    necessary to consider whether the other person is an exempt  person  as
    defined in Regulation 16(7)(c) of the 2016 Regulations but as Mr Clarke
    accepts it the appellant and his wife were not exempt.

 7. The 2019 Guidance in relation to 'Sharing equal  responsibility'  (page
    48) states "Two people  should  be  considered  to  share  equally  the
    responsibility for a child when they both have responsibility  for  the
    care and welfare of the child,  both  long-term  and  on  a  day-to-day
    basis" and further in the section "Where a child's parents  live  apart
    the parents will usually be considered to  share  equal  responsibility
    for the child if the other parent has legal parental responsibility and
    has regular contact with the child".

 8. Specifically, under

    'Evidence of shared responsibility

    A person will, generally, be considered to share  equal  responsibility
    in the following circumstances, where both parents are:

    . living together in the same household with the child

    . separated but share responsibility for the child - evidence  of  this
         may include (but is not limited to) a:

         ?  custody agreement or court order

         ?  statement(s) from the parent(s) to this effect

    Equal responsibility does not mean there has to be  evidence  of  equal
    sharing of responsibilities, as  this  is  not  always  practical.  For
    example, a child may reside with their mother during the week and their
    father at weekends or they may reside with the  mother  full-time,  but
    the father has regular contact with the child. Whilst  the  father  may
    not provide the majority of care  for  the  child,  in  both  of  these
    examples, the father is actively  involved  in  the  child's  life  and
    continues to have parental responsibility for the child. In such cases,
    unless there is evidence to indicate the father is unable to  care  for
    the  child,  it  can  be  accepted  that  both  parents   share   equal
    responsibility'.

 9. I have preserved the judge's findings at 6.1 to 6.3.  It  was  accepted
    by the judge and, that the appellant was the  biological  father  of  a
    minor British child and that the  appellant  shared  the  care  of  his
    children with his wife. It was accepted that  because  he  was  out  of
    work, he spent a considerable  time  looking  after  his  children  and
    indeed was the first point of call  for  their  school.   He  took  his
    youngest child, O, who  was  a  British  citizen  to  school,  had  the
    children during the summer holidays.  On that basis, I find without the
    support and care afforded to the children they would be forced to leave
    the  European  Union.  Indeed,  Mr  Clarke  sensibly  agreed  that  the
    Regulations were fulfilled.

10. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision (specifically the  conclusion  at  6.4)  pursuant  to  Section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  (TCE  2007)
    and remake the decision under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007

Order

The appeal of Mr [A] is allowed under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2016


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 25th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
bearing in mind the complexity of the case.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date  25th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

