
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/00884/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 August 2017                      |On 4 September 2017            |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                             FATIMA ABOULHASSANE
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms V Adams (counsel) instructed by Latif solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Buckwell promulgated on 29  December  2016,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 20 October 1987 and is a national  of  Morocco.
On  29  December  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for an EEA residence card.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Buckwell ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 15 June  2017  Judge  Kimnell
gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable that the Judge failed when  dismissing  the  appeal  to
      take  account  of  the  legal  submissions  put  by  the   appellant's
      representative in closing argument. The decision records the fact that
      the  skeleton  argument  was  relied  upon  together  with  a  written
      reconsideration request made to the respondent. Neither figures in the
      Judge's reasons for the decision.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Ms Adams moved the  grounds  of  appeal.  She  had
prepared a 10-page skeleton argument, which she took me  through.  She  told
me that counsel before the First-tier had referred to  a  skeleton  argument
and a letter requesting reconsideration of the respondent's decision,  which
is reproduced from page 127 of the appellant's bundle. She told me that  the
Judge failed to take account of  the  submissions  contained  in  those  two
documents. She conceded that at [42] the Judge records  that  reference  was
made to each document, but told me that  no  consideration  or  analysis  is
given to the submissions contained in those documents.

(b) Ms Adams told me that the appellant was granted a family permit  by  the
respondent before she entered the UK (from Ireland)  on  1  June  2015.  She
told me that because a family permit had been granted an application  for  a
residence card, proceeding on  the  same  basis  and  on  exactly  the  same
evidence, should automatically have been granted. She told me  that  because
a family permit had been granted the Home  Office  accepted  (in  May  2015)
that the centre of the appellant's husband's life  had  transferred  to  the
Republic of Ireland.

(c) Ms Adams referred me to O and B v Minister voor Immigratie (and  others)
Case C-456/12 CJEU Grand Chamber and told me  that  the  only  two  relevant
considerations in this case were  (i)  whether  or  not  there  was  genuine
residence in the Republic of Ireland and (ii) the  strengthening  of  family
life there. She told me that the Judge found that the sponsor had  genuinely
resided in Ireland, but had gone on  to  look  at  whether  or  not  he  had
transferred the centre of his life there and considered the quality  of  the
business that the appellant and her husband started there. She told me  that
those were irrelevant considerations. She told  me  that  what  should  have
been considered was whether or  not  the  appellant  and  her  husband  were
genuinely resident in the Republic of Ireland for three months. She told  me
that the evidence and the Judge's fact-finding  indicated  that  they  were.
She told me that the evidence and the  Judges  findings  of  fact  indicated
that residence in Ireland strengthened their family  life.  On  that  basis,
she told me that the appeal should succeed.

(d) Ms Adams insisted  that  the  purpose  of  moving  to  an  EU  state  is
irrelevant. The question for the Judge was whether or not there was  genuine
residence. As the Judge found that the appellant and her  husband  lived  in
the Republic of Ireland, genuine residence  was  established.  She  told  me
that the Judge had clouded his mind with considering whether  or  not  there
had been an attempt to exploit a loophole in the law. The  consideration  of
abuse of the terms of EEA law, she told me, is irrelevant. Relying  on  SSHD
v Akrich C-109/01 Ms Adams told me that the was no  room  for  consideration
of motive. The Judge accepted that the appellant's  husband  had  started  a
leafleting business.  The  success  or  failure  of  that  business  was  an
irrelevant consideration.

(e) Ms Adams told me that the Judge's decision is tainted by material  error
of law because the Judge has considered irrelevant matters and  because  the
Judge had failed to follow European jurisprudence. She urged me to  set  the
decision aside and substitute  my  own  decision  allowing  the  appellant's
appeal.

6. (a) For the respondent Ms Petterson told me that the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law material or otherwise. She relied on the terms of  the
respondent's rule 24 response. She told me that the Judge had taken  account
of both the skeleton argument and  the  letter  requesting  reconsideration.
She told me that at [42] of the decision the Judge clearly takes account  of
submissions. She told me that between [49] and [50] the  Judge  reaches  his
credibility conclusions, and that throughout the decision the Judge  focuses
on regulation 9 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  She  drew  my
attention  in  particular  to  regulation  9(2)  and  9(3)   of   the   2006
Regulations.

(b) Ms Petterson told me that there is no legal principle that  a  residence
card should be issued because a family permit has been issued.  He  told  me
that the Judge carefully analysed the evidence before  reaching  sustainable
findings of fact. She  told  me  that  the  Judge  had  taken  all  relevant
considerations into account,  so  that  the  decision  does  not  contain  a
material error of law. She urged me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the
decision to stand.




Analysis

7.  In the decision, the Judge refers  to  the  appellant's  letter  to  the
respondent asking for reconsideration and the skeleton  argument  reproduced
at pages 2 and 3 of the appellant's bundle. That is the only  reference  the
Judge makes to the two documents which are said to summarise the law  relied
on by the appellant.

8. The Judge's findings of fact are found  between  [48]  and  [50]  of  the
decision. The Judge's conclusions are contained at  [51]  of  the  decision.
The findings of fact are brief. There is no reasoned analysis of the  impact
of the law on the facts as the Judge finds them to be.

9. The Judge summarises the law  at  [44]  of  the  decision  and  restricts
himself to regulation 9 of the 2006 Regulations. The Judge  does  not  carry
out an analysis of the European jurisprudence relied on  by  the  appellant.
Although the Judge records that there is both  a  skeleton  argument  and  a
detailed letter reproduced at pages 127 to 130 of  the  appellant's  bundle,
inadequate consideration is given to the submissions contained in those  two
documents. No analysis of what is contained in those documents can be  found
in the decision.

10. The lack of analysis of detailed  written  submissions  means  that  the
Judge's conclusions are inadequately reasoned. In MK (duty to give  reasons)
Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it was held  that  (i)  It  was  axiomatic
that  a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for  a  tribunal's
decision. I therefore find that the decision contains a  material  error  of
law, and must set the decision aside.

11. Although I set  the  decision  aside  there  is  sufficient  information
before me to substitute my own decision.

My findings of fact

12. (a)The appellant is a Moroccan citizen. In 2011, she married  Abdul  Al-
Asadi, a British citizen who originates from Iraq.  The  appellant  and  her
husband were married in Morocco. After  marriage,  the  appellant's  husband
returned to the UK. Towards the end of 2014 the  appellant's  husband  moved
to Waterford, Ireland, where he established a leafleting business.

(b) On 4 December 2014, the appellant joined her husband  in  Ireland.  They
have lived  together  as  husband  and  wife  since  then.  The  appellant's
husband's leafleting business was not successful. In the six months  between
December 2014 and June 2015 he did not earn enough to meet expenditure.  The
appellant and her husband decided to return to the UK. On 8  May  2015,  the
appellant applied for an EEA family permit so that she could  accompany  her
husband to the UK.

(c) The appellant and her  husband  now  live  in  Middlesbrough.  When  the
appellant applied for her family  permit  she  was  pregnant.  She  has  now
safely delivered twins.

(d) On 27 July 2015,  the  appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card.  She
supported her application with exactly the  same  information  used  in  her
application for a  family  permit.  On  29  December  2015,  the  respondent
refused the appellant's application for a residence card on the  basis  that
the appellant's husband had not transferred the centre of his  life  to  the
Republic of  Ireland.  The  respondent  also  suggested  that  the  marriage
between the appellant and her husband might not be genuine.

(e) The respondent now accepts  that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  are
parties to a genuine marriage. The respondent  accepts  that  the  appellant
and her husband lived together in the Republic of Ireland for  approximately
6 months. The respondent accepts that  the  appellant's  husband  was  self-
employed throughout his time in the Republic of Ireland.

Discussion

13. Reg 9 of the 2006 Regulations says

      9. (1) If  the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,  these
      Regulations apply to a person who is the family member  of  a  British
      citizen as if the British citizen ("P") were an EEA national.


      (2) The conditions are that-


           (a) P is residing in an EEA State as a worker  or  self-employed
           person or  was  so  residing  before  returning  to  the  United
           Kingdom;
           (b) if the family member of P is P's spouse  or  civil  partner,
           the parties are living together in the EEA State or had  entered
           into the marriage or civil partnership and were living  together
           in the EEA State before the  British  citizen  returned  to  the
           United Kingdom; and
           (c) the centre of P's life has  transferred  to  the  EEA  State
           where P resided as a worker or self-employed person.


      (3) Factors relevant to whether the centre of P's life has transferred
      to another EEA State include-


           (a) the period of residence in the EEA State as a worker or self-
           employed person;
           (b) the location of P's principal residence;
           (c) the degree of integration of P in the EEA State.


      (4) Where these Regulations apply to the family member of P, P  is  to
      be treated as
      holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for  the  purposes  of
      the application of regulation 13 to that family member.

14. In Surinder Singh (1992) ECR I-4265 it was held that, a  national  of  a
member state who has exercised his rights deriving  from  community  law  in
another Member State, is entitled to return to his state of  origin  in  the
company of his spouse who is a national of a non Member country.

15. In Osoro (Surinder Singh) [2015] UKUT  00593  (IAC)  it  was  held  that
(i)   The rationale of the decision in R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal  and
Surinder Singh ex parte SSHD [1992] ECR I-4265 is formed by two  principles,
namely the principle of the efficacious enjoyment of Treaty rights  and  the
principle of non-discrimination; (ii)   These  are  the  two  principles  to
which Tribunals must have particular regard in deciding cases in  which  the
appellant does  not  satisfy  any  of  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations; (iii)       The  co-existence  of  the
decision  in  Surinder  Singh  with  Directive  2004/38/EC  ("the   Citizens
Directive") raises questions which may require  to  be  determined  in  some
appropriate future case.

16. In O v Minister voor Immigratie (and others) Case  C-456/12  CJEU  Grand
Chamber the Dutch EEA nationals lived and worked in the  Netherlands.  Their
non EEA national partners lived  in  Spain  and  Belgium  respectively.  One
couple met in Spain by way of regular holidays and the other in  Belgian  at
weekends. On  a  preliminary  ruling,  it  was  held  that  refusal  by  the
Netherlands, the EEA's nationals' home Member State, of a residence card  to
the non-EEA family  members  could  amount  to  a  breach  of  the  Citizens
Directive, even though the EEA nationals  worked  and  had  their  principal
place of residence  in  the  Netherlands,  if  family  life  was  based  and
conducted in the host Member States - Spain and Belgium -  and  if  the  EEA
national's residence in those host Member States  was  sufficiently  genuine
so as to enable the EEA national to create and  strengthen  family  life  in
those states such that the EEA nationals' "centre of  life"  may  have  been
transferred to the  host  Member  States  -  although  the  court  suggested
regular holidays or weekends  in  the  host  Member  States  alone  may  not
suffice for this purpose.

17. Regulation 9 sets out matters  which  may  be  illustrative  of  genuine
residence. It is not a complete list of determinative factors. In this  case
the respondent's decision is based on the belief that the appellant and  her
husband have entered into a dishonest  scheme  to  give  the  appearance  of
genuine residence in the Republic of Ireland. The basis for that  conclusion
is that the appellant's husband's business there was not successful.

18. On the facts as I find them to  be  the  appellant's  husband  genuinely
resided in the Republic of Ireland. His  residence  there  was  short  lived
because his new business was not financially viable. There  is  no  reliable
evidence  which  supports  the  respondent's  conclusion  that  the   failed
business was part of an overall scheme.  The  weight  of  reliable  evidence
indicates that the appellant and sponsor created a home in the  Republic  of
Ireland. It is accepted by the respondent that they lived  there,  and  that
the appellant's husband was self-employed in the Republic of Ireland.

19.  The  documents  produced  to  support  the  application  included   the
appellant's husband's employment invoices and receipts; Irish bank  accounts
for both  the  appellant  and  her  husband;  an  Irish  tenancy  agreement;
electricity bills incurred in Ireland; copies of the  appellant's  husband's
business website and Irish tax registration letters.

20. The respondent accepted that evidence in May 2015  and  granted  an  EEA
family permit. The application for a residence  card  was  made  just  weeks
later, on 27 July 2015, relying on the same evidence. The  respondent  gives
inadequate reasons for finding that what was viewed as genuine residence  in
May 2015 could no longer be viewed as genuine residence in July 2015.

21. Regulation 9(3) of the 2006 regulations sets  our  factors  relevant  to
establishing whether  or  not  the  appellant's  husband's  centre  of  life
transferred to another EEA state. The weight of reliable evidence  indicates
that the appellant's husband lived in the Republic of  Ireland  as  a  self-
employed person for six months. The evidence indicates that the  appellant's
husband's principal residence during that period  was  in  the  Republic  of
Ireland. The production of bank statements, tax documents  and  evidence  of
pursuit of self-employment provides evidence of the  degree  of  integration
in the Republic of Ireland.

22. It is arguable that six months is not a  lengthy  period.  The  European
jurisprudence considers half of that time as adequate to establish a  period
of genuine residence. Six months can feel  like  a  long  time  when  a  new
business is haemorrhaging money and showing signs of failure. On  the  facts
as I find them to be the appellant meets the requirements  of  regulation  9
of the Immigration (EEA) regulations 2006.

Decision

23. The First-tier Tribunal decision promulgated  on  29  December  2016  is
tainted by material errors of law. The decision is set aside.

24. I substitute my own decision.

25. The appeal is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.



Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 4 September 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

