
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/00037/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|at                                   |On 28 September 2020                 |
|Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |                                     |
|On 17 September 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 PELLUMB [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed of Evolent Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 23 June 1994.

 2. On 27 July 2019, the appellant applied for a residence card  under  reg
    18 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052 as  amended)
    (the "EEA Regulations 2016") on the basis of a  'durable  relationship'
    with Melanie [U], a French citizen.

 3. On 3 August 2019, the appellant married Ms [U] at the Haringey Register
    Office.   Following  the  marriage,  the  appellant's  application  was
    considered as an application for a residence card as the "spouse" of an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 4. On 10 December 2019, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application under reg 18 of the EEA Regulations 2016 on the basis  that
    she was satisfied that the appellant's  marriage  was  "a  marriage  of
    convenience" and so the appellant did not qualify as a  "spouse"  under
    reg 2 of the EEA Regulations 2016.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    listed for an oral hearing.  On 14 January 2020, the appellant's  legal
    representatives  (Evolent  Law)  wrote  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    requesting  that  the  appeal  be  converted  to  a  "paper   hearing".
    Consequently, on  27  January  2020,  Judge  I  Howard  determined  the
    appellant's appeal without a hearing.

 6. In a determination sent on 19 February 2020, Judge Howard dismissed the
    appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016.  He did  so  on  the
    basis that the appellant's marriage was a "marriage of convenience".

 7. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.   On  8  June  2020,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Scott-Baker)   granted   the   appellant
    permission to appeal.

 8. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis,  the  Upper  Tribunal  listed  the
    appellant's appeal for a remote hearing  by  Skype  for  Business.   No
    objection to that was made by either party.  As a  result,  the  appeal
    was listed on 17 September 2020 for  a  remote  hearing  by  Skype  for
    Business.  I was based in the  Cardiff  Civil  Justice  Centre  and  Mr
    Ahmed, who represented the appellant, and Mr Howells,  who  represented
    the Secretary of State, took part in the hearing remotely by Skype  for
    Business.

The Submissions

 9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Ahmed  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal
    which he developed in his oral submissions.

10. First, Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge, having found that there  were
    reasonable grounds to suspect that the appellant's marriage was one  of
    convenience, failed properly to deal with  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant had discharged the evidential burden of raising  an  innocent
    explanation.  He submitted that, in para 13 of the  determination,  the
    judge accepted that the statements of both the appellant and  his  wife
    were "capable of providing an explanation for the differences in  their
    accounts".  However, having found that the explanations were in  effect
    plausible, Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge nevertheless wrongly  went
    on to reach an adverse conclusion.

11. Secondly, Mr Ahmed submitted the judge had been  wrong  to  reject  the
    evidence of the  appellant  and  sponsor  just  because  they  had  not
    attended court and given oral evidence.

12. Thirdly, Mr Ahmed referred to para  17  of  the  judge's  determination
    where he appeared to place the burden of proof on the  appellant  which
    was incorrect.  The burden of proof was upon the respondent.

13. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    judge had not made an error of law.

14. First, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had correctly  set  out  the
    relevant case law, in particular Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 0038 (IAC) and Sadovska & Anor  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 54.  The judge  recognised  that  the  respondent  had  the
    burden  of  proving  whether  the  appellant's  marriage  was  one   of
    "convenience" and, where there was  evidence  justifying  a  reasonable
    suspicion that the marriage had been entered into for  the  purpose  of
    securing residence rights  and  circumventing  immigration  rules,  the
    evidential burden passed to the individual.  Mr Howells submitted  that
    the judge had found, on the basis of differences in the accounts of the
    appellant and his wife, at  para  11,  that  there  was  a  "reasonable
    suspicion" that their marriage was  one  of  convenience.   Mr  Howells
    submitted that the judge was entitled to find, in the  absence  of  the
    appellant and sponsor giving oral evidence, that the appellant had  not
    discharged the evidential burden and the respondent had proved that the
    marriage was one of "convenience".

15. Secondly, whilst Mr Howells  accepted  that  para  17  of  the  judge's
    determination was loosely drafted, all that the  judge  was  doing  was
    stating that the respondent had discharged the burden of proof and that
    he had not accepted the appellant's  "innocent  explanation".   Reading
    the decision in its entirety, the judge had  not  materially  erred  in
    law.

16. In his reply, Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge had specifically  found
    that the explanations of the appellant and sponsor were plausible given
    his view that they were capable of providing  an  explanation  for  the
    differences in their accounts which had given rise  to  the  reasonable
    suspicion.

17. Further, it was wrong  to  simply  rely  upon  the  absence  of  cross-
    examination without considering  the  detailed  evidence  of  both  the
    appellant and sponsor in their witness statements which contained their
    explanations.  By way of example, Mr Ahmed drew my attention to para 25
    of the appellant's witness statement (at page 3 of  the  bundle)  where
    the fact that the appellant's wife had given a mistaken date for  their
    marriage (stating it to be 4 October 2019 rather than 3  October  2019)
    was simply an error, and it was objectively established  that  she  was
    present at that ceremony.  The  explanation  was  not  a  matter  which
    lacked weight simply because of the absence of cross-examination.

Discussion

18. In reaching his decision, Judge Howard set  out  the  correct  approach
    following the decisions of Papajorgji and Sadovska at  paras  8-9.   He
    correctly recognised that the legal burden of proof, on  a  balance  of
    probabilities, was upon the Secretary of State to  establish  that  the
    appellant's marriage was one  of  "convenience".   Further,  the  judge
    correctly recognised that  if  the  evidence  justified  a  "reasonable
    suspicion" that the marriage  was  entered  into  for  the  purpose  of
    evading immigration control, then an evidential burden  passed  to  the
    individual to establish an innocent explanation.

19. In his determination, at paras 11 and 12 the judge concluded  that  the
    evidence did establish a "reasonable suspicion" based upon  differences
    in answers given by the appellant and his  wife  at  their  interviews.
    That conclusion is not challenged.

20. Then, at paras 13-16, the judge dealt with the shift in the  evidential
    burden to the appellant as follows:

         "13. So it is the evidential burden shifts to the appellant to show
             that this is not the case.   I  have  the  materials  set  out
             above.  In their respective statements  they  have  sought  to
             address the issues raised by  the  respondent  directly.   The
             answers they  give  are  certainly  capable  of  providing  an
             explanation for the differences in their accounts.

         14.  In addition to the statements I have a wealth of material that
             establishes that they  are  known  to  each  other,  socialise
             together and with others, share  the  same  accommodation  and
             underwent a formal marriage.  These are all objectively proven
             facts.  What this material cannot do is  answer  the  question
             what is the nature of the relationship.

         15.  Answering questions as a paper  exercise  and  doing  so  when
             being forensically challenged in cross-examination are however
             two quite different things, as the interview showed.  When the
             appellant instructed Evolent Law to ask  that  the  appeal  be
             dealt with on the papers the explanation  given  was  lack  of
             funds.  This explanation in no way prevents the appellant  and
             his wife from attending the  hearing in person and  without  a
             representative as many do in this jurisdiction.

         16.  Choosing not to at all is not a decision for which I criticise
             the appellant, however it has deprived me of  the  opportunity
             of  seeing  them  answer  my  questions  and  those   of   the
             respondent's  representative  and  how  they   interact   more
             generally".

21. Having said that, the judge reached his conclusion in para  17  of  his
    determination in the following terms:

         "17. The burden of proof is on the appellant and in the absence  of
             live evidence on these intensely personal  matters  I  am  not
             satisfied  he  has  discharged  that  burden  in  respect   of
             Regulation 2".

22. Despite Mr Howells' invitation, it is impossible, in  my  judgment,  to
    read para 17 as anything  other  than  a  misdirection  by  the  judge.
    There, the judge clearly placed the burden of proof upon the appellant.
     Despite, therefore, his careful citation of the relevant case  law  at
    paras 8-9 of  his  determination,  and  stating  that  it  is  for  the
    respondent to establish that the appellant's marriage is a marriage  of
    convenience, the judge reached a finding on the application of reg 2 on
    the erroneous basis that he is not satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    discharged the burden of proof required - when there is no such  burden
    of proof.  I see no proper basis upon which it can  be  concluded  that
    the judge has simply made a 'slip' in para 17.  It is a fundamental and
    material error of law to have placed the legal burden of proof upon the
    appellant.

23. In any event, in reaching that finding, I am satisfied that  the  judge
    erred in law in his approach to the evidence even if he  correctly  had
    in mind that the burden of proof was upon the respondent.

24. Having found that a "reasonable suspicion" arose from the discrepancies
    or differences in the evidence of the appellant and sponsor about their
    personal circumstances, the judge was required to consider whether  the
    appellant had shown an explanation  which  refuted  a  conclusion  that
    would otherwise follow from the "reasonable suspicion"  having  arisen.
    In para 13 of his determination, the judge stated that the explanations
    given by the appellant and his wife - which he does not set out in  his
    determination - are "certainly capable of providing an explanation  for
    the differences in their accounts".  Then, in para 14  he  went  on  to
    cite a number of matters, including the conduct of  the  appellant  and
    his wife which, at least in some instances, offered  some  support  for
    their marriage being a genuine one which was  not  contracted  for  the
    purpose of circumventing immigration control.

25. Having found the explanations to be "certainly capable" of refuting the
    reasonable suspicion, given the judge's ultimate decision, he must have
    concluded that those explanations were not to be accepted.  Mr  Howells
    submitted that he had implicitly done so.  That, in my  view,  must  be
    correct since the judge did not explicitly reject the explanations and,
    if he had accepted them, he would have  reached  a  different  ultimate
    conclusion about the nature of the appellant's marriage.

26. Consequently, in order to discern the judge's reasons for his  ultimate
    finding in para 17, it is necessary to look at paras 15 and 16.   Those
    paragraphs refer to the fact that the evidence  of  the  appellant  and
    sponsor has not been subject to cross-examination  because  the  appeal
    was determined without a hearing.  At no point does the judge say  that
    because of that, he rejects their explanations.   However,  as  I  have
    already said and Mr Howells submitted, he must have implicitly done  so
    on that basis.  He offered no other reason  for  his  ultimate  adverse
    finding that the appellant's marriage is one of convenience.

27. While, of course, the weight that should be given to  evidence  can  be
    affected by whether or not that evidence has  been  given  orally  and,
    therefore, if disputed  has  been  the  subject  of  cross-examination.
    Testing evidence  by  cross-examination  is  a  key  feature  of  civil
    litigation where evidence is in dispute.  In its absence, a  judge  may
    be entitled to give less weight to evidence which  the  opposing  party
    has been unable to test forensically.  That,  however,  does  not  mean
    that the judge is not required  to  analyse  the  evidence  given,  for
    example, in witness statements.   It  may  be  that  that  evidence  is
    intrinsically worthy of credit even if the witness has not been subject
    to cross-examination.  It is unlikely that it can  be  simply  rejected
    out of hand  because  the  evidence  has  not  been  tested  in  cross-
    examination. All will depend upon the content of the evidence.

28. In this case, the judge did not analyse the evidence of  the  appellant
    and his wife given in their  respective  statements.   Indeed,  without
    reading those statements, the reader of  the  determination  is  wholly
    unaware of what their evidence (and explanations) were.

29. However, without  providing  any  detail  at  all,  the  judge  himself
    accepted in para  13  that  the  evidence  was  "certainly  capable  of
    providing an explanation for the differences in their  accounts".   One
    can ask the question: if their evidence  was  capable  of  having  that
    effect (which would mean that the respondent had not  established  that
    the marriage was one of convenience) why was it in  fact  incapable  of
    doing so?  It can only be because the judge determined that  it  should
    be given so little (or no) weight because the  evidence  had  not  been
    tested in cross-examination.

30. The error that the judge fell into in this appeal was  not  to  analyse
    the written evidence of the appellant and his wife  before  concluding,
    albeit implicitly, that he considered  that  evidence  should  have  so
    little weight placed upon it that it could not discharge the evidential
    burden upon the appellant of establishing innocent explanations for the
    differences in their evidence.  The absence  of  cross-examination  did
    not, in itself, justify an otherwise unreasoned  blanket  rejection  of
    the evidence  of  both  the  appellant  and  his  wife.   That  was  an
    inadequate reason for reaching such a conclusion without analysing  the
    content of the evidence and determining, despite the absence of  cross-
    examination, whether or not it was worthy of credit.

31. For these reasons, therefore, the judge erred in law in dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016.

Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016 involved the making of  an  error
    of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

33. Both representatives invited me, if I was satisfied that the judge  had
    erred in law, to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de
    novo rehearing.  I agree that is the proper  disposal  of  the  appeal.
    Having regard to the extent and nature  of  fact-finding  required  and
    para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the appeal is to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a
    judge other than Judge I Howard.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           22 September 2020


