
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/00639/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 September 2019                    |On 30 September 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                              mrs Kaneez begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Shey
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devlin promulgated on 6  February  2019  dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 30 November
    2017  to  refuse  her  application  for  an  EEA  family  permit.   The
    application was for entry to the UK as the  mother-in-law  of  Muhammad
    Ashik Khan, a Spanish national  married  to  the  appellant's  daughter
    Tahira Parveen.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb granted  permission  to
    appeal on 16 November 2019.  In summary, the grounds, dated 28 February
    2019, which were not in the file but which have now  been  provided  to
    me, complain that the judge erred in:

      1) requiring the 70-year-old applicant to obtain further  evidence  in
         Pakistan which was not possible;

      2) not taking into account that the interpreter could  not  understand
         the judge's questions and not accepting that the  sponsor  did  his
         best to explain why the appellant was not supported by her sons  in
         Spain; and

      3) finding the appellant and the sponsor were not related  as  claimed
         when this had been accepted and was not an issue in the appeal.

 2. With respect to Judge Gibb,  there  are  no  merits  in  any  of  these
    grounds. For the following reasons I find no error of law in the making
    of the decision sufficient to require the decision to be set aside.




 3. In relation to the interpreter, Judge Gibb pointed out that that ground
    would require evidence that there were indeed interpreter difficulties.
     No such evidence has been produced to the Tribunal.  All that Mr  Shey
    could rely upon were various statements in the decision, for example at
    [74], where the judge said he asked the sponsor  again  and  again  and
    again in different ways to help him  understand  the  reasons  why  the
    appellant's sons in Spain would not support her.  That was not  because
    the sponsor was having difficulties understanding the judge, or because
    there were difficulties with the interpreter.  As the  judge  explained
    at [74], the reason he asked again, again and again was because it  was
    perfectly clear that the  sponsor  was  engaging  in  prevarication  or
    verbal fencing.  Other examples have been set out  by  the  judge  from
    [66] onwards, for example at  [67]  the  judge  said  he  repeated  the
    question and  either  questions  were  not  answered  or  not  directly
    answered.  It took some time, for example,  to  establish  whether  the
    sponsor had any extended family in Pakistan.  None of those matters, or
    anything else relied upon by Mr Shey, demonstrates any difficulty  with
    the interpreter.




 4. The third ground of appeal  asserts  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were not related as claimed.  This is derived
    from paragraph 6 of the grounds:

         "The  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  was
         accepted.  The only issue in the appeal was evidence of dependency,
         whether the appellant is dependent on her EEA sponsor or not.   The
         sponsor provided documentary evidence clearly proving the appellant
         had been a dependant on  the  sponsor,  the  honourable  judge  has
         clearly erred while dealing with EEA Regulations."

    I am not sure if that is an assertion that the  judge  went  beyond  an
    acceptance or something accepted by the  respondent.  However,  in  any
    event, nowhere in the decision does the judge state that  he  does  not
    accept the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor, or  that
    it was not as claimed.  I have been referred to the  very  end  of  the
    decision at [86] where the judge found that the appellant did not  meet
    the definition of a family member in Regulation  7(1)(c)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.  That is not a finding that the sponsor and the  appellant
    are not related as claimed; it merely means that the judge  found  that
    the respondent could not meet the definition of  family  member  within
    the Regulations which,  as  is  common  ground,  requires  evidence  of
    dependency.  So, there is no merit in that ground either.  Neither do I
    find any merit in the ground, or any error in the decision, in relation
    to the assertion that  the  judge  required  the  appellant  to  obtain
    further evidence in Pakistan which was not possible.  That is not found
    in the decision and I note that Mr Shey did  not  pursue  that  in  his
    submissions before me.

 5. The judge had to deal with this case  at  an  oral  hearing  where  the
    appellant was represented by Ms  Hashmi  but  the  respondent  was  not
    represented; it is not clear why. However, in  the  circumstances,  the
    judge was entitled to put questions to the appellant to try to  clarify
    the factual situation. Clearly, the appellant was reluctant to answer a
    straight question with a straight answer. There  is  nothing  in  those
    questions that is improper or untoward and, as has been pointed out  in
    the grant of permission, no ground of appeal or ground  of  application
    for permission makes any objection to  the  judges  entering  into  the
    arena or relying on matters that the  appellant's  representatives  did
    not have a chance  to  respond  to.   For  his  part,  Mr  Shey's  sole
    submission related to alleged difficulties in the sponsor understanding
    the judge's questions.  For the reasons I have set out above, there  is
    no merit in that unsupported assertion, and I do not accept it.

 6. In the circumstances, I find no error of  law  in  the  making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law such as to require the decision to be set
    aside.

    I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal remains dismissed

    No anonymity direction is made.
     [pic]
                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                       Dated                 27 September 2019


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.







                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 27 September 2019
