
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00182/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 April 2019                     |On 05 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                               Aisabu Jamalcan
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Mahmud, Counsel, instructed by Ishwar
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is the mother of the sponsor and appeals against the First-
tier Tribunal decision dismissing her appeal against the respondent's
decision on 29 November 2017, maintained following administrative review on
9 March 2018, to refuse her application for an EEA residence card pursuant
to Regulation 7(1)(c) of the EEA Regulations 2016.

The sponsor and his siblings, all of whom are in the United Kingdom
exercising treaty rights, are all Portuguese citizens, the sponsor having
become a Portuguese citizen in 2014 and moved here almost immediately.  The
sponsor's evidence to the First-tier Tribunal was that he had been
supporting his mother emotionally and financially since he was 14 years old
in 1997 when his father died and that until he moved to the United Kingdom
he and his siblings had continued to live in his mother's and father's
family home, where she still lives.

At paragraph 10 of the decision the judge found the sponsor to be "an open
witness, who had a genuine wish for the appellant to join him and his
siblings in the United Kingdom".  Nowhere in the decision does the judge
find that there is any hint of lack of credibility in the evidence of the
sponsor.  At paragraph 13 the judge accepted that the sponsor had provided
financial assistance to the appellant since he arrived in the United
Kingdom in 2014 and at paragraph 16 she accepted that there was documentary
evidence of that financial assistance over a number of years.

At paragraph 17 the judge accepted that the sponsor had given evidence that
the appellant had been financially dependent on him for over twenty years
and at paragraph 18 that he sent money to pay for food, household expenses
and medical bills and, at paragraph 22, additional money if the appellant
needed to attend family weddings and buy clothes and presents.  It is not
suggested anywhere in the First-tier Tribunal decision or indeed in the
application to the Entry Clearance Officer that the appellant has ever been
employed or that she has any financial resources of her own.

At paragraph 25, having set out the dependency test at paragraph 24, the
judge says this:

"25. However, having given careful consideration to all of the evidence and
materials before me in this appeal and to the submissions I find that the
appellant has not established to the required standard that she requires
material support for essential needs and that her dependency on the sponsor
is genuine."

At paragraph 26 the judge goes on to deal briefly with Regulation 8 but, in
context, we are not concerned with Regulation 8 in this judgment.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb granted permission to appeal on 20 November
2018, specifically because:

         "3.  At [10] the judge arguably appeared to find the sponsor to be
         a reliable witness, and found that he sent regular sums to the
         appellant; the judge's Record of Proceedings records him as having
         said that his mother relied on him for all her needs and had no
         other income.  It is therefore arguable that the findings at [25]
         were not open to the judge on the evidence, or were not adequately
         reasoned."

We have invited Ms Isherwood to seek to persuade us that this decision can
be sustained but, having looked at it again this morning in court, she has,
very properly, said that she accepts that the reasoning in the decision
cannot be sustained.

We therefore set aside this decision and remake it on the basis of the
facts found by allowing the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision.

We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     1 July 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


