
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00602/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2020                   |On 26 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                           Afolashade Semiat Ajayi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Amgbah, Legal Representative, UK Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, is  the  former  wife  of  an  EEA
    national (a citizen of Bulgaria).

 2. On 11 November 2013 the appellant was issued with a residence  card  as
    the family member of her (then) husband.

 3. On 5 April 2016 the appellant and her former husband divorced.

 4. On 12 November 2018 the appellant applied  for  a  permanent  residence
    card to confirm she is the former family member of an EEA national  who
    has retained a right  of  residence  under  Regulation  10(5)  of   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
    Regulations").

 5. The application was refused.  The reason it was refused is  that,  when
    making her application, the appellant submitted  her  former  husband's
    Bulgarian ID card, in accordance with  Regulation  21(5)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.  However, information held by the respondent  showed  that
    the ID card she submitted had  been  reported  lost  or  stolen  on  23
    November 2015. The application was refused on  this  basis  only.   The
    respondent's refusal letter of 17 January 2019 stated:

         "Because your application falls for refusal on  this  basis  [under
         Regulation 21(5)], no further consideration has been given  to  any
         other evidence that you  may  have  supplied  in  support  of  your
         application.  If you are able  to  supply  the  necessary  identity
         document,  you  may  wish  to  submit  a  further  application  for
         consideration."

 6. The appellant applied to the First-tier Tribunal where her  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cohen  ("the  judge").  In  a
    decision promulgated on 15 August 2019 the judge dismissed her  appeal.
    The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7.  The  appellant's  explanation  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for
    submitting an invalid identity card to  the  respondent  was  that  her
    former husband had, whilst they were still  married,  reported  his  ID
    card as stolen but had then  found  it.  She  stated  that  her  former
    husband had, following the  divorce,  agreed  to  assist  her  and  had
    provided  her  with  the  ID  card  that  she  submitted  but  that  he
    subsequently refused to assist her by providing  his  new  ID  card  or
    passport, or to have any contact with her.

 8. The judge found the appellant's evidence to not be credible.  He stated
    that she had not provided any reasonable  explanation  as  to  why  her
    former husband was willing to assist her in  November  2018  (when  she
    made the application) but not a few months later; and that she had  not
    adequately explained the efforts she had made to obtain his assistance.
     The judge stated that the appellant gave vague evidence and  described
    her as "an unconvincing and unimpressive witness".

 9. The appellant argued in the First-tier  Tribunal  that,  following  the
    Upper Tribunal decision in Rehman (EEA  Regulations  2016  -  specified
    evidence) [2019] UKUT 000195 (IAC), it was not  necessary  for  her  to
    provide her former husband's identification document, as the respondent
    had already accepted that she had been married  to  him  when  she  was
    previously issued with a residence card.  The  judge  found  that  this
    appeal was distinguishable from Rehman.  At paragraph 19 he stated:

         "I note the case law in respect of Rehman above.   I  however  find
         that the extant case can be distinguished  from  the  circumstances
         prevailing in that case.  In Rehman the  appellant  met  all  other
         requirements of the Regulations which  has  not  been  demonstrated
         before me particularly noting that I have not  been  provided  with
         any evidence of the sponsor exercising treaty rights in the  UK  at
         the date of  commencement  of  divorce  proceedings  or  otherwise.
         Secondly, in Rehman the appellant did not submit any identity  card
         for his former spouse which had been  recorded  as  being  lost  or
         stolen.  I find that the appellant's actions in doing  so  in  this
         case are damaging to her credibility and have not  been  adequately
         explained."

10. The judge concluded at paragraph 21:

         "I find that the appellant has failed to discharge  the  burden  of
         proof to indicate that the identity document for the sponsor relied
         upon is genuine and I find that the  appellant  therefore  has  not
         established that she is the former family member of an EEA national
         who exercised  treaty  rights  in  the  UK  and  I  find  that  the
         application under the Regulations is bound to fail on this basis."

Grounds of Appeal

11. The appellant advanced four grounds of appeal.

12. The first ground  submits  that  the  decision  was  inconsistent  with
    Rehman, where it was found that in circumstances such  as  these  there
    was no necessity to provide an identity document for a former spouse.

13. The second ground  of  appeal  submits  that  the  appellant  submitted
    evidence of her former husband exercising treaty rights in the  UK  for
    the last five years to the respondent and therefore she met all of  the
    requirements of the 2016 Regulations. It is argued that the  fact  that
    these were not produced  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  either  the
    appellant or the respondent was sufficient for  the  judge  to  realise
    that this was  not  an  issue  before  him  and  therefore  was  not  a
    sustainable basis to refuse the appeal.

14. The third ground of appeal  submits  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had not  explained  why  her  former  husband  stopped  being
    willing to assist her without considering her evidence  on  this  issue
    concerning her former husband refusing to have contact with  her  since
    he began cohabiting with a new partner.

15. The fourth ground of appeal submits that the judge erred by failing  to
    have proper regard to the attempts the appellant  made  to  obtain  the
    identification document from her former partner.

Analysis

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. However, the error was not material and therefore  I
    have not set aside the decision.

17. The error in the decision is that the judge did  not  correctly  follow
    Rehman when considering the implications of the  appellant  failing  to
    provide with her application a valid identity document for  her  former
    husband.

18. Rehman is  a  recent  Upper  Tribunal  decision  which  considered  the
    consistency of regulation 21(5)  of  the  2016  Regulations  (requiring
    submission of  a  former  partner's  ID  document)  with  EU  law.  The
    appellant in Rehman (like the appellant in this appeal) had been issued
    with a residence card as a family member of an EEA  national  while  he
    was still married. The Upper Tribunal Judge stated at para. 36:

          "If there was any doubt that the appellant had been married to  an
         EEA national as claimed the respondent could lawfully  require  the
         production of his former wife's passport, but this was not an issue
         in this case.  The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
         married to an EEA national when he issued  the  previous  residence
         card.  Indeed, the respondent accepted that the appellant  met  the
         requirements of Regulation  10(5).   As  such,  the  appellant  had
         already provided the necessary proof  to  establish  his  right  of
         residence.  A blanket  application  of  Regulation  21(5),  without
         proper analysis  of  what  proof  was  required  to  establish  the
         relevant right of residence, cannot be used as a reason for refusal
         if the appellant was not in fact required  to  produce  his  former
         spouse's EEA passport to show that  he  had  retained  a  right  of
         residence.  If he was not required to produce his  former  spouse's
         passport, nor could he be required to provide  an  explanation  for
         his failure to produce it under Regulation 42."

19. Mr Amgbah argued that it is plain from Rehman that  the  appellant  did
    not need to produce her former partner's identity  card  and  therefore
    the fact that she provided an  out-of-date  card  was  irrelevant.   Ms
    Jones argued that the case is distinguishable from  Rehman  because  in
    this appeal, unlike in Rehman, the appellant had submitted  an  invalid
    card.

20. I agree with Mr Amgbah.  On 11 November 2013 the respondent issued  the
    appellant with a residence card as a family member of  an  EEA  citizen
    exercising his right of free movement.  At  that  time,  the  appellant
    would have been required to produce her (then) husband's identification
    document. The conclusion reached in Rehman, which was  binding  on  the
    First-Tier Tribunal, is that in such circumstances it is not  necessary
    for an appellant to  submit  an  identity  document  for  their  former
    spouse. The judge therefore fell into error by dismissing the appeal on
    the basis of non-compliance with Regulation 21(5).

21. However, the error was not material because it was not  sufficient  for
    the appellant to show that Regulation 21(5) did not need to be complied
    with. She also needed to establish that she satisfied the conditions of
    regulation 10(5), which, inter alia, require her  to  demonstrate  that
    her former husband was a qualified person exercising Treaty  rights  up
    until  the  date  of  the  commencement  of  divorce  proceedings.  See
    Baigazieva v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ
    1088.

22. The respondent did not concede that the appellant's former husband  was
    exercising Treaty rights. This is made clear in the part of the refusal
    letter quoted above at paragraph 5. In the absence of a  concession  by
    the respondent it fell to the appellant to prove her case. However, she
    did not do so because evidence of her former husband exercising  Treaty
    rights was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal. This was correctly
    noted by the judge at paragraph 19 where he stated  that  he  had  "not
    been provided with any evidence of the sponsor exercising treaty rights
    in the UK".

23. Mr Amgbah argued that it was sufficient that the appellant had provided
    evidence of  her  former  husband's  employer  to  the  respondent.  He
    submitted that the judge was aware the evidence existed  on  the  basis
    that within the bundle of documents before the First-tier Tribunal  was
    the appellant's application form and cover letter  to  the  respondent,
    both of which referred to evidence of her former  husband's  employment
    being  enclosed.   However,  as  noted  by  Ms  Jones,  although  these
    documents indicate that evidence of the former husband's employment was
    sent to the respondent, that is not a substitute for the judge being  a
    position to determine for himself whether the evidence established that
    he was in fact exercising  Treaty  rights  as  required  by  Regulation
    10(5). The evidence needed to be put before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    but it was not.

24. Accordingly, even though it was an  error  of  law  for  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appeal because of non-compliance with Regulation 21(5), the
    error did not effect the outcome of the  appeal  because  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal did not establish that the conditions in
    Regulation 10(5) were satisfied.

Decision

25. The appeal is dismissed.

26. The decision involved the making  of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.
    However, in accordance with Section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 (pursuant to which I may - but need not -  set
    aside the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal where an error of law has
    been made) I do not set aside the decision because the error of law was
    not material to the outcome.

27. No anonymity direction is made.


|                                      |                               |
|Signed                                |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated: 13 February 2020        |

