
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00082/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17th March 2017                     |On 12th June 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ISLAMABAD)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR TAHIR MEHMOOD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Meyler promulgated on 4th May  2016.   The
    appellant before me is the Entry Clearance Officer (Islamabad) and  the
    respondent to this appeal, is Mr Tahir Mehmood.  However, for  ease  of
    reference, in the course of this decision I shall  adopt  the  parties'
    status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").   I  shall  in
    this decision, refer to Mr Mehmood as the appellant, and the  Secretary
    of  State  as  the  respondent.   Although  the   appellant   was   not
    represented, his wife and sponsor, Suriya Jan did appear before me.


 2. In her decision promulgated on 4th May 2016, FtT Judge Meyler concluded
    that the appellant's sponsor is not a national of  another  EEA  member
    state, was never married to an EEA national and had never exercised  EU
    Treaty rights.  She concluded that the sponsor and  appellant  have  no
    rights arising out of EU law but went on to conclude that the  decision
    to refuse the appellant entry to the UK, amounts to a  disproportionate
    lack of respect for the rights of all those affected  by  the  decision
    under Article 8 of the European Convention.


 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  FtT  Judge
    Hodgkinson on 14th September 2016.  At the conclusion  of  the  hearing
    before me, I announced that I agreed with the respondent that there was
    a material error of law in the decision of FtT Judge  Meyler  and  that
    having considered the submissions made by the parties, I  would  remake
    the decision, dismissing the appeal.  I said  that  I  would  give  the
    reasons for my decision in writing. This I now do.


 4. The underlying decision that was the subject of the appeal  before  the
    FtT was the decision of the respondent dated 14th May  2015  to  refuse
    the appellant's application for an EEA family permit. The appellant had
    applied for an EEA family permit to join his sponsor,  Suriya  Jan  and
    Mohammed Musa Tahir in the UK as a spouse and carer respectively.   The
    application was considered by the respondent under Regulations 9, 11(5)
    and 12(2) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.




 5. The appellant was not represented at the hearing before the  FtT.   The
    sponsor did attend and she gave evidence  in  English.   At  paragraphs
    [11] and [12], the Judge states:


         "11. I asked the sponsor a number of questions which led me to  the
         conclusion that she was not a national of another EEA member state,
         was never married to an EEA national and  had  never  exercised  EU
         Treaty rights. The EEA form completed was a simple mistake  on  the
         part of the  appellant.  The  appellant  had  previously  used  the
         correct form and paid the correct fee on 9 March 2015 when her  son
         was  ill  but  his  application  had  been  refused.  The   current
         application was submitted on 1 May 2015.


 6. Having concluded at paragraph [12] of her decision that the sponsor and
    appellant have no rights arising out of EU law, the Judge directed that
    she could only determine the appeal under Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on  Human  Rights  as  both  the  application  and  decision
    postdate 6th April 2015.


 7. The Judge's assessment of the  Article  8  claim  is  to  be  found  at
    paragraphs [24] to [41] of her decision.  The Judge did  not  refer  to
    the requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or the  extent
    to which, if any, the requirements of  the  rules  could  not  be  met.
    Without having considered the requirements of  the  immigration  rules,
    the Judge found, at [24], that there is a gap  between  the  rules  and
    Article 8 and that there are relevant, weighty circumstances  that  are
    not fully provided for within the rules, which take this  case  outside
    the class of cases which the rules properly provide for.  Having  taken
    all matters into account, the Judge concluded that it  is  unreasonable
    or disproportionate to ask the sponsor to move to Pakistan with all  or
    some of her children, in order to continue her  family  life  with  the
    appellant.  The appeal was therefore allowed.


 8. The respondent submits the Judge materially erred in  law  by  allowing
    the appellant's appeal outside the immigration rules and on  Article  8
    grounds, when his application was in fact an application for  a  family
    permit under Regulation 12 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The respondent relies on the Tribunal's decision  in
    SZ (Applicable Immigration Rules) Bangladesh [2007] UKAIT  00037 which
    held that there is no general duty on the Tribunal to consider  whether
    a claimant's case might have succeeded on a different basis  from  that
    on which the application was made.


 9. Mr Mills submits the  application  made  by  the  appellant  here,  was
    clearly an application made  under  the  EEA  Regulations.  The  method
    adopted - the making of an EEA application rather than  an  application
    for leave to enter the UK as a spouse, would  enable  an  applicant  to
    make an application without payment of the relevant  fee,  and  without
    giving the respondent any proper opportunity of considering whether the
    requirements of the immigration rules are in fact met.  Whether or  not
    the rules are met, and if they are not met, the reasons  why  they  are
    not met, is also relevant to any assessment of the Article 8 claim.  He
    submits that the applicant made an application on the wrong basis,  and
    the proper approach to such cases, as noted in SZ is  that  the  appeal
    should be dismissed, and the appellant should make a fresh  application
    under the rules.


10.  Mrs Jan accepts that the appellant did not make the application  under
    the  immigration  rules  but  made  an  application   under   the   EEA
    Regulations.  She submits that at the time the  application  was  made,
    they did not realise the error, and  she  accepted  that  there  is  no
    reason why an application for entry  clearance  under  the  immigration
    rules, with all the supporting evidence, cannot be made.


11. In SZ, the Tribunal held that in the generality of cases,  it  will  be
    obvious from the application which immigration rule (or rules) must  be
    considered and as a result, the Tribunal's scope  of  enquiry  will  be
    circumscribed  and  focussed  upon  a  clearly  applicable  rule.   The
    Tribunal recognised that there could be situations where  there  is  an
    obvious link or connection between one rule and another, and  therefore
    that will mean that there is an obligation on the Tribunal to  consider
    and apply another rule if fairness requires it to do so.  However,  the
    appellant here, did not fail to  apply  under  the  correct  rule.   He
    wished to come to the UK to join  his  sponsor  under  the  immigration
    rules, but he made  an  application  for  an  EEA  family  permit.  The
    appellant made an application that, as the Judge correctly  noted,  was
    bound to fail.


12.  In  my  judgment,  the  appeal  before  the  FtT  was  limited  to   a
    consideration of whether the appellant was  able  to  satisfy  the  EEA
    Regulations.   As is clear from the decision  of  the  FtT,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer made the only decision which was open to him. It  was
    clearly lawful. The proper course is for  the  appellant  to  make  the
    correct application so that the respondent can properly decide  whether
    the appellant is able to meet the requirements of the immigration rules
    by reference to Appendix FM, and if not, whether it is appropriate  for
    the appellant to be granted leave  to  enter  outside  the  immigration
    rules, on Article 8 grounds.


13. Crucially, the appellant has a  remedy  for  his  present  difficulties
    under the Immigration Rules. He simply has to make an application under
    the relevant rules. In my judgment, where there is a clear procedure to
    be followed, and an appellant has chosen not to follow it, it  is  very
    hard to envisage circumstances in which it would  be  proportionate  to
    allow the Immigration Rules to be circumvented, by relying  on  Article
    8.


14. The decision of the FtT  contains  a  material  error  of  law  and  is
    therefore set aside.  I remake the decision, dismissing the appeal.


Notice of Decision


15. The decision of the FtT contains a material error of  law  and  is  set
    aside.


16. I remake the decision, dismissing the appeal.


17. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date     8th June 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have set aside the decision of the FtT and dismissed the  appeal,  and  so
there can be no fee award.


Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

