
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00227/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice      |Oral Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 27 June 2017                           |On 17 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                           Mr MD MOZAMMIL HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F. Shaw instructed by Hamlet Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION


 1. The appellant appealed against the determination of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Shepherd promulgated on 18 April 2017 in which she made a finding
    that the appeal should be dismissed for want of jurisdiction.  She  did
    so on the basis that the case fell within the decision of  Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 411.

 2. It is accepted that this ruling has no relevance to  the  circumstances
    of the present case.

 3. The applicant  had  made  an  application  in  2015  for  a  derivative
    residence  card  based  on  the  relationship  that  he  had  with  his
    grandmother and on the basis that he was her  principal  carer  in  the
    United Kingdom.  A decision was made on 23 December  2015  refusing  to
    issue a derivative residence card.  These provisions  arise  under  the
    general umbrella of the principles outlined in the  case  of  Zambrano.
    It is accepted that in the case of  a  derivative  residence  card  the
    principles of Sala do not apply and accordingly the judge was wrong  in
    saying that there was no jurisdiction.  There is jurisdiction in a case
    such as this and it was for the judge to determine whether or  not  the
    appellant was entitled to a derivate residence card in accordance  with
    the provisions of Regulation 15A of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

 4. In those circumstances the sensible course agreed by the parties is for
    me to find that there was an error of law and to remit the case to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for determination of the appeal against the refusal
    of the derivative residence card.

I direct that the appeal is remitted for hearing afresh  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal and

     (i) The witness statements  provided  in  support  of  the  appellant's
claim should be filed and served within  28  days  from  the  date  of  this
hearing.

     (ii)     Up-to-date medical evidence should be filed and served  within
42 days from the date of this hearing.

     (iii)    An interpreter in Sylheti is required.

I suggest that the  hearing  should  take  place  at  Taylor  House  with  a
suggested hearing date marked as First Available Date after 49 days.








                                                     Date:    13 July 2017


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

