
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00667/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                    IMMIGRATION OFFICER, Aberdeen Airport
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MARIUS [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above,  but  the  rest  of  this  decision
    refers to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania, born on 7 December 1985.

 3. The appellant arrived at Aberdeen airport on 5 August 2015  and  sought
    admission to the UK under European Community law,  in  accordance  with
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006.   The
    Immigration Officer served him with a notice stating that on  18  March
    2010 he had been convicted of drugs offences in Lithuania for which  he
    received a sentence of 2 years and 3 months imprisonment.  "Whilst  you
    have a partner in the UK  I  am  satisfied  that  your  crimes  are  of
    sufficient seriousness that refusal of admission  is  justified  ...  I
    refuse admission ... under regulations 19 and 21 ...".

 4. The appellant was removed in accordance with directions on the same day
    to Lithuania.

 5. The appellant  appealed  to  the  first-tier  tribunal,  stating  these
    grounds, "I can't be in my country because my wife ...  is  in  the  UK
    (Peterhead) and we have a life there and she is pregnant now (2 months)
    we were dreaming to live in the UK all our  life.  We  have  one  child
    (born 8 November 2011) ... to be going to school in Peterhead. If I  am
    not able to live in the UK we will have to divorce ... Wife and I  have
    jobs in Peterhead and in Lithuania I don't have life,  even  my  father
    lives in Peterhead. I made mistakes ... but I was in jail for that from
    9 April 2010 to 9 July 2012."

 6. In a "refusal report" dated 18 September 2015 the  immigration  officer
    provides some further detail. Home  Office  checks  revealed  that  the
    appellant had been charged with "unlawful  possession  of  narcotic  or
    psychotropic substance for the  purposes  of  distribution  on  4  June
    2009". He was sentenced to years and 3 months imprisonment on 18  March
    2010 and released on 9 July 2012.  He  had  been  travelling  with  his
    partner and her son (both Lithuanian citizens). He stated at  interview
    that on release from prison he travelled to the UK  in  September  2012
    with his partner and child to  start  a  new  life,  and  had  been  in
    continuous employment in Peterhead.  His  partner  also  worked.  While
    living in the UK he had been charged and served with  a  fixed  penalty
    notice for breach of the peace (10th February 2014) and  cautioned  for
    domestic assault (10th February 2015). He also said at  interview  that
    he been fined for not wearing a seatbelt and for parking in  a  council
    permit parking area.

 7. First-tier tribunal judge Handley dealt with the case "on the  papers",
    as requested by the appellant,  and  allowed  his  appeal  by  decision
    promulgated on 18 March 2016.

 8. At paragraph 13 the judge said that he had  limited  information  about
    the offence in Lithuania, and  went  on  "...  the  evidence  does  not
    suggest that it was a particularly serious crime (as opposed to  crimes
    such as rape, murder or drug smuggling). The evidence does not  suggest
    that he represents a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat to
    one of the fundamental interests of society".

 9. The judge then related matters since the appellant arrived in Scotland.
    At paragraph 15 he took  account  of  the  fact  that  the  offence  in
    Lithuania was committed some time ago, and the appellant's  explanation
    that he came to the UK to create a future here, that he has had a child
    and his wife is expecting another. "It is not disputed that he and  his
    wife have been employment in the UK. I no  reason  to  doubt  that  the
    appellant has a family life in the UK with his wife and child  and  has
    been making efforts to support them. I conclude that the appellant does
    not represent a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat to  the
    public of the UK. I am satisfied that removal was not justified on  the
    grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health   in
    accordance  with  regulation  21.  I  allow  this  appeal   under   the
    regulations".

10. The respondent's grounds of appeal to the upper tribunal state that the
    judge's conclusion that the appellant's offence was not a  particularly
    serious  crime  "...  is  flawed  and  not  adequately  or   rationally
    reasoned... The fact that the appellant's offence does not come  within
    the category stated by the judge cannot mean that the offence  was  not
    particularly serious... The judge wrongly belittled the gravity of  the
    appellant's  crime  in  Lithuania  and  this   clearly   coloured   his
    conclusions. Furthermore, the appellant clearly came to  the  attention
    of the police for other, albeit smaller crimes in  the  UK.  The  judge
    again belittles and disregard such incidents and does not take the very
    real propensity to offend into account..."

11. On 9 August 2016 FtT Judge Kimnell refused permission,  observing  that
    the respondent left  the  judge  with  limited  information  about  the
    offence, and that the fine for breach of the peace in the UK was not  a
    criminal conviction but was dealt with by way of a fixed penalty.

12. The respondent renewed the application to  the  upper  tribunal.  On  2
    September 2016  UT  Judge  Rimington  granted  permission,  finding  it
    arguable that the judge had not adequately reasoned why the  supply  of
    drugs was not a serious crime, a sentence of imprisonment  of  2  years
    and 3 months having been imposed.

13. Mr Matthews submitted thus.  It was an error to describe the offence as
    "not particularly serious", sufficient to require a fresh  decision  to
    be made. The appellant must have accepted that he committed offences in
    the UK for either a fixed penalty or a caution  to  have  been  issued.
    This was not similar offending, but his history in the UK was far  from
    unblemished, or to put it another  way,  he  was  no  stranger  to  the
    authorities. The fact that his conviction did not come to light when he
    first entered the UK made no difference. The judge correctly identified
    the test as whether  the  appellant  currently  represented  a  genuine
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of
    society,  but  came  to  the  wrong  answer.  A  decision   should   be
    substituted, dismissing the appellant's appeal.

14. I reserved my decision.

15. The respondent's grounds and submissions show that the judge  erred  in
    law by  describing  the  offence  in  Lithuania  as  "not  particularly
    serious".  It  was  not  analogous  to  murder  or  rape,  but  serious
    offending is not confined to the very top end of the range.  The nature
    of the offence and the substantial sentence imposed show  that  it  was
    well within the bracket of serious offending.  That did not mean  there
    could be only one outcome, but the  misstatement  is  so  central  that
    decision cannot safely stand.

16. The criticism that the judge belittled the adverse history in the UK is
    not so well taken.  The  fixed  penalty  and  caution  do  not  reflect
    matters of anything like the  same  seriousness.   The  seat  belt  and
    parking matters do not affect the issue.

17. The information recorded in the papers is  a  little  disjointed.   For
    example, it is not clear  if  it  is  the  appellant's  father  or  his
    partner's father who lives in Peterhead, or  both,  and  it  seems  his
    mother lives in Lithuania.  The older child seems to be  the  child  of
    his partner and not his biological child.  There  is  some  information
    about the offence, although only from the appellant in  the  record  of
    the interview at the airport, and rather vague: he says he was  selling
    cannabis, "2 gram", for 6 months.  However, he seems to have been frank
    with the interviewing officers and  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  that
    circumstances have been as he describes, giving a clear enough  overall
    picture: a serious offence in Lithuania, now over 7 years ago; a family
    move to the UK after release, and since then living in  family  and  in
    employment; no further significant offending, but minor encounters with
    the authorities.  I cannot agree that these  encounters  demonstrate  a
    "very real propensity to offend".  The appellant has family, employment
    and  immigration  incentives  to  continue  to  refrain  from   further
    offending.  I find the case quite finely  balanced.   The  respondent's
    decision was taken for respectable reasons, but the offence  by  itself
    cannot justify the decision, and I now have to make the best assessment
    I can, based on all available information.  I  find  that  the  factors
    pointing  away  from  ongoing  risk  tip  the  balance  away  from  the
    appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  being  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of society.

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  but  the
    decision substituted is that the appeal, as  brought  to  the  FtT,  is
    again allowed.


            [pic]

            26 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




