
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00255/2020
                                                               EA/00270/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham (via Microsoft Teams)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 August 2021                             |On 12 August 2021             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               MOHAMMAD ASHIQ
                               ABU BAKR IKHLAQ
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nazir Ahmed instructed by Wright Justice
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant's appeal with permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Mehta ('the Judge') promulgated on 2 March  2021  in
        which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeals   of   the   above-named
        appellants.
     2.  The first appellant is a national of Pakistan and  the  father  of
        the EEA national sponsor. The second  appellant  is  the  sponsor's
        nephew.
     3. On 29 November 2019 their respective applications for an EEA Family
        Permit as a Family Member and Extended Family Member  (EFM)  of  an
        EEA national was refused by an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO).  That
        decision was upheld on review by an Entry Clearance  Manager  (ECM)
        on 4 March 2020.
     4. In the refusal notice in respect  of  the  first  appellant  it  is
        written:


     The decision


                          . You state that your son Mussadiq  Ishtiaq  is  a
                            Greek national. You have provided evidence  that
                            your sponsor holds a Greek passport.
                          .  You  have  stated  that  you  are   financially
                            dependent on your sponsor. As evidence  of  this
                            you have provided an account  summary  from  UAE
                            exchange showing funds sent from your sponsor to
                            you sporadically  from  January  2019  -present.
                            Unfortunately, this limited amount  of  evidence
                            in  isolation  does  not  prove  that  you   are
                            financially dependent on your sponsor. You  have
                            not provided any evidence of your own  financial
                            situation,  such  as  bills  or  personal   bank
                            statements. I would expect to see evidence which
                            fully details your circumstances;  your  income,
                            expenditure  and  evidence  of  your   financial
                            position which  would  prove  that  without  the
                            financial  support   of   your   sponsor,   your
                            essential living needs could not be met.
                          . You have failed to provide your  sponsor's  bank
                            statements  showing  the  funds,  leaving  their
                            account. Without this corroborating evidence,  I
                            am unable to verify that the monies  being  sent
                            from your sponsor as claimed.
                          .  Your  sponsor  has  given  an  outline  of  the
                            property, you will be staying  at  if  you  were
                            granted entry clearance to the  UK.  This  is  a
                            three bedroom home where already  your  sponsor,
                            his wife and three children live, along with his
                            brother and sister-in-law, whose  house  it  is.
                            This raises concerns regarding  the  suitability
                            of this property and Part X of the 1986  Housing
                            Act regarding overcrowding  and  your  continued
                            dependency on your sponsor upon arrival  in  the
                            UK. As stated,  this  has  no  bearing  on  this
                            decision, however, it  is  noted  that  as  your
                            accommodation and failure to accommodate you and
                            your family may cast out into the nature of your
                            dependency.



        The refusal notice in  respect  of  the  second  appellant,  whilst
        recognising the different relationship between the second appellant
        and  the  sponsor,  contains  similar  reasons  for  rejecting  the
        application for leave to remain as an EFM.

     5. The ECM in the review, having considered the appeal papers, wrote:


        I have reviewed the grounds of appeal.


        The Appellant has failed to submit further evidence in response to
        the refusal notice, no further evidence has been submitted to
        demonstrate the Appellant's financial dependence on the sponsor, in
        addition, no evidence of adequate housing arrangements has been
        submitted; the refusal is therefore sustained.


        Based on the refusal notice, I am satisfied the original decisions
        to refuse were correct. The decision is therefore in accordance
        with the law and the EA Regulations and are not prepared to
        exercise discretion in the appellant's case.


        Given all of the above considerations, I maintain the ECO's initial
        decision to refuse entry clearance.



Background


     6. The Judge notes in the decision that although the appeal was listed
        for a CVP (remote online)  hearing  on  25  February  2021,  on  22
        February 2021 the sponsor emailed the  First-tier  Tribunal  asking
        for the matter to be determined on the papers.
     7. The Judge refers  at  [4]  to  the  appellant  providing  a  bundle
        consisting of 202 pages and the  ECO  a  bundle  of  27  pages  and
        confirms the content to both bundles had been read.
     8. The Judge at [6] wrote : "The issue for me to  decide  was  whether
        there was dependency on the  sponsor  by  the  appellants  in  that
        whether the money provided  for  support  by  the  sponsor  to  the
        appellants was for their essential needs."
     9. The Judge's core findings are set out between  [14  -  18]  in  the
        following terms:


        14.  There are a series of financial transactions evidenced in  the
             bundle where the sponsor has sent the appellant's money. These
             are sporadic and dates between 3 February 2019 and  7  January
             2021.  I  find  that  the  sponsor  did  send  money  to   the
             appellant's and has financially supported them.


        15.  The appellant's sponsor has provided a statement in support of
             the appeal. The sponsor states that he is a Greek national who
             came to the UK in 2018. The sponsor states that  he  had  been
             working for engineering firms but  now  works  for  Uber.  The
             sponsor states that he has previously sponsored his spouse  to
             join him in the UK and before his spouse joined him he used to
             send money to her as she  was  looking  after  the  day-to-day
             needs of the appellant's. The appellant states that his spouse
             was living in the same house as the appellant's and after  she
             came to the UK and the sponsor  send  money  directly  to  the
             appellant's.


        16.  The sponsor makes assertions in his statement  which  are  not
             substantiated  with  documentary  evidence.  The  evidence  is
             easily obtainable and providable. There is no evidence  either
             in written format from the appellants  themselves  or  in  the
             form of documentary  evidence  to  show,  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities,  that  they  spend  the  funds  to  meet  their
             essential needs. There is no attempt  to  document  where  the
             money is spent, what the money is spent on and  how  often  in
             the form of any specific  broken  down  explanation  from  the
             appellant's.  I  am  unable  to  quantify  the  cost  of   the
             appellant's essential needs and how much of  the  money  which
             was given to the appellant's was used for their  basic  needs,
             if any at all. I have taken into account  social  factors  and
             taken a holistic view. However, there is  simply  no  reliable
             evidence to show that the appellants cannot support themselves
             without assistance from the sponsor. The appellant's  sponsors
             written statement could not be tested as he did not request an
             oral hearing. This was despite directions  from  the  tribunal
             making provision for an Urdu interpreter and been notified  of
             the administrative  arrangements  for  him  to  join  the  CVP
             hearing, enabling him to participate. The sponsor was directed
             that not being legally represented does not prevent  him  from
             participating remotely. I therefore place little weight on his
             statement.


        17.  Based on the above, I am not satisfied  that  the  remittances
             sent were allocated to the appellant's essential  needs  on  a
             balance of probabilities. I am therefore  not  satisfied  that
             there is dependency between the appellant's and the sponsor.


        18.   The  appellant  appeals,  in  my  judgment,  fall  short   of
             discharging the burden which falls upon them  to  prove  their
             case  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  with   appropriate
             documentary evidence.


    10. The appellant sought permission to appeal,  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal. The operative part of the
        grant being in the following terms:

        3.   Having considered the Grounds in both  cases,  in  respect  of
             each in both Appellants, I am satisfied that  it  is  arguable
             that  the  FtT  Judge  erred  in  his  consideration  of   the
             applicable Regulations.


        4.   Whilst identifying the issue in the case of Mr Ashiq  was  one
             of dependency, it is right to observe that the Judge failed to
             mention that Regulation 7 applied to him. It is also right  to
             observe that the Judge failed to reference and  determine  the
             issue of 'same household' when  considering  the  case  of  Mr
             Ikhlaq. Further,  in  the  case  of  both  Appellants,  it  is
             arguable that the  Judge  failed  to  engage  fully  with  the
             evidence  available,  including   statements   made   in   the
             applications themselves,  and  the  written  evidence  of  the
             Sponsor (particularly as to the fact that the Appellants  were
             not working and totally relied upon the  support  provided  to
             them) and failed to provide any or adequate reasons as to  why
             this evidence was rejected.


        5.   In the circumstances permission to appeal is granted  to  both
             Appellants. While some of the grounds  may  be  stronger  than
             others and any error, even if established in respect  of  them
             may  not  necessarily  be  material,  I  do  not  consider  it
             appropriate to restrict the grounds which may be argued.

    11. In her Rule 24 response dated 17 June 2021, the Secretary of  State
        representative wrote:


        The question to be decided is set out by the judge at [6].


        The factual findings begin from p.11 of the decision with the judge
        directing himself to the relevant case law [13].


        The sponsors statement is considered [15] and findings made on  the
        issue of essential needs dependency [16] the judge, noting that the
        sponsor's evidence simply cannot be  tested  despite  the  Tribunal
        making provision for an Urdu interpreter thus little weight can  be
        placed on this statement.


        The Judge notes that there is a 202 page bundle  submitted  by  the
        sponsor but does not  record  any  skeleton  argument  provided  to
        direct him to what sections in this bundle  he  should  be  looking
        for.


        It is submitted that it is clear that whilst  accepting  that  some
        remittances  were  made  the  judge  simply  could  not  draw   the
        conclusion that these were for the appellant's essential needs.


        In light of the above the FtT decision is one that  is  sustainable
        in law.



Error of law


    12. In his grounds. Mr Ahmed raised four separate issues being:


        1) A  misdirection  of  law  in  relation  to  the  application  of
           Regulation 7(1)(c) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (as
           amended) ('the Regulations') which transpose into  domestic  law
           the provisions of Article. 2.2(d) of Directive 2000/38/EEC.
        2) A misdirection of law in relation  to  the  test  of  dependency
           under Regulation 7(1)(c) of the Regulations, in failing to apply
           the  correct  legal  principles  in  determining  the  issue  of
           dependency.
        3) A misdirection of law relation to  dependency  under  Regulation
           7(1)(c) of the Regulations in having accepted that the  evidence
           showed the sponsor was sending money to the EEA national  making
           a series of legally flawed findings when assessing  whether  the
           relevant test had been satisfied.
        4)  Misdirection  of  law  regarding  Regulation  8(2),  Member  of
           Household.


    13. Mr Ahmed is correct to note  that  in  the  decision  there  is  no
        specific reference to regulation 7(1)(c) which reads: (c) dependent
        direct relatives in A's ascending line, or in that of A's spouse or
        civil partner.
    14. The Judge was well aware that the first appellant was the father of
        the EEA national,  which  is  specifically  noted  at  [3]  of  the
        decision under challenge, but that is not determinative.  A  direct
        relative in the ascending line of the EEA  national  has  to  be  a
        "dependent direct relative" (my emphasis). It  is  clear  that  the
        focus of the Judge throughout the appeal has been upon the question
        of whether the required element of dependency had been  established
        by either appellant.
    15. This is not a new matter as it can be seen from the  refusal  above
        that the failure to properly evidence dependency was of concern  to
        both  the  ECO  and  ECM.  Any  failure  to  specifically   mention
        regulation 7 in the determination does not establish arguable legal
        error if  the  principles  of  regulation  7  in  relation  to  the
        assessment of dependency were properly applied.
    16. The  test  for  dependency  distilled  from  European  law  can  be
        summarised in the following terms: "The  family  member  must  need
         that  support  in  order  to   meet   her   basic   needs;   there
        needed  to  exist  a  situation  of  real  dependence;  receipt  of
         support  was  a  necessary  condition  of  dependency,   but   not
        a  sufficient  condition;  and it was necessary to  determine  that
        the family member was dependent in  the  sense  of  being  in  need
         of  assistance  even  though  it  was  irrelevant  why  he  or she
        was  dependent." A reading of the  determination,  particularly  at
        [6], clearly shows that that was the test applied by the  Judge  in
        assessing the merits of the appeal.
    17. The Judge clearly took into account all of the  evidence  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny  and  the  issue  is  therefore
        whether  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  the  required  element  of
        dependency had not been  made  out  is  a  finding  not  reasonably
        available to the Judge on the evidence.
    18. In this respect, Mr Ahmed, in Ground 3 writes:


        The FTTJ has erred in respect of findings reached on the  issue  of
        dependency in material respects in that:


           i) The findings reached by the FTTJ at 14 of  the  determination
              were sufficient and went to demonstrate  that  appellant  was
              dependent upon the EEA National, and  thus  a  family  member
              under Regulation  7  (1)  (c)  of  the  EEA  Regulations.  At
              paragraph 14 the FTTJ reached the following finding:


              "I find that sponsor did send money to  the  appellant's  and
              has financially supported them."


          ii) Given the findings at paragraph 14 of the determination,  the
              FTTJ  then  goes  on  to   reach   contradictory/inconsistent
              findings at paragraph 16  of  determination  where  the  FTTJ
              states as follows:


              ".. There is simply no reliable evidence  to  show  that  the
              appellant's cannot support themselves without assistance from
              the sponsor."


         iii)  There  was  undisputed  evidence  before  the  FTTJ,   which
              demonstrated that the EEA National had been sending financial
              support. This was material evidence that went in  support  of
              appellant's claim to be dependent and hence a  family  member
              under Regulation  7  (1)(c)  of  EEA  Regulations.  There  is
              support for this contention, which is to be  found  at  para.
              [24] of the decision in Reyes (above) where  the  ECJ  stated
              the following:


              [24] The fact  that...  a  Union  citizen  regularly,  for  a
              significant period, pays a sum of money to  that  descendant,
              necessary in order for him to support himself in the State of
              origin, such as to show that  the  ascendant  is  in  a  real
              situation of dependence vis-�-vis that citizen.


          iv) The findings of the FTTJ at paragraph 16 of determination ate
              further legally flawed in that:


                   a) The findings failed to take  into  consideration  the
                      evidence/information  put  forward  by  appellant  at
                      pages [3]; [6] and [8]-[9]  in  his  EEA  application
                      form and the supporting evidence;
                   b) The findings  of  FTTJ  further  fail  to  take  into
                      consideration the evidence  of  the  EEA  National  -
                      Sponsor which  was  submitted  as  part  of  the  EEA
                      application and also for the hearing of  the  appeal.
                      All the  evidence  submitted,  corroborated/supported
                      the   appellant's   claim   in   relation   to    his
                      personal/financial circumstances  and  his  claim  to
                      dependent upon EEA National.
                   c) The findings of the FTTJ  are  inconsistent  and  run
                      contrary to the  evidence  which  went  to  show  the
                      following:


                       -   Appellant   was   73    years    of    age    and
                         unemployed/retired;
                       - Appellant had no resources or  personal  income  of
                         his own to support himself;
                       - Appellant was residing in property/household of EEA
                         national.  The  accommodation   was   amongst   the
                         essential needs of appellant that was been  met  by
                         EEA National;
                       - Appellant was been sent. Financial support  by  his
                         son - EEA National (Sponsor);
                       - Appellant was been  financially  supported  by  EEA
                         National, for all his essential needs.


                   d) At paragraphs 15 and 16 of  the  determination,  FTTJ
                      erred in failing  to  reach  any  findings  on  these
                      material aspects of the evidence in the  appeal.  The
                      FTTJ has also erred in failing to reach any  findings
                      on the evidence of the EEA National  -  sponsor.  The
                      FTT J was required to indicate clearly what  evidence
                      was accepted and that which was  rejected.  There  is
                      simply no proper findings reached  and  as  such  the
                      decision is unsustainable in law.
                   e) There was no evidence before the FTTJ to support  the
                      conclusion of the FTTJ that  the  appellant  had  any
                      personal resources of his  own  such  that  he  could
                      support  himself.  The  evidence  was  quite  to  the
                      contrary that the appellant  could  support  himself.
                      This was all  that  the  appellant  was  required  to
                      demonstrate without the need to explore  the  reasons
                      for it. See: ECJ cases  (above);  also  Lim  at  para
                      [32].


    19. It is not sufficient for an appellant to prove they  are  receiving
        remittances and to do no more. It was not  disputed  that  payments
        were being made as noted by the Judge at [14]. The  source  of  the
        statements  highlighted  in  the  Grounds  was  only  the   written
        statement of the sponsor and the Judge  was  entitled  to  consider
        what weight could be given to that evidence. The first  observation
        by  the  Judge  at  [16]  was  that  those  assertions   were   not
        substantiated with  documentary  evidence  which  could  have  been
        easily obtained, that there was no  evidence  from  the  appellants
        themselves in any form to show they spent the funds sent in meeting
        their essential needs, and  therefore  insufficient  evidence  upon
        which  the  Judge  could  place  weight  to  establish   that   the
        remittances made were to meet such essential  needs  without  which
        those needs could not be met. That has  not  been  shown  to  be  a
        finding outside the range of those available to the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.
    20. The burden has always been  upon  the  appellants  to  prove  their
        entitlement as recognised by the Judge. An  opportunity  was  given
        for the UK based sponsor to  attend  the  hearing,  to  enable  the
        written statement to be tested through cross  examination  and  any
        matters of concern discussed and clarified if required. The sponsor
        however chosen not to attend the hearing and asked for  the  matter
        to be determined on the papers. It is clear the Judge did the  best
        he could in the circumstances that prevailed at the  time,  and  it
        has not been made out there is anything arguably irrational in  the
        Judge finding there was insufficient evidence to prove the required
        element of dependency. This is a factual finding.
    21. This Ground is, in effect, disagreement with  the  Judge's  finding
        that insufficient evidence had been provided. The Judge's  findings
        to this  effect  are  adequately  reasoned  and  provides  a  clear
        indication of what evidence could be given weight and accepted  and
        what was rejected. No material legal error is made out.
    22. In relation to Ground 4, the assertion relating  to  Membership  of
        Household, the difficulty the appellant's face in relation to  this
        ground, pursuant to  Regulation  8(2)  which  mainly  concerns  the
        second appellant as an  EFM  of  the  EEA  national,  is  that  the
        application for the Family Permit was not  made  on  the  basis  of
        claim to be a member of the EEA nationals household, the grounds of
        appeal challenging the decision of  the  ECO  did  not  raise  this
        issue, and there is no indication it was raised as an issue  before
        the Judge. The Judge therefore did not deal with it as it was not a
        live issue. It is not made  out  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
        account any live issue before him or to have undertaken an improper
        assessment of the evidence.
    23. As a further point, the evidence in relation  to  membership  of  a
        household did not establish an entitlement on  this  basis  anyway.
        The grounds are also misleading at Ground 4(d) where it is  pleaded
        there was no issue taken by the ECO  in  the  refusal  decision  in
        relation to the appellant's claim to  be  a  member  of  the  EEA's
        household, which is correct because no such claim was made  in  the
        application or evidence furnished in relation to  this  matter  not
        because it was found this element was made out.
    24. It does not establish legal error to claim that  because  something
        was not argued or raised in the application and not mention it  was
        therefore accepted. There is an established burden and standard  of
        proof and a need to raise matters in proper form in an  application
        to enable the decision-maker to come  to  an  informed  conclusion.
        That did not happen in this case in relation to membership  of  the
        household test as a result of the application actually made.
    25. Having considered  the  written  material,  oral  submissions,  and
        relevant law. I find the appellants have failed  to  discharge  the
        burden of proof upon them to the  required  standard  to  establish
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeals.


Decision

    26. There is no material error of law  in  the  Judge's  decision.  The
        determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    27. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 10 August 2021












