
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00542/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 03 December 2018           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 Beshel [I]
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal to grant him a  residence  card  as  the  extended
    family member of an EEA citizen exercising Treaty rights in the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria:  it is  not  disputed  that  his
    wife, the sponsor, is an EEA citizen and is in the United Kingdom.  The
    appellant has appeared in person both in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 3. However, in the refusal letter the respondent did not accept  that  the
    sponsor was exercising Treaty rights, nor  that  there  was  sufficient
    evidence of a durable relationship between the appellant and sponsor.

 4. The First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal,  accepting  that  the
    parties are in a durable relationship  but  not  that  the  sponsor  is
    exercising Treaty rights.  She has not been fit  to  work  since  March
    2015 because she has both Sjogren's syndrome  and  fibromyalgia.   Both
    are long-term conditions.  Sjogren's syndrome affects parts of the body
    that produce fluids like  tears  and  spit  (saliva)  and  fibromyalgia
    causes pain all over the body.  The sponsor receives Employment Support
    Allowance (ESA) and Personal Independence Payments (PIP).

 5. The evidence accepted in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal begins
    at [8]:-

         "8.  The appellant states in the application that he began to  live
             with  the  sponsor  on  19  August  2011  (page  16   in   the
             respondent's bundle).  He  explains  that  the  sponsor  is  a
             photographer  trading  under  the  style  of  firm  names   of
             Photomadarka (page 26 in the respondent's bundle).  Illness in
             2014 resulted in the sponsor temporarily ceasing trading (page
             27 in the respondent's bundle).  She stopped taking  new  jobs
             in March 2015 (page  28  in  the  respondent's  bundle).   The
             sponsor received Employment Support Allowance  (ESA)  from  15
             May 2015 and evidence of this  was  provided  at  the  hearing
             (letter from jobcentreplus dated  15  May  2015)  and  Housing
             Benefit from 20 April 2015.  Housing Benefit pays the rent  of
             those who are on a low income or claiming certain benefits.

         9.   The sponsor suffers from Sjogren's syndrome.   There  is  also
             evidence that the sponsor has been  treated  for  a  fertility
             problem (letter from King's College Hospital dated 4 September
             2015.  The sponsor said that she had fibromyalgia, a long-term
             condition that causes pain and increased sensitivity  to  pain
             throughout the body, extreme tiredness and  muscle  stiffness.
             ...

         17.  ESA is a  United  Kingdom  state  benefit  paid  to  qualified
             persons who have paid or been credited with National Insurance
             contributions [for at least two years]  and  who  cannot  work
             because  of  illness  or  disability.   Personal  Independence
             Payment (PIP) helps with the extra costs of disability or long-
             term health conditions for people aged 16 to 64.  It is a non-
             means tested benefit.

         18.  I am satisfied that the sponsor was awarded ESA  from  15  May
             2015 and both ESA and PIP remain in payment.

         19.  The sponsor is not a  jobseeker,  a  worker,  a  self-employed
             person, a self-sufficient person or a student.  The  sponsor's
             medical conditions are longstanding, and  incurable.   Plainly
             she is not temporarily unable to  work.   Whilst  the  sponsor
             stopped work temporarily it is stretching language too far  to
             say that remains the position.

         20.  The appeal must fail because the  sponsor's  own  evidence  is
             that the medical conditions that prevent her working  are  not
             temporary."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

 6.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  appellant
    appealed.

Permission to appeal

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the First-tier Judge
    had arguably approached the appeal on the basis that  the  sponsor  was
    permanently unable to work, but had then failed to consider whether the
    sponsor was entitled to a permanent right of residence as a  worker  or
    self-employed person  who  had  terminated  activity  as  a  result  of
    permanent incapacity to work.

Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006

 8. The relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations 2006 are:

         ""Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"

         5.-(1) In these Regulations, "worker or  self-employed  person  who
         has ceased activity"  means  an  EEA  national  who  satisfies  the
         conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5). ...

         (3)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

             (a)  he terminates his activity in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
             worker or self-employed person as  a  result  of  a  permanent
             incapacity to work; and

             (b)  either-

                  (i)he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for  more
                  than two years prior to the termination; or

                  (ii)the incapacity is the result of an accident at work or
                  an occupational disease that entitles  him  to  a  pension
                  payable in full or in part by an institution in the United
                  Kingdom.

         "Qualified person"

         6.-(1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person  who
         is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

             (a)  a jobseeker;

             (b)  a worker;

             (c)  a self-employed person;

             (d)  a self-sufficient person; or

             (e)  a student.

         (2) A person who is no longer working shall not cease to be treated
         as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

               a) he is temporarily unable to  work  as  the  result  of  an
                  illness or accident; ...

         "Extended family member"

         8.-(1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person
         who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation
         7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions  in  paragraph
         (2), (3), (4) or (5). ...

         (5)  A person satisfies the condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
         person is the partner of  an  EEA  national  (other  than  a  civil
         partner) and can prove to the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a
         durable relationship with the EEA national.

         Permanent right of residence

         15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside  in
         the United Kingdom permanently-...

             (c)  a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;
             ...

         (2)  Once acquired, the right of  permanent  residence  under  this
         regulation shall be lost  only  through  absence  from  the  United
         Kingdom for a period exceeding two consecutive years. ..."

 9. That is the legal framework against  which  this  appeal  falls  to  be
    decided.

Analysis

10. Paragraph 8(5) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 defines an extended family member as a person who is a partner  of
    an EEA national other than  a  civil  partner  and  can  prove  to  the
    decision maker that he is  in  a  durable  relationship  with  the  EEA
    national; that is not now disputed in this application.

11. The question for the First-tier Tribunal and now for the Upper Tribunal
    is whether the sponsor  is  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom, now that she is not working.  She needs to show that she is  a
    worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity and/or that  she
    is a qualified person under Regulation 6.

12.  Employment  and  Support  Allowance  (ESA)  is  administered   through
    Jobcentre Plus and requires a Work  Capability  Assessment  at  regular
    intervals, to see to what extent the illness or disability affects  the
    person's ability to work.  Those assessed fall into two groups, a work-
    related activity group where there are regular interviews  between  the
    person and an advisor, and a support group, where  no  such  interviews
    are conducted.  ESA provides financial support while an  individual  is
    unable to work, together with personalised help, so that the person can
    work, if they are able to do so.

13. The sponsor is  in  the  work-related  activity  group  which  requires
    regular interviews to see whether she still qualifies for  ESA,  as  is
    evidenced  by  the  Jobcentre  Plus  correspondence  in   the   bundle.
    Jobcentre Plus  is  treating  the  sponsor's  long-term  illness  as  a
    temporary illness.  On that  basis  the  finding  at  paragraph  19  is
    plainly wrong.

14. If the sponsor's inability to work were permanent,  as  the  First-tier
    Judge found, then her  situation  should  have  been  considered  under
    Regulation 5(3). The sponsor would be entitled to a permanent right  of
    residence as a person who terminated her activity in the United Kingdom
    as a worker  or  self-employed  person  as  a  result  of  a  permanent
    incapacity to work.

15. On any view, the sponsor is in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with
    the Regulations and exercising Treaty rights,  and  accordingly,  there
    being no challenge to the First-tier Judge's finding that the appellant
    and sponsor are in a durable relationship  as  required  by  Regulation
    8(5), the appellant is entitled to the grant of a residence card on the
    basis that he is an extended family member of the sponsor.

16. For all of these reasons there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

17. I set aside the decision  and  remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal.


Signed:        Judith  A  J  C  Gleeson                          Date:    28
November 2018
              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

