
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00511/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2019                 |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                 mr Zibin wu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr C Timson
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make no  anonymity  direction.   None  was  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and there has been no request for such.

 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 31  July  2019  allowing  the
    Claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated
    15 December 2017 rejecting his application made on  11  September  2017
    for an EEA permanent residence card on the basis of a retained right of
    residence as the ex-husband of  an  EEA  national  formally  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes granted  permission  on  14  September
    2018 suggesting it was arguable that the judge  had  erred  as  to  the
    correct date for the termination of the marriage.   The  grounds  state
    that the date of termination of marriage is the operative date and  not
    when the relationship may have broken  down.   With  respect  to  Judge
    Parkes the grant of permission was entirely flawed on that basis but at
    the same time the decision was itself flawed for  a  different  reason.
    Judge Thorne found the claimant honest and reliable  and  accepted  the
    essential facts of the case, but at paragraph 18 the  judge  stated  "I
    therefore am satisfied that S was exercising treaty rights in the UK as
    at the time of the breakdown of the marriage".  As is  now  clear  that
    was an error.  Under Regulation 10(5) and the current case law on  this
    issue  the  relevant  date  is  the  date  of  institution  of  divorce
    proceedings not the date when the marriage broke  down.   To  that  end
    Judge Thorne's decision was entirely flawed and I set it aside.

 4. In remaking the decision, I made the following  factual  findings  from
    the documents and confirmed them with Mr Timson at the  hearing  before
    me.  The spouse entered the UK in 2009 as an EEA national (Spain).  She
    and the claimant met at university in 2010.  They married on 5 December
    2011 in the UK.  Their relationship broke down in August 2013.   It  is
    now known that the petition for divorce was sealed on 7 August 2014 and
    the divorce was finalised by decree absolute on 19 August 2015.

 5. Those facts create an immediate problem that does not  appear  to  have
    been spotted by the claimant in either his appeal before the First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal, or indeed either the judges making  the
    decision or granting permission.   The  problem  is  this,  that  under
    Regulation 10(5)(i) the requirements for a retained right of  residence
    are that prior to the initiation of proceedings for the termination  of
    the marriage the marriage must have lasted for at least three years and
    the parties had resided in the UK for at  least  one  year  during  its
    duration.  If the marriage took  place  on  5  December  2011  and  the
    divorce proceedings were issued on 7 August 2014 the  total  period  of
    marriage is less than three years  and  thus  Regulation  10  does  not
    apply.

 6. Mr Timson asked for some time to  take  instructions  on  this  matter,
    following  which  he  conceded  that  could  not  defeat  that  primary
    difficulty with the application and the appeal in relation to  retained
    right of residence. The point is fatal to the  application,  regardless
    of the errors of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 7. In the circumstances I need not deal with the identity  document  issue
    in relation to Regulation 21(5).  The application  as  made  could  not
    have succeeded and the appeal should not have been allowed.

 8. At the hearing before me, Mr Timson pursued a further argument that  as
    the claimant and the sponsor  entered  into  a  relationship  prior  to
    marriage they now wish to rely on Regulation  8  and  the  issue  of  a
    durable relationship for the purpose of  becoming  an  extended  family
    member.  However, as well as the fact no permission had been granted on
    such a ground never pleaded, it is clear  that  the  provisions  for  a
    retained right of residence under Regulation 10 do not cover a  durable
    relationship and no-one in or having  had  a  durable  relationship  is
    entitled to claim a retained right of residence.  It  follows  that  Mr
    Timson's argument cannot succeed.

 9. Mr Timson also raised the issue of whether the  claimant  may  be  able
    claim under the Brexit Settlement Scheme however that is not  a  matter
    for the Upper Tribunal at this stage.

10. In all the circumstances, as explained above,  the  application  for  a
    permanent residence card was doomed to  failure  from  its  outset  and
    could not succeed.  It may be that the applicant is not  at  fault;  he
    may have received inaccurate legal advice.  Be that as  it  may,  I  am
    satisfied on the respondent's application that the  decision  of  Judge
    Thorne was entirely in error  of  law,  based  on  a  fallacious  legal
    approach, and has to be set aside.

Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such  as  to  require  it  be  set
    aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.
                    [pic]
                    Signed
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  27 September 2019

To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.
                    [pic]
                    Signed
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  27 September 2019
