
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/00453/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 July 2021                            |On 29 July 2021                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                               VIORCIA STANCIU
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 28 May 2021 I gave the following directions:-

          1. I have reviewed the file in this case.

          2. The first ground of appeal is that there should have  been  an
             oral hearing of the appeal. In her rule  24  letter  response,
             the Home Office accepts that this is arguable.

          3. Having considered the file, it is my preliminary view that the
             First-tier Tribunal did err in not holding  an  oral  hearing,
             given  that  there  are  facts  in  dispute.  It  is  also  my
             preliminary view that, as a result, the decision of the First-
             tier Tribunal was wrong in law and should be set aside.

          4. It is also my preliminary  view  that  as  the  error  of  law
             identified means that, in effect, the appellant did not have a
             fair hearing, this appeal should be remitted  (sent  back)  to
             the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  oral  hearing  on  all
             issues.  None of the findings made  by  Judge  Dunne  will  be
             preserved.

          5. Accordingly, unless within ten working days of  the  issue  of
             these directions there is any written objection to this course
             of action, supported by cogent argument,  the  Upper  Tribunal
             will proceed to determine the appeal without an  oral  hearing
             and will remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard again
             by a judge other than Judge Dunne. This means that there  will
             be no need for a hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

          6. In the absence of a timely response by a  party,  it  will  be
             presumed that it has no objection  to  the  course  of  action
             proposed.

 2. There has been  no  response  to  these  directions  by  either  party.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that neither party objects  to  the  matter
    being determined without a hearing and has nothing further to say. I am
    satisfied that that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law for the reasons  set  out  above,
    and must therefore be set aside.  In the circumstances, given that  the
    assessment of credibility was flawed, it will be necessary for all  the
    contested findings of fact to be remade, and thus,  it  is  appropriate
    for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard
    again de novo by a judge other than Judge Dunne.



Summary of conclusions

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
         on all issues


Signed      Date: 16 July 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

