
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00314/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th January 2018                          |On 19th  February 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                          Mr Muhammad Faizan Khalid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 24th  April  1988.   The
    Appellant by his solicitors had applied  for  a  residence  card  as  a
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom  on  16th  July
    2016.  That application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  in  a
    Notice of Refusal dated 15th December 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal I M Scott sitting at Taylor House on 26th  October  2016.
    The Appellant's appeal under Regulation 26 of the 2006 Regulations  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in a promulgation dated 22nd
    November 2016.  Grounds of Appeal were lodged with the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 14th November 2017.  On 18th  December  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McWilliam granted permission to appeal.  The application was granted on
    the prospect that in the light of the decision in Khan v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was wrong in law to conclude that it did not have jurisdiction
    to hear the appeal.

 3. On 29th December 2017 the Secretary of  State  filed  a  reply  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The assertion is made therein
    that whilst the court ordered a stay on  the  effect  of  the  judgment
    pending a renewed application for permission to the Supreme  Court  and
    (if permission is granted) the determination of the appeal that  as  an
    application for permission in Khan had now been filed with the  Supreme
    Court, therefore the overturning of the decision in Sala  (EFMs:  Right
    of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 0411 (IAC), that is, a refusal  to  document  an
    extended family member, is not an EEA decision and thus not appealable,
    that the overturning of Sala remained  stayed.   The  ground  contended
    that the same point was under consideration by the Supreme Court in  SM
    (Algeria), which was heard on 29th November 2017 and the  Secretary  of
    State therefore asked the Tribunal to  adjourn  the  matter  until  the
    matter is resolved or at least until judgment is given in SM (Algeria).

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant does not appear, nor  do  his
    instructing solicitors.  No reason is given for  their  non-attendance.
    The Respondent appears  by  her  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr
    Bramble.

 5. Mr Bramble makes submissions relying and effectively mirroring the Rule
    24 response,  which,  he  indicates,  represents  current  Home  Office
    policy.

 6. I indicated that I had two options before me.  I  could  either  follow
    the suggested path or I could simply find an error of law and remit the
    matter back to the First-tier where  these  issues  could  be  properly
    argued.  In the event that the Supreme Court endorsed the view  of  the
    Court of Appeal a substantive hearing could then take place whereas  if
    the Supreme Court up upheld the view expressed by the Upper Tribunal in
    Sala then the First-tier Tribunal would be able to deal with the matter
    on the basis that there was no  jurisdiction.   I  indicated  that  the
    second option was my preferred option in the  absence  of  any  blanket
    stay on such applications.

Decision

In such circumstances I found that the making of the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error on a point of law.   I  set
aside the decision.  I remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
sitting at Taylor House to  be  heard  by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Scott at a date  to  be  fixed.   In  view  of  the  position
regarding  pending  appeals  in  the  higher  courts  I  make  no   specific
directions.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date 16 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
