
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00452/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 January 2019                       |On 11 February 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                              Mr Faizan mahmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harris, counsel instructed by Rainbow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Geraint Jones QC, promulgated  on  24  September  2018.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McClure on 7 November 2018.



Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. The appellant married AK, a Polish citizen on 20 March 2013. A  divorce
    petition was issued on 15  March  2017  and  the  decree  absolute  was
    pronounced on 15 August 2017.  On  20  September  2017,  the  appellant
    sought  confirmation  that  he  was  entitled  to  retained  rights  of
    residence as the former family member of  a  citizen  of  the  European
    Economic Area following their divorce.

 4. The said application was refused by  virtue  of  a  decision  dated  20
    December 2017 owing to the appellant's failure to provide  an  original
    valid identification document for his former  spouse.  The  application
    was further refused because the appellant had not  provided  sufficient
    evidence that the former spouse was a qualified person or had  a  right
    of permanent residence at the date of the termination of the  marriage;
    inadequate evidence  was  provided  to  show  that  the  appellant  was
    residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations;
    insufficient evidence to show that the appellant  was  a  self-employed
    taxi driver had been  provided  and  the  appellant  had  not  provided
    adequate evidence that prior to the initiation of proceedings  for  the
    termination of the marriage, the marriage had lasted  three  years  and
    that he and his former spouse had resided in the United Kingdom for  at
    least one year. Thus, it was considered that the  appellant  failed  to
    meet the requirements of Regulations 10 and 21(5).

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, on 12 September 2018, an
    application for an adjournment was made for the respondent  to  contact
    HMRC in order to obtain  the  employment  records  of  the  appellant's
    former spouse. The judge deferred deciding the adjournment  application
    until he had reached a conclusion on whether the appellant had provided
    the national identity card or passport for his former wife as  required
    by Regulation 21(5) or satisfied the judge that he  was  residing  with
    his former spouse for a period of three years.  As  the  appellant  was
    unable to satisfy the judge on these points,  the  adjournment  request
    was refused as the judge was of the view that the appeal would fail  in
    any event.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued that the  judge  had  erred,  firstly,  in
    imposing a requirement that the appellant and his former spouse had  to
    have lived together at the same address and secondly, in  finding  that
    there was  a  requirement  that  the  appellant  produce  the  original
    identity document of his former spouse. These  errors  had  an  adverse
    impact on his treatment of the issue of whether the former  spouse  was
    exercising Treaty rights.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 7 December 2018,  stated
    that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not  been
    received. It was accepted that if the matters set out in the  grant  of
    permission were reflective of the approach of  the  judge,  they  would
    amount to material errors of law.

The hearing

 9. At the outset, while unable to concede the appeal, Mr  Melvin  accepted
    that the error relating to Regulation  10(5)(d)(i)  identified  in  the
    grounds as well as materiality appeared to be made out.   He  submitted
    that the judge placed emphasis on the living together point rather than
    concentrating on what was  said  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    regarding the lack of evidence of the former spouse  exercising  Treaty
    rights.  Nonetheless he found it difficult to defend the decision  with
    vigour.

10. Mr Harris did not accept that there was no evidence  before  the  judge
    regarding the former spouse's exercise of Treaty rights. There  was  an
    employer's letter from Lidl and bank statements,  none  of  which  were
    addressed directly. Central to the decision under challenge  was  a  is
    mistake of law in that the judge analysed the appellant's documents for
    evidence of cohabitation and failing to find any, the  judge  concluded
    that Regulation 10(5)(d) not met. It was a fundamental error and it was
    material. It was unclear how the  judge  would  have  approached  other
    aspects of case without this error. It was not clear what another judge
    would think of evidence of spouse working. Mr Harris argued that  there
    was  sufficient  evidence  of  the  former  spouse  working  but,  with
    reference to the reason for the adjournment  request,  it  was  in  the
    appellant's interest to obtain as much evidence as he could.  Regarding
    the second issue, there had been no consideration of Regulation 42. The
    question whether the Secretary  of  State  was  being  unreasonable  in
    insisting on the production of a passport or  identity  card  when  the
    appellant had been issued a Residence Card before, was not answered.

11. In reply, Mr Melvin stated that the  Regulation  42  point  was  valid,
    albeit it was unclear what submissions were made on the point.

12. At the end of the hearing, I announced that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    findings with respect to  Regulation  10(5)(b)  and  42  and  that  his
    decision was set aside with no findings preserved.

Decision on error of law

13. There were two bases upon which the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal. The first was that the appellant had not  provided  his  former
    spouse's identity card or passport. That finding had no regard  to  the
    following  provision  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016;

         '42. - (1) Subject to paragraph (2), where a provision of these
         Regulations requires a person to hold or produce a valid national
         identity card issued by an EEA State or a valid passport, the
         Secretary of State may accept alternative evidence of identity and
         nationality where the person is unable to obtain or produce the
         required document due to circumstances beyond the person's
         control.'

14. The appellant had a ready explanation for his inability to provide  the
    said identity documents, that being  that  he  was  divorced  from  his
    former sponsor and did not know her whereabouts. Furthermore,  when  he
    was granted a residence card, he produced his former spouse's  identity
    documents. These issues were not considered.

15. The second issue was in relation  to  whether  the  appellant  and  his
    former spouse had been married for  three  years,  including  one  year
    spent residing in the United Kingdom. The judge's findings  demonstrate
    that he misdirected himself by assessing the documentary  evidence  for
    proof of cohabitation. Of relevance is the headnote in PM (EEA - spouse
    - "residing with") Turkey [2011] UKUT 89, which states as follows;

         "Regulation 15(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
         Regulations 2006 applies to those who entered a genuine marriage
         where both parties have resided in the United Kingdom for five
         years since the marriage; the EEA national's spouse has resided as
         the family member of a qualified person or otherwise in accordance
         with the Regulations and the marriage has not been dissolved. The
         "residing with" requirement relates to presence in the UK; it does
         not require living in a common family home."

16. Owing to the judge's errors, he gave no further  consideration  to  the
    appellant's application  for  an  adjournment  for  the  respondent  to
    request the employment records of  his  former  spouse.  The  appellant
    still requires this  search  to  be  made  and  has  yet  to  have  any
    consideration by the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  whether  his  former
    spouse was a qualified person  during  the  relevant  timescale.  These
    errors  were  material  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   In   these
    circumstances, it is appropriate that the matter  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh, with no findings preserved.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of  two  hours  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC.


Signed                                  Date: 11 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
