
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/00355/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8th February 2018                       |On 2nd March 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                              Md Shafikul Islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Junior, Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Md Shafikul Islam against the  decision  of  Judge
    Henderson sitting at Taylor House on 24th November 2016.  The decision,
    which was promulgated on 2nd December 2016, was to dismiss  the  appeal
    for want of jurisdiction.

 2. The original application  had  been  brought  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant was an extended family member of  a  European  Union  citizen
    exercising European Community Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.   In
    the decision of Sala (Extended Family Members - Right of Appeal) [2016]
    UKUT 00411 (IAC), it was held that as an  extended  family  member  the
    Appellant did not have a right of appeal  and  it  was  following  that
    decision that Judge Henderson dismissed the appeal.

 3. The Appellant appealed on the ground that, amongst  other  things,  the
    judge made an error  of  law  in  concluding  that  she  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  The matter came before Upper Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer on 15th December 2017 and she directed as follows:

         1.   In light of Khan v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 the First-tier Tribunal was wrong in  law
             to conclude that it did not  have  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
             appeal.

         2.   The Upper Tribunal is minded to find an error of law,  to  set
             aside decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit  the  case
             to the First-tier Tribunal.

         3.   Any party opposed  to  this  course  shall  inform  the  Upper
             Tribunal in writing with reasons, not later  than  seven  days
             from the date this decision is sent.  Following  that  period,
             the Upper Tribunal will issue its decision.

 4. I am unclear why the matter has been listed for oral hearing given that
    I am told that nobody has indicated that they are opposed to the course
    suggested in paragraph 2 of Judge Plimmer's directions.  Be that as  it
    may, it is clearly appropriate that I now make the  decision  that  she
    was minded to make on the 15th December 2017.  I  therefore  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error  of  law  in  holding
    that there was no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal, and  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

 5. It seems to me that given the rather narrow basis upon which the appeal
    was dismissed and the consequent  absence  of  any  findings  upon  the
    substantive merits of the  appeal,  it  may  be  heard  by  any  judge,
    including (if convenient) Judge Henderson.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and is remitted to be heard by any  judge  sitting  at
Taylor House.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 26th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

