
.[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01102/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th December 2017                     |On 2nd March 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                              THE LORD MATTHEWS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                        DAVID KINGSLEY AKANLO ADOCTA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: In person
For the Respondent: Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen who heard the appeal of David Adocta at
    Taylor House on the 20th February 2017.  In this decision we refer to
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent and Mr Adocta as the Appellant
    to retain consistency with the terminology of the First-tier Tribunal
    decisions.

 2. In a decision promulgated on the 22nd February 2017 the judge purported
    to remit the decision to the Respondent on the basis of the decision in
    Greenwood Part 2 relying on an earlier decision by Judge Hutchinson
    that had been promulgated on the 16th June 2015.  Judge Cohen said at
    paragraph 10:

         "10.     The burden of proving that the decision of the  Respondent
             was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and   the   relevant
             Regulations rests upon the Appellant.  The  standard  of  that
             proof is the balance of probabilities.  The relevant date  for
             the purposes of this appeal is the date  of  the  hearing.   I
             must therefore look at those facts in existence on that  date.



         11.      As indicated above, the previous Immigration Judge made  a
             finding  that  whilst  the  Appellant   did   not   meet   the
             requirements of Regulation 15(1)(f)(i) of the Regulations that
             he did meet  the  requirement  in  Regulation  10(5)(a).   The
             Respondent did not however action the decision of the previous
             Immigration Judge.  I have regard to  the  case  of  Greenwood
             Part 2.

         12.      In the light  of  my  findings  above,  I  find  that  the
             Respondent's decision herein is not in accordance with the law
             and I therefore allow the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules
             to  the  limited  extent  indicated  above  of  remitting  the
             decision to the Respondent in order to action the findings  of
             the  previous  Immigration  Judge  and  grant  the   Appellant
             appropriate leave based upon retained rights of residence.

         Decision

         This appeal is allowed under the Regulations."

 3. There are a number of problems with that decision.  The first is that
    it was not open to the Judge to allow it under the Immigration rules
    because it was a decision under the EEA Regulations.  The Judge was not
    allowing it under the Regulations because the Judge had found that
    there had been no action but in any event I need to turn to the
    decision of Judge Hutchinson to see what it was that the Secretary of
    State was supposed to have actioned.

 4. The appeal before Judge Hutchinson was considered on the papers on the
    11th June 2015 and promulgated on the 16th June 2015.  I do not need to
    go through that decision in detail.  The relevant part is paragraph 9
    which read as follows.

         "9.      Although  neither  party  provided  me  with  the  divorce
             document as this was not contested I accept  the  Respondent's
             finding that the Appellant and his ex-wife  were  divorced  in
             July 2014.  Therefore the Appellant  satisfies  10(5)(a).   On
             balance I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  demonstrated
             that he was working at the date of the divorce.

         10.      However in order to obtain permanent  residence  to  which
             the Appellant has applied for on the basis of his divorce  and
             residence in the  UK  the  Appellant  must  demonstrate  under
             15(1)(f)(i) that he is a person who has resided in the  UK  in
             accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period  of
             five years and was at the end of that period a  family  member
             who has retained the right of residence."

 5. In the following paragraphs the Judge noted that there was a lack of
    evidence that would have justified a finding under 15(1)(f).

 6. Finally in paragraph 17 the Judge decided that the evidence was
    inadequate and in paragraph 18 said

         "The correct approach is  for  the  Appellant  to  reapply  to  the
         Respondent with appropriate evidence  of  continuous  residence  in
         accordance with the Regulations for a full period of five years  or
         alternatively of  course  an  application  could  be  made  in  the
         Regulations  17(2)  with  reference  to  Regulation  10(5)  for   a
         residence card  on  the  basis  of  a  claimed  retained  right  of
         residence."

 7. The Judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

 8. It is clear from the earlier decision of Judge Hutchinson that there
    was no decision to allow the appeal.  There was therefore nothing for
    the Secretary of State to action.  It was not open to Judge Cohen to
    take the course of action described in the decision that I have quoted
    above which is clearly erroneous.  There were no findings made on any
    of the evidence or documents that had been submitted.

 9. The correct approach we are satisfied, and by agreement between the
    parties, is that this decision should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard at Taylor House but not before Judge Cohen.
    However we do not see why it cannot be heard by Judge Hutchinson who
    has not made findings adverse to this appellant on credibility and who
    retained an open mind as to how the appeal might proceed.

10. The appeal of the Secretary of State is therefore allowed.  The
    decision of Judge Cohen is set aside and this appeal is remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing on all points.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Date 22nd February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes



As this is an appeal by the Secretary of State the issue of a fee award
does not arise in these proceedings but remains an issue for the First-tier
Tribunal to decide consequent upon the result in the remitted hearing.


Signed                                       Date 22nd February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

