
                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01416/2020 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing pursuant        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure         |                              |
|(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008                  |On 15 February 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                              TOYOSI SHOWEMIMO
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Grounds of appeal by Ms F Shaw, counsel, instructed
                    by Babs & Co
For the Respondent:    Written reply provided by Ms J Isherwood, Senior
                    Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior  President   of   Tribunals:   Pilot   Practice   Direction:
         Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
         Tribunal on 19 March 2020, and the Presidential Guidance Note no  1
         2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19 Pandemic, as amended  on  19
         November 2020.


      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier  Tribunal  F  E  Robinson  (the  judge)  who,  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 24 November 2020, dismissed her appeal in respect of
         a decision by the respondent dated 27  January  2020  refusing  her
         application for a permanent residence card as the former spouse  of
         an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK who has retained
         a right of residence following the end of her marriage.

      3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal Andrew in a decision dated 22 December 2020
         but sent on 29 December 2020.

      4. In a document headed 'Memorandum & Directions' dated 5 January 2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul expressing his provisional view  that,
         in light of the pandemic,  it  was  appropriate  to  determine  the
         questions (i) whether the judge's decision involved the  making  of
         an error of law and, if so, (ii) whether the decision should be set
         aside, without a hearing.  The  parties  were  required  to  submit
         further evidence on these questions within stipulated  time  limits
         and to indicate whether, despite Judge Rintoul's provisional  view,
         they considered that a hearing to determine questions (i) and  (ii)
         was necessary. On 7 January 2021 the Upper Tribunal received a Rule
         24 response (pursuant to the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008) from the respondent indicating that she did not  oppose
         the appellant's challenge to the  judge's  decision.  The  Rule  24
         response stated:

             "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application
             challenging the decision of Judge Robinson promulgated  on  20
             November 2020. This is because in line with ground 1 the Judge
             appears to have made a mistake of fact  when  considering  the
             evidence regarding the marriage  registration  and  dowry.  In
             light of this, the  Tribunal  are  invited  to  determine  the
             appeal with a fresh  oral  hearing  in  the  FTT  to  consider
             whether the appellant is entitled to permanent right [sic]  of
             residency."

      5. No submissions were made in respect of whether  the  two  questions
         could be determined without a hearing. No further submissions  have
         been received from the appellant.

      6. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
         challenge to  the  judge's  decision,  and  having  regard  to  the
         relatively narrow focus of the legal challenge (whether  the  judge
         made mistakes of fact amounting to error of law; whether the  judge
         misdirected herself  on  the  validity  of  the  appellant's  proxy
         marriage, and whether the judge misdirected herself in  respect  of
         case law)  and  the  respondent's  rule  24  response,  and  having
         satisfied  itself  that  both  parties  have  been  given  a   fair
         opportunity of fully advancing their cases, and  having  regard  to
         the judgment in JCWI v President of the Upper Tribunal [2020]  EWHC
         3103 (Admin), the Upper Tribunal considers it appropriate, in light
         of the Covid-19 pandemic,  to  determine  questions  (i)  and  (ii)
         without a hearing pursuant to rule 34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Discussion

      7. Given the respondent's position it is not necessary for me to  deal
         with the challenge to the judge's decision in great detail. By  way
         of brief summary, the appellant is a Nigerian national born  on  31
         May 1984 who claims to  have  entered  the  UK  in  2005  and  who,
         following an application made on 18 September 2012, was  granted  a
         residence card as the unmarried partner of an EEA national after an
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. In a  determination  promulgated
         on 28 November 2013 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Seifert  found
         that there was insufficient evidence that  the  appellant  was  the
         spouse of an EEA  national  (the  issue  being  whether  the  proxy
         marriage that was  conducted  in  Nigeria  was  recognised  in  the
         Netherlands), but he did accept that  the  appellant  and  the  EEA
         national were in a subsisting and  durable  relationship,  and  the
         residence card was issued on that basis.


      8. On 7 October 2019 the appellant applied for a  permanent  residence
         card on the basis that she was the family member of an EEA who  had
         retained the right of residence following the  termination  of  her
         marriage and who had resided in the UK for a continuous period of 5
         years in accordance with the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2016. This application was refused  and  the  appellant
         appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.


      9. The judge had to determine, inter alia, whether the  appellant  had
         been lawfully married  to  an  EEA  national.  At  [34]  the  judge
         considered there to be a number of inconsistencies in the  evidence
         produced relating to the proxy marriage. At [35]  the  judge  found
         there was "some uncertainty" about the date of registration of  the
         marriage and the form it took. The judge referred to a confirmation
         letter which, in the judge's  view,  indicated  that  the  marriage
         certificate was issued by the registrar on 26 April 2018,  but  the
         appellant claimed that the marriage was registered on 8 April 2012.
         The 1st ground of appeal  contends  that  the  judge  confused  the
         original 'date of registration' of the marriage (8 April 2012) with
         the 'date of issue' of the replacement certificate and confirmation
         letter (26 April 2018). The respondent accepts that the  judge  was
         so mistaken. I have independently considered the certified copy  of
         the marriage certificate and the confirmation letter and  I  accept
         that the judge made a mistake in her assessment of these documents.
         Having regard to paragraphs 5 and 6 of the grounds, I  additionally
         accept, having  considered  the  certified  copy  of  the  marriage
         certificate, that, contrary to the judge's  finding  at  [36],  the
         name of the registrar who provided the  certificate  copy  and  the
         date on which it was provided were detailed in the copy,  and  that
         the certificate number of '000797' was provided in the certificate,
         in the narrow vertical column, contrary to the judge's  finding  at
         [37].


     10. The respondent additionally accepted that the judge erred in law at
         [37] in respect of her finding that there was a discrepancy  as  to
         the amount of the  dowry.  The  dowry  mentioned  in  the  marriage
         certificate was 10,000 naira, but the appellant referred to a dowry
         of 5,000 naira in her statement. As pointed out in the  grounds  of
         appeal at paragraph 7, the  appellant  indicated  that  her  spouse
         "paid N5,000 bride  price  to  her  kinsman",  reflecting  Nigerian
         custom that a dowry is paid to both the bride and,  separately,  to
         the bride's family.

     11. The respondent accepts that the  above  errors  of  law  materially
         undermine the sustainability of the judge's decision. I agree.  The
         judge has either made mistakes on points of fact amounting to legal
         errors, or she has taken into account or given weight to irrelevant
         matters. It is not therefore  necessary  for  me  to  consider  the
         remaining grounds. I find for the reasons given,  which  have  been
         accepted by the respondent, that the decision contains mistakes  on
         points of law that require it to be set aside.

     12. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 a case may be remitted to the  First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

              a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                 opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                 is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                 re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                 to the First-tier Tribunal.

      1. I have determined that the  judge's  conclusions  relating  to  the
         lawfulness of the appellant's marriage,  and  by  implication,  the
         appellant's credibility, are unsafe. The appeal will be remitted to
         the First-tier Tribunal so that a new fact-finding exercise can  be
         undertaken. It will be for the First-tier Tribunal to determine the
         most appropriate mode of hearing the appeal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal F E Robinson.


D.Blum

Signed                              Date 20 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
