

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01892/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2018                           |On 2 February 2018            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                BLESSING [J]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr E. Yerokun, A & A Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  28
    January 2016 to refuse to issue a residence card recognising a right of
    permanent residence as the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national.  The
    decision, wrongly, concentrated on whether the appellant had retained a
    right of residence when regulation 10 did not apply  to  the  appellant
    because she was, at that time, still married to an EEA national.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge James ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 29 June  2017.  The  judge  stated  that  the
    appellant's EEA rights did not commence until the date of the  marriage
    for the purpose of her assessment of regulation 15 of  The  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006").
    She analysed the evidence accordingly and decided that there were  gaps
    in the evidence, which indicated that the appellant's husband was not a
    'qualified person' for a continuous period of five years and  therefore
    the appellant could not show that she was residing in  accordance  with
    the regulations for a continuous period of  five  years  to  acquire  a
    right of permanent residence.

Background

3.    It is said that the appellant's EEA national partner  entered  the  UK
    in 2004. They began their relationship in 2006. The  appellant  applied
    for a residence card recognising a right of residence  as  an  extended
    family member  (durable  relationship)  in  January  2011.  The  couple
    married on 07 May 2011. The respondent issued a residence  card,  which
    was valid from 13 May 2011 to 13 May  2016.  It  is  unclear  from  the
    evidence currently before the Tribunal whether the residence  card  was
    issued recognising a right of residence as a 'family member' or  as  an
    'extended family member'. In any event, it is  not  disputed  that  the
    couple were in a genuine and subsisting  relationship.  They  have  two
    children. "D" was born on [ ] 2007 and there is evidence to  show  that
    he has been issued with a German passport. "M" was born on  [  ]  2008.
    She does not have a passport, but is likely to be  entitled  to  German
    citizenship in the same way as her brother. The respondent accepts that
    the appellant separated from her husband in 2014  because  of  domestic
    violence. Since then it would appear that  she  has  been  the  primary
    carer for the two children. On 21 August 2015 the appellant applied for
    a residence card  recognising  a  permanent  right  of  residence.  The
    respondent refused the application in a decision dated 28 January 2016.
    Although it appears that there was a second application for a permanent
    residence card, this appeal relates to the decision made on 28  January
    2016. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the appellant said  that
    she became divorced from her husband in December 2017.

Error of law

4.    In view of the concession made by Mr Jarvis, the hearing largely  took
    place in Mr Yerokun's  absence.  Mr  Yerokun  did  not  appear  at  the
    Tribunal until 11.30am, by which time the Tribunal  had  completed  the
    other cases on the list. I decided that it was not an effective use  of
    court time to delay the matter any further. Ms [J] attended the hearing
    on time. The respondent agreed that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error of law so there was  no  unfairness  to
    the appellant in proceeding with the hearing  in  the  absence  of  her
    legal representative. Mr Yerokun arrived in time  to  make  some  last-
    minute  representations,  which  I  considered  before  completing  the
    hearing.

5.    Mr Jarvis accepted that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the
    making of an error of law although he maintained  that  the  respondent
    may still have arguments as to whether there was sufficient evidence to
    show that her husband was a 'qualified person' for a continuous  period
    of five years and therefore whether the appellant had acquired a  right
    of permanent residence. He acknowledged that relevant matters were  not
    considered.

6.    Under regulation 15 the appellant had to show that she was  a  'family
    member' who had resided  in  accordance  with  the  regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five  years.  The  status  of  a  'family  member'
    (spouse)  is  distinct  from  an  'extended  family  member'   (durable
    relationship/unmarried partner) under the regulations. Regulation  7(3)
    states that a person who is an extended  family  member  who  has  been
    issued with an EEA residence card  shall  be  treated  as  the  'family
    member' of the relevant EEA national. Although the appellant might have
    been in a durable relationship with an EEA national for  several  years
    before she applied for a residence card as an 'extended family  member'
    in January 2011, the card was not issued until 13 May  2011,  at  which
    point, she had become a 'family member' by virtue of her  marriage.  As
    such, the judge was correct to begin her  assessment  from  around  the
    date of the marriage given the fact that a residence card was issued in
    response to her application as an 'extended family  member'  at  almost
    the same time.

7.    However, it is argued that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider
    whether it was likely that the appellant's husband had acquired a right
    of permanent  residence  before  the  start  of  the  five-year  period
    considered by the judge. It is arguable that if he had already acquired
    a right of permanent residence then any  gaps  in  employment  did  not
    necessarily detract from the appellant's lawful period of residence  as
    a 'family member'. In failing to consider the evidence relating to  the
    EEA national's work history  pre-dating  the  marriage  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.

8.    The hearing involved a discussion as to whether  the  applicant  might
    have other EEA rights that have not been considered by the Secretary of
    State and were not considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal  within  the
    broad scope of an appeal under regulation 26. For example, even if  the
    appellant had not acquired permanent residence it was at least arguable
    that she might have had a continuing  right  to  reside  as  a  'family
    member' given that she had not divorced from her husband at the date of
    the hearing. It was also arguable that  she  might  have  a  derivative
    right of residence arising from her role as the primary  carer  of  EEA
    national children. Even if these matters were not  argued  properly  on
    the appellant's behalf, they were sufficiently obvious on the facts  of
    the case and were relevant to the core issue,  which  was  whether  the
    decision to refuse a residence card was  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006. I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's failure  to
    consider these obvious matters also amounts to an error of law.

9.    If the matter is to  be  re-heard,  which  it  must  be,  the  current
    circumstances indicate that it is at least arguable that the  appellant
    might now retain a  right  of  residence  following  divorce.  This  is
    another matter that falls within the broad scope  of  an  appeal  under
    regulation 26 of the EEA  Regulations  2006,  which  will  need  to  be
    considered at the next hearing.

10.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal decision is set aside. Because new findings of fact will  need
    to be made it is appropriate to remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

DIRECTIONS

11.   The Upper Tribunal does not usually issue  directions  in  preparation
    for an appeal which is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. This  is  a
    rare case where I consider that it is appropriate to do  so  given  the
    discussion that took  place  at  the  hearing  and  the  need  to  make
    directions for  further  evidence  and  reconsideration  of  the  case.
    However, listing directions are a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

       i) The appellant shall serve a  copy  of  the  final  divorce  order
          (Decree Absolute) on the respondent within 14 days  of  the  date
          this decision is sent.


      ii) In view of the fact that  the  appellant  might  be  hindered  in
          obtaining further records  of  her  former  husband's  employment
          history as a result  of  domestic  violence  and  divorce  it  is
          appropriate to make an  Amos  direction  for  the  respondent  to
          obtain records of Mr [SJ]'s history from HMRC (2004-present). The
          evidence should be filed no later than 14 days  before  the  next
          hearing.

     iii) In view of the fact that the respondent considered  the  original
          application on the wrong factual basis, and there  might  now  be
          other strands of European law applicable  to  this  case,  it  is
          necessary for the respondent to reconsider the case in  light  of
          the evidence that  she  will  obtain  from  HMRC  and  the  other
          elements of European law highlighted above [8-9]. The  respondent
          shall  reconsider  the  application  and  file  a   supplementary
          decision letter stating her position at least 14 days before  the
          next hearing.

      iv) If the decision is to be maintained, the appellant shall file the
          following documents at least 7 days before the next hearing:


              a) A detailed witness statement outlining  a  history  of  her
                 relationship with Mr [J] including what she can remember of
                 his work history and a detailed description of the  current
                 arrangements for the care of the  children,  including  the
                 extent of any contact that Mr [J] has with the children.


              b) A chronological schedule of  evidence  outlining  Mr  [J]'s
                 work history (and that of the  appellant)  cross-referenced
                 to the evidence contained in the appellant's bundle.

              c) A composite bundle of evidence  arranged  in  chronological
                 order.

12.   It is a matter for the appellant whether she  wishes  to  prepare  the
    evidence as soon as  possible  so  that  the  Secretary  of  State  can
    consider any further representations as part of her reconsideration  of
    the case, but it might benefit her to do so.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 01 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








