

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/01859/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 April 2020                              |On 14 April 2021               |
|                                             |                               |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                              K A W (Pakistan)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Ahmad Bader, Counsel instructed by Abbott
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of K A W  who is the subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission from the  decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  on
   13 February 2020 to refuse to issue him an EEA residence card pursuant to
   the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. The  appellant
   is a citizen of Pakistan and his claimed spouse is a citizen of the Czech
   Republic.

2. The appellant, who is a Muslim man from  Pakistan,  came  to  the  United
   Kingdom with a work permit, which was due to expire on 31 March 2013.  On
   14 January 2013, he entered into an Islamic marriage with his Czech wife,
   who is a Christian.  On 25 May 2013, his application for an EEA residence
   card as her spouse, based on  the  Islamic  marriage  was  refused,  both
   because it was not a marriage recognised in United Kingdom, and thus EEA,
   law, and because the relationship was not  accepted  as  durable.   After
   further  submissions  from  the  appellant,  the  respondent  agreed   to
   reconsider her decision.

3. In May 2013, very soon after the civil  wedding  the  appellant's  spouse
   conceived a child with another man and the couple separated for  a  time.
   Her child was born in March 2014. The couple then failed to attend  three
   marriage interviews, the first on 5 November 2014 (they did  not  respond
   to the invitation)  and  the  second  on  19  November  2014,  which  was
   cancelled at short notice on medical grounds. The appellant  remained  in
   the United Kingdom without leave.

4. On Sunday 22 March 2015, immigration officers  conducted  a  home  visit.
   The appellant's wife and her child were not at home and  there  was  very
   little trace of the wife in the shared bedroom, or  in  the  house.   Two
   other bedrooms were sublet  to  male  friends  of  the  appellant.    The
   appellant told the immigration officers that his wife  had  travelled  to
   the Czech Republic two days earlier,  to  visit  her  sick  mother.   The
   appellant's mobile phone showed no recent contact  between  the  parties.
   There were a few items of female clothing and a photograph of the  couple
   in a wardrobe:  the photograph was at the back of the wardrobe, with  its
   face turned to the wall.

5. On 25 March 2014, based on all the above matters, the respondent  refused
   the application.  The appellant exercised an in-country right  of  appeal
   and on 21 May 2018, following  an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
   appellant's appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

6. The couple are now  living  at  the  same  address  and  the  appellant's
   stepchild lives there too.  The appellant and his wife have  no  children
   of their own.

Refusal letter

7. The appellant's spouse is said to be  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the
   United Kingdom.  The respondent did not consider that the  appellant  was
   entitled to be treated as her EEA spouse as she  found  the  marriage  to
   have been one of convenience.

8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

9. The appeal has now been heard three times  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   There have been two previous determinations of this appeal, the first  by
   First-tier Judge Graham, and the second by First-tier  Judge  Ford.   The
   following facts were preserved when the decision of First-tier Judge Ford
   was overturned and remitted for rehearing, by First-tier Judge Juss:

    i) That the appellant had limited knowledge  of  his  wife's  childcare
       arrangements;

   ii) That there had been little, if  any,  contact  since  she  left  the
       family home when the immigration officers visited there; and

  iii) The lack of  credibility  of  the  evidence  of  two  witnesses  who
       attested to the genuineness of the marriage when contracted.

10. First-tier Judge Juss heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and  from
   his wife.  No other witnesses gave oral  evidence  at  the  hearing.  The
   couple's evidence, which had in the past been significantly inconsistent,
   was now word perfect, but on mundane and predictable points.  Nothing  in
   their evidence this time engaged with  the  discrepancies  identified  by
   Judge Ford in the earlier oral evidence.

11. Judge Juss noted that the appellant's wife had not brought  her  witness
   statement with her, and that the copy which her  solicitor  was  able  to
   produce ended at paragraph 13  and  was  incomplete.   Nevertheless,  she
   adopted, signed and dated the witness statement at the hearing  and  said
   that she had nothing further to add after paragraph 13.

12. At [17], the judge stated that he had  given  careful  consideration  to
   the documentary evidence and the submissions at the hearing.  He set  out
   the test for whether a  marriage  was  a  'marriage  of  convenience'  as
   defined in the EEA Regulations.  At [22], he set out accurately the  test
   and the  shifting  burden  of  proof,  reminding  himself  that,  if  the
   appellant produces evidence of  a  genuine  marriage,  that  finally  the
   Secretary of State bears the burden of proving a marriage of convenience.
    His self-direction is unassailably correct.

13. At [24], the judge reminded himself of Mr Lay's  submission  that  post-
   decision evidence, and evidence of the role played by  the  appellant  in
   his stepson's life, meant that the appeal must be allowed.   At  [25]  he
   set out the 'marriage of convenience' test again and held that he was not
   satisfied that the intention of the parties at the time of  the  marriage
   was to live together as man and wife.  At [26], he said that he had taken
   into account the oral evidence given, but that the parties' knowledge  of
   domestic arrangements in the house where they and others  lived  was  not
   evidence of their intentions at the time of the marriage.

14. The judge's core reasoning is at [27] - [29].  At [27]  he  acknowledged
   that it was always possible for  a  relationship  to  change  and  become
   genuine following a marriage of convenience, but that did not make it  an
   EEA marriage: it was the intention at the outset that counted.   Nor,  on
   the facts, was he satisfied that such a change had occurred here.

15. The passage which is in dispute in these proceedings begins at [28]:

         "28. Fourth, the appellant cannot succeed as a matter of  law.   It
         is well-known that the burden  of  proof  of  establishing  that  a
         marriage is one of convenience rests on the Secretary of State, see
         Rosa v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         14 and Sadovska v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
         UKSC 54.  Once the Secretary of State displaces the  legal  burden,
         the evidential burden then rests on the person who is alleging that
         the marriage is not one of convenience.   These  propositions   are
         distilled from the decision of the Supreme Court in Sadovska, where
         the parties were not married, but at [32] the court indicated  that
         if  the  non-European  Union  national  produced  evidence  of  the
         relationship, it was for the Secretary of State to  show  that  the
         relationship was not genuine.  I find that in  the  latest  refusal
         letter this has indeed been done.  In Sadovska, the court was clear
         that 'It must be permissible for the state to take steps to prevent
         sham marriages, although it is also incumbent on the state to  show
         that the marriage would indeed be a sham'.  And at [29], the  court
         explained that

             "29.     For this purpose, "marriage of convenience" is a term
             of art. Although it is defined in the Directive and  the  2009
             Communication as a marriage the sole purpose of  which  is  to
             gain rights of entry to and residence in the  European  Union,
             the 2014 Handbook suggests a more flexible approach, in  which
             this must be the predominant purpose. It is  not  enough  that
             the  marriage  may  bring  incidental  immigration  and  other
             benefits if this is not its predominant purpose.  Furthermore,
             except in cases of deceit by the non-EU national, this must be
             the purpose of them both. Clearly, a non-EU  national  may  be
             guilty of abuse when the  EU  national  is  not,  because  she
             believes that it is a genuine relationship."

16. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal and the appellant appealed  to
   the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

17. There were three grounds of appeal, settled by Counsel  Mr  Taimour  Lay
   on the appellant's behalf:

     i) that the First-tier Judge had not applied correctly the legal  test
        for establishing a marriage of convenience, failing to consider the
        totality  of  the  evidence  as  part  of  consideration   of   the
        respondent's ultimate burden;

    ii) that the judge's finding was perverse, given his finding  that  the
        appellant and his wife had cohabited for seven years, and

   iii) that there had been  a  failure  to  have  regard  to,  and  reach,
        findings on material evidence.

18. The evidence in question comprised a number  of  written  statements  of
   support: two  were  from  the  witnesses  who  had  been  found  to  lack
   credibility when cross-examined  previously,  and  three  were  from  new
   witnesses.  None of these witnesses attended  the  hearing  before  Judge
   Juss.

19. First-tier Judge Fisher granted permission to appeal:

         "...3.   It may be that the allegation of perversity [in ground  2]
         is little more than a disagreement with  the  conclusions  reached.
         However, whilst the judge correctly  identified the shifting burden
         of proof in cases of this nature, it is arguable that he  erred  in
         applying it, particularly at paragraph 28 of his decision, where he
         appears to suggest that the respondent had discharged the burden in
         the decision  letter,  rather  than  considering  the  evidence  in
         totality.

         4.   For that reason, it is arguable that the judge erred  in  law.
         Although I have reservations about the  second  and  third  grounds
         raised, I grant permission on all grounds as it appears to me  that
         they are arguably linked to the first."

Rule 24 Reply

20. On 6 January 2021, the respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply:

         "5.  It is submitted  that  the  FtT  judge,  after  recording  the
         submissions made on behalf of both  parties,  begins  his  findings
         from paragraph 17  of  the  determination  firstly  addressing  the
         caselaw and directing himself to the burden of proof and the  legal
         position.
         6.   Having correctly directed himself at length  and  setting  out
         the relevant caselaw the judge begins his conclusions  from  23  of
         the decision.
         7.   The judge firstly reminds himself of  the  starting  point  in
         this appeal that being the previously dismissed decision of the FtT
         in 2018.
         8.   It is submitted that the judge has considered the new evidence
         produced (p24-27) and draws conclusions at p28/29.
         9.   It is submitted that the language used by the judge might have
         been clearer but it is crystal clear to any reader that  the  judge
         has considered the evidence in its totality if the decision is read
         holistically.
         10.  It is submitted that the "sentence" apparently  relied  up  to
         show error is  not  material  to  this  appeal  given  the  careful
         assessment of all of the evidence and  self-direction  to  the  law
         concerning marriages of convenience.
         11.  This is nothing more than a lengthy semantic argument  without
         merit if the FtT decision is considered in its entirety.
         12.  It is submitted that the decision is not one that is  perverse
         as the findings have all been rationally explained by the FtT."

21. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

22. At the hearing today, the  appellant  attended  in  the  office  of  his
   solicitor, Mr Mohammed Islam.  Mr Bader, who represented  the  appellant,
   confirmed that they were the only ones in the room  and  that  it  was  a
   quiet private space. Mr Bader attended separately.

23. Mr  Bader  submitted  that  the  consistency  of  the  evidence  of  the
   appellant and sponsor was sufficient to shift  the  burden  back  to  the
   respondent to establish that the appellant's  marriage  was  not  genuine
   when entered into in 2013.  He relied on the witness statements from  the
   two witnesses  previously  found  to  lack  credibility,  and  additional
   witnesses.  He argued that it had not been open to the judge to make  the
   finding that the marriage was one of convenience, on the evidence  before
   him.

24. I did not call on Mr Melvin, who appeared for the Home Office.

Analysis

25. The definition  of  an  EEA  marriage,  which  excludes  a  marriage  of
   convenience is a term of art, specific to the EEA Regulations.   Becoming
   an EEA spouse at the date of decision conferred on the non-European Union
   spouse freedom of movement to live in any EEA state in which  the  spouse
   was exercising her EEA free movement rights. As  stated  in  Sadovska  at
   [35], 'It must be permissible for the state to take steps to prevent sham
   marriages, although it is also incumbent on the state to  show  that  the
   marriage would indeed be a sham'.

26. The question is whether it was open to the judge, as a  matter  of  law,
   to find as a fact that these parties, who had contracted both an  Islamic
   marriage and a civil marriage in 2013, did not both have the intention at
   the date of the civil marriage to enter into a genuine  marriage.   These
   parties contend that their relationship is genuine  and  subsisting  now,
   but even if that is right, it does not assist the Tribunal in determining
   whether it was a marriage of convenience when contracted in 2013.  If  it
   was, then by definition, the appellant is not an EEA  spouse  and  cannot
   have the benefits which would accrue to him by reason of that status.

27. In this case, there was a significant quantity of  evidence  around  the
   time of the civil marriage, in particular, to indicate that the  marriage
   was a marriage of convenience.  The Islamic marriage took place in haste,
   just as the appellant's work permit was expiring.  His wife left him very
   soon after the civil ceremony and almost immediately became pregnant with
   another man's child.  They failed to attend their marriage  interview  on
   three occasions, and when immigration officers made a visit to the house,
   the appellant's spouse was not there and  the  other  two  bedrooms  were
   occupied by friends of his.   His mobile phone showed no  recent  contact
   between the parties.   The wife has not been able to produce evidence  of
   her mother's illness in the Czech Republic  at  that  time,  nor  of  the
   illness of the uncle in Leicester who  should  have  accompanied  her  to
   visit her mother.

28. The only evidence upon which Mr Bader relied  to  the  contrary  at  the
   hearing was the untested set of brief witness statements from a number of
   witnesses who were not brought before the First-tier Tribunal  for  their
   evidence to be tested.  The accounts of two of them had  previously  been
   found to lack credibility.  The others gave evidence which the judge  was
   entitled to view as bearing little weight in relation to  the  intentions
   of the parties when the civil wedding was contracted.

29. The question whether a marriage when entered into is one of  convenience
   is a question of fact for the First-tier Judge.  I remind myself  of  the
   narrow circumstances in which it  is  appropriate  to  interfere  with  a
   finding of fact by a First-tier Judge who has heard the parties give oral
   evidence: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
   [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran) & Others v Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at  [90]  in  the  judgment  of  Lord
   Justice Brooke, with whom Lord Justice Chadwick and Lord Justice  Maurice
   Kay agreed.

30. That standard is not reached here  and  it  is  not  proper  for  me  to
   interfere with this finding of fact, made by the  fact-finding  judge  on
   the evidence before him.  I am satisfied that there was no perversity  in
   the judge's finding that this was a marriage of convenience, and that  no
   material evidence was overlooked.

31. It is right that the judge says at [28], referring to  the  third  stage
   of proof, that the evidence in the refusal letter  was  sufficient.   Had
   that phrase stood alone, without  consideration  of  the  evidence  as  a
   whole, the appellant might have been able to argue  that  the  judge  had
   misunderstood  the  three  stage  nature  of  the  test,  but  given  the
   thoroughness with which he set it out elsewhere, that is unarguable.  The
   judge's phrasing may be unfortunate, but there was more  than  sufficient
   evidence on which he could and  did  conclude  that  the  respondent  had
   established that at the date of contracting the marriage  in  July  2013,
   these parties did not intend to become a genuine couple  but  rather,  to
   facilitate the appellant's access to EEA  rights  to  which  he  was  not
   entitled.

32. Taking an holistic view of  the  First-tier  Judge's  reasoning,  it  is
   proper, intelligible and adequate to support his conclusions as  to  fact
   and credibility.  I uphold the First-tier Judge's decision and decline to
   interfere with his finding that this was a marriage of convenience.

DECISION

33. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     9 April
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

