
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01547/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Skype)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2021                  |On 3 March 2021                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               GBENGA ADERANTI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ferguson instructed by SLA Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. By a decision dated 1 October  2020  another  judge  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal set aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
        directed that the  appeal  remain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a
        rehearing. Following the retirement of that judge a transfer  order
        has been made.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 12 November 1968  who
        challenged the respondent's refusal to issue him with  a  residence
        card in recognition of a right to reside in the United  Kingdom  as
        the family member of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights,
        dated 11 March 2019.
     3. The decision maker was not satisfied, inter alia, that the evidence
        provided supported the assertion that the proxy marriage undertaken
        between the appellant and EEA national was sufficient to  establish
        the validity of that marriage.
     4. The specific reasoning set out in the decision under  challenge  is
        as follows:


        You have provided documents issued in Lagos  as  evidence  of  your
        marriage. It states that the marriage took place  on  22  September
        2018 at 44 Emanuel High Street, Ojota, Lagos, Nigeria and that  the
        marriage was registered on 25  September  2018  by  Billy  Sherifat
        Abosede.


        The documentation you have provided as evidence that your  marriage
        was performed and registered legally in  Nigeria  is  not  accepted
        because it has not been signed by a  competent  authority,  who  is
        also a third party.


        The Marriage Certificate issued by the Lagos State  Government  has
        been signed by the same person, Billy Sherifat Abosede, who  signed
        the Confirmation of Traditional Marriage document.  As  such,  this
        cannot be used to  verify  that  the  marriage  was  performed  and
        registered legally in Nigeria.  This  document  would  need  to  be
        signed by a competent authority, who is a third party.


        In addition to this, you have only provided a Sworn  Affidavit  for
        yourself and not one for your sponsor.


        As the evidence you have  provided  does  not  confirm  your  proxy
        marriage was valid, we are unable to confirm your  'family  member'
        status as the spouse of your EEA or Swiss  national  sponsor.  Your
        application has been refused for that reason.


        If you are unable to prove that you are in a valid marriage you may
        wish to reapply instead as the extended family member of  your  EEA
        or Swiss national sponsor.


     5. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's  appeal  but  was
        found to have erred in law, for the following reasons  set  out  in
        the Error of Law  decision  following  citation  of  the  documents
        relied upon by the appellant in support of his appeal:


        8.   Neither the Respondent nor  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle
             asserted that these documents were false or that they had  not
             been signed and stamped in the proper manner.


        9.   In Cudjoe (Proxy Marriages -  burden  of  proof)  [2016]  UKUT
             00180 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:


             "1. It will be for an appellant  to  prove  that  their  proxy
             marriage was in accordance with the laws  of  the  country  in
             which it took place, and that both parties were free to marry.
             The burden of proof may  be  discharged  by  production  of  a
             marriage certificate issued by a competent  authority  of  the
             country in which the marriage took place,  and  reliance  upon
             the statutory  presumption  of  validity  consequent  to  such
             production.  The  reliability  of  marriage  certificates  and
             issuance by a competent authority are matters for an appellant
             to prove".


        10.  The Respondent has submitted that "statutes  are  open  to  be
             amended and their interpretation can be a question of case law
             in the country concerned".  As  a  consequence,  it  was  also
             submitted that "it was open to the judge to conclude that  the
             evidence provided by the appellant was insufficient".


        11.  However, this was not the basis on which  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Doyle dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.  Firstly,  he
             asserted that  the  Appellant  could  not  merely  rely  on  a
             photocopy of a statute. There is no requirement  in  case  law
             for an Appellant to produce an expert  report  confirming  the
             validity of his marriage. Furthermore, the Respondent has  not
             asserted that the copy of  the  statute  which  the  Appellant
             relied upon did not reflect current law in Nigeria.


        12.   Furthermore,  the  Respondent  asserted  that  there  was  no
             independent  verification  of  the  marriage.  However,   this
             ignored the fact that  the  Appellant  had  also  provided  an
             affidavit, sworn in the High  Court,  by  his  uncle  who  was
             present at the proxy marriage ceremony. In  addition,  he  had
             provided a copy of the Form MCM.1 also signed by  the  on-call
             and properly certified.


        13.  For all these reasons, I find that there were material  errors
             of law in First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle's decision.


     6. The appellant's case has always been that  the  documents  provided
        are sufficient to prove that his proxy marriage was valid under the
        terms of Nigerian law. The  original  grounds  of  appeal  provided
        evidence of the marital relationship/marriage, a Customary Marriage
        Certificate issued on 25 September 2018, a Confirmation of Marriage
        letter  dated  25  September  2018,  a  sworn  affidavit  from  the
        appellant's uncle, and evidence of the  completed  registration  of
        the marriage. The appellant also relied  upon  a  letter  from  the
        Foreign & Commonwealth  Office/British  High  Commission  in  Abuja
        dated 4 February 2013 confirming that local government  in  Nigeria
        is vested with the constitutional powers to make laws and  register
        customary law marriages.
     7. The appellant disputes the requirement relied upon  decision  maker
        for the marriage certificate to be signed by a competent  authority
        who is also a third party; asserting that the person who  did  sign
        the documents (a Billy Sherifat Abosede) had lawful authority to do
        so. Mr Diwnycz was asked at the hearing whether he had anything  by
        way of case law or country material to support the  assertion  made
        by the decision-maker that the format  of  the  documents  provided
        meant the customary marriage had not been  properly  registered  in
        accordance with the legal requirements in Nigeria.  In  his  normal
        candid approach to such matters Mr Diwnycz confirmed  that  he  had
        been unable to locate any authority to support a  proposition  that
        the concerns expressed by  the  decision-maker  reflected  a  valid
        stance capable of establishing that the  required  burden  had  not
        been discharged.
     8. I find in the absence of anything to counter the assertion made  in
        the grounds of appeal and in light of the lack of any challenge  to
        the weight that could be given to the marriage documents, that  the
        appellant has discharged the  burden  of  proof  upon  him  to  the
        required standard to show  he  has  undertaken  a  valid  customary
        marriage recognised in Nigerian law and provided adequate  evidence
        from an official with the capacity to do so confirming the marriage
        has been properly registered. On that  basis  the  appeal  must  be
        allowed.
     9. The remaining issue raised in the refusal relating  to  there  only
        being one affidavit does not establish legal  error  sufficient  to
        warrant the appeal being dismissed.

Decision

    10. I allow the appeal.

   Anonymity.


    11. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 12 February 2021












