

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal no: EA/01936/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                    |                 Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|on    16.10.2017                      |                       on            |
|                                      |7.12.2017                            |


                                   Before:

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                  Between:

                                MONIRA Khatun
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Alexis Slatter  (counsel instructed by Londonium) on 16
                    October;
       Mr Manir Chowdhury (working under the supervision of Londonium) on 5
                    Dec
For the Respondent: Mr Paul Duffy

                            RULING AND DIRECTIONS



   1. This is an appeal, by the , against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Neil Froom), sitting at Hatton Cross on  14  February,
      to  an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh, against refusal  of  an  EEA
      residence card as the primary carer of her son Ahamuf Jarif, a British
      citizen through his father Mohd. Jahirul Haque, born here on 2 January
      2013. The judge was not satisfied,  for  reasons  he  gave,  that  the
      appellant would be compelled to leave the EEA if his mother were:  see
      Sanneh [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin).

 2. Permission was given in the Upper Tribunal, on  the  basis  that  there
    still needed to be a finding as to who would be  the  appellant's  main
    carer. It was  agreed,  following   Chavez-Vilchez  and  others  (Union
    citizenship - Article 20 TFEU - Access to social assistance  and  child
    benefit conditional on right of residence in a Member State : Judgment)
    [2017] EUECJ C-133/15 (10 May 2017, that specific findings  would  need
    to be made on this point.

 3. This decision does not in any way set aside the findings of  fact  made
    by the very experienced judge on the evidence put before him: however I
    shall consider for myself the evidence of the appellant, and those  who
    might reasonably be expected to take care of  the  child  if  she  were
    removed, or its absence. The appellant and her brother Maruf Ahmed gave
    evidence in accordance with their statements, and  were  cross-examined
    on it by Mr Duffy.

 4. At the end of this process, the following things were clear. First, the
    appellant and her brother had quite cynically manipulated the effect of
    her son's birth here to a British  father.  Whether  or  not  they  are
    telling the truth about the father's having effectively  abandoned  the
    child, they have done everything they can to  minimize  the  amount  of
    help the brother appeared to be able to give the appellant with him.

 5. One glaring example was the letter written by the brother, posing as no
    more than her flatmate, and referred to by the judge at  paragraphs  19
    and 28. Before me, he tried to explain this gross  piece  of  attempted
    deception by saying he was not prepared, for reasons he gave, to accept
    the unrecognized religious  ceremony  of  marriage  through  which  the
    appellant had gone with the child's father. As the judge said, if  that
    was the reason, then why write her a letter of support at all?

 6. The only point on which I am prepared to give further consideration  to
    any explanation given by the appellant and her brother is  on  what  is
    said  in  the  Family  Plan  for  the  child,  prepared  by  the  local
    authority's social services department following a meeting on  13  July
    2013. The passage concerned, under Q. 1, is this

       The paternal aunt and uncle live [in] the  adjacent  building,  which
       means that it is easy to provide this support.

       [The appellant] comes round to [her brother and his wife's] home 2 or
       3 times a week, so [the child] is supported and  looked  after.  {The
       wife]  has  looked  after  [the  child]  on  several  occasions.  For
       instance, he is weaning and is bottle fed so [the  wife]  can  manage
       this easily.

 7. The brother explained that he and his wife had all along been living at
    [                      ] at the time in question the appellant  was  at
    no. 25. This was indeed the address she gave in a  medical  context  in
    October that year. Since the social worker had just said  that  he  and
    his wife were able to look after their  own  children  without  outside
    support,  the  support  referred  to  is  clearly  what  they,  and  in
    particular she, were able to give the appellant.  Their  two  dwellings
    might not unreasonably have been described  as  adjacent,  and  in  the
    circumstances I am prepared to accept their evidence  that  the  social
    worker's reference to 'paternal aunt and uncle'  was  her  mistake  for
    'maternal', and that there are no other close family  members  in  this
    country.

 8. The appellant's brother went on to give evidence that his daughter  had
    lately passed the entrance examination for the [         ] and  he  and
    his wife were about  to  move  into  the  school's  catchment  area  as
    required, so away from where the appellant is presently living with her
    child, still in the East End, but with a friend who she says has  taken
    her in.

 9. While I do not doubt that the brother and his wife  would  want  to  do
    their best for their daughter's education, I have serious doubts as  to
    whether they have parted company with the appellant, so  far  as  their
    living arrangements are concerned, or have any real intention of  doing
    so. However I do not consider it necessary to resolve these doubts, for
    reasons I shall go on to give.

10. As Mr Duffy pointed out, the leading  authority  in  point  before  the
    judge had been Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano)  [2015]
    UKUT 560 (IAC): however, that had now to be read in the light of Chavez-
    Vilchez , and in particular paragraph 1 of the Grand Chamber's ruling:

       Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that for the purposes
       of assessing whether a child who is a citizen of the  European  Union
       would be compelled to leave the territory of the European Union as  a
       whole and thereby deprived of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance
       of the rights conferred on him by that article if the child's  third-
       country national parent were refused a  right  of  residence  in  the
       Member State concerned, the fact that the  other  parent,  who  is  a
       Union  citizen,  is  actually  able  and  willing  to   assume   sole
       responsibility for the primary day-to-day care  of  the  child  is  a
       relevant factor, but it is not in itself a sufficient  ground  for  a
       conclusion that there is  not,  between  the  third-country  national
       parent and the child, such a  relationship  of  dependency  that  the
       child would indeed be so compelled were there to be such a refusal of
       a right of residence. Such an assessment must take into  account,  in
       the  best  interests  of  the  child  concerned,  all  the   specific
       circumstances, including the age of the child, the  child's  physical
       and emotional development, the extent of his emotional ties  both  to
       the Union citizen parent and to the  third-country  national  parent,
       and the risks which separation from the latter might entail  for  the
       child's equilibrium.

11. In this case, the child's EU citizen parent is not able or  willing  to
    assume sole responsibility for him: while I might be prepared  to  find
    that the appellant's brother and wife were able to do so, I do not find
    it possible to go behind his expressed unwillingness. Even if they were
    both able and willing, that could not take things further than  in  the
    case of an able and willing parent, which is no more than  a  'relevant
    factor'.

12. In this case the child is not yet 5, has always lived with his  mother,
    and is as dependent on her as any other  child  of  his  age  in  those
    circumstances. There is nothing to suggest he is not a perfectly normal
    child: when he had bronchitis in 2013 he got treated for  it,  and  the
    local authority have been keeping an eye on the  arrangements  for  his
    care. He clearly knows his maternal aunt and uncle very  well,  and  no
    doubt has a good relationship with them too.

13. However Mr Duffy did not seek to argue with my suggestion that in those
    circumstances the child's best interests would  be  to  stay  with  his
    mother, and not to be separated from her by her removal to  Bangladesh.
    Nor did Mr Duffy suggest that, on a practical level, the child would be
    unable to live here without her.

14. It follows that this appeal must be allowed, whatever distaste  may  be
    felt for the various  deceptions  and  contrivances  practised  by  the
    appellant and her brother. It should be  noted,  however,  that  Ayinde
    remains fully authoritative in cases not involving  children,  as  were
    those considered in it. Even where children are involved,  paragraph  2
    of the Court's ruling in Chavez-Vilchez shows the way forward.

15. While both Ayinde and Chavez-Vilchez  were  decided  on  the  basis  of
    article 20 TPEU, paragraph 2 of the ruling empowers  member  states  to
    require evidence

       ... to prove that a refusal of a right of  residence  to  the  third-
       country national parent  would  deprive  the  child  of  the  genuine
       enjoyment of the substance of the rights pertaining  to  the  child's
       status as a Union  citizen,  by  obliging  the  child  to  leave  the
       territory of the European Union, as a whole.

16. As pointed out in Ayinde, this is exactly what reg. 15(4A) (iii) of the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   [the   EEA
    Regulations], as they now stand, does require; but the ruling in Chavez-
    Vilchez  goes on:

       It is however for the  competent  authorities  of  the  Member  State
       concerned to undertake, on the basis of the evidence provided by  the
       third-country national, the necessary enquiries in order to  be  able
       to assess, in the light of all the specific circumstances, whether  a
       refusal would have such consequences.

17. Applications of this kind should be dealt with by the  Home  Office  on
    the basis of such inquiries, and, in the light of paragraph  1  of  the
    ruling in Chavez-Vilchez, a full assessment of the  best  interests  of
    the child: the familiar adversarial judicial process cannot be used  as
    a substitute.

Appeal allowed
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



