
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01294/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 September 2018                 |On 15 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD NAEEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan and was born on 20 September
       1974. On 10 November 2017 he applied for a document certifying
       permanent residence under Regulation 15 (1) (b) of the Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (EEA Regulations) as the
       extended family member of Ana Mafalda Dias Goncalves.


    2. The Respondent refused his application in a Reasons for Refusal
       Letter (RFRL) dated 17 January 2018 on the basis that the Respondent
       was not satisfied that the Appellant met the requirements of
       Regulation 8 (5) of the EEA Regulations and was the partner of and
       in a durable relationship with the EEA national. The Appellant
       appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal and that appeal
       was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Manchester in a decision
       and reasons promulgated on 19 March 2018. The Appellant sought
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was granted by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on 25 June 2018. Permission was
       granted on the grounds that the Judge's findings at [19] were
       arguably contrary to the evidence before him. Further, it was
       arguable that the Judge had not placed any reliance on bank
       statements produced by the Appellant and his partner covering the
       period of their life together.

       The Grounds

    3. The grounds assert that the Judge made findings that were contrary
       to the evidence. It was the Appellant's case, as set out in his
       witness statement at [13] that he did not pay bills for his property
       because it was included in the rent. This was confirmed by his
       landlord in a letter. The Appellant gave this explanation for why he
       did not receive utility bills at his home address. The sponsor
       confirmed this in her statement at [9]. It is asserted that the
       landlord also confirmed this in his statement at [4].


    4. It is argued that there was no basis for the Judge to reject the
       information provided by the landlord in his statement and
       consequently the Judge's finding that the Appellant was unable to
       satisfactorily explain why, if he was living with the EEA national
       as claimed, he was unable to produce Council tax and utility bills
       in joint names is said to be unsafe.

    5. The Appellant also argues that the Judge misdirected himself at [12]
       regarding the letter issued by the accountant as the letter was
       obtained for the sponsor and not her partner. It is also asserted
       that the Judge erred in relation to the bank statements which
       covered the five years and were evidence of their life together.


    6. The appeal therefore comes before the Upper Tribunal in order to
       determine whether there was an error of law in the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal and if so whether to set that decision aside.

       The Hearing

    7. The Appellant did not attend the hearing but submitted a bundle of
       documents. It was clear from the bundle that he was aware of the
       date and place of the hearing and so at 12.00pm I exercised my
       discretion to hear the appeal in his absence. I heard submissions
       from Mr Howells. He said that the Judge made the decision on the
       papers at the request of the Appellant. In reaching adverse findings
       the Judge addressed himself to the documentary evidence before him.
       Unfortunately, the Respondent had not submitted a bundle. The Judge
       carefully considered all of the evidence and reached reasoned
       findings. The main part of the grounds related to [18] of decision
       and the possible inconsistency as to whether the Appellant was
       liable to bills and Council tax. The grounds as pleaded ignored the
       Judge's concerns at [16] and [17] about 6 tenancy agreements on
       which he considered there were identical signatures. He expressed
       concerns in relation to the fact that they were photocopies and bore
       such similarities which would be remarkable if issued separately on
       each date. Even if the Judge made an error in relation to the
       tenancy agreements, he had more serious concerns about the
       agreements as evidence of cohabitation and any error in relation to
       the subclause in the tenancies was not material.


    8. Paragraph 7 of the grounds related to [21] of the decision. If there
       was a factual error in relation to an accountant's letter it was not
       a material error of law. The key point was that the Appellant did
       not explain why correspondence had been sent to address when she had
       only been a partner for 2 years. There was no corroborative evidence
       regarding the sister's address. It was a further example of the
       Judge assessing the evidence in a meticulous way and assessing
       whether the evidence supported or did not support the claimed
       cohabitation.

       Discussion

    9. The appeal was dealt with in the absence of a hearing at the
       Appellant's request. The First-tier Tribunal did not find that the
       evidence provided by the Appellant demonstrated that he was in a
       durable relationship with an EEA national for a five year period. He
       considered the tenancy agreements which had been submitted by the
       Appellant at [16] to [19] of the decision.  The Respondent contended
       in the RFRL that the tenancy agreements were photocopies, contained
       absolutely identical signatures for the Landlord and the Appellant
       in terms of both the signatures and their place on the pages and the
       signature pages were not dated. The Respondent also contended that
       the Appellant had not produced any corroborating evidence of joint
       residence such as Council Tax bills and utility bills showing both
       names.


   10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the Appellant's explanation
       in relation to the signatures and gave adequate reasons for
       rejecting it at [16]. He concluded that the Appellant's explanation
       that he may have attached the wrong signature pages to the wrong
       tenancy agreements was not satisfactory given that the signatures
       were identical. The Judge had further, adequately reasoned, concerns
       about the tenancy agreements before him at [17].

   11. The Judge also dealt with the Appellant's explanation as to why
       there were no Council tax bills and no utility bills in joint names.
       He noted the Appellant's explanation that the bills were included in
       the rent and that the agreements stated that the rent included
       utility bills and rates. However, he found that this was in
       contradiction to paragraph 3.2 of the agreements which required the
       tenant to pay to the authorities to whom they were due, Council tax
       and other bills.  Whilst the grounds assert that the Judge did not
       have regard to the witness statement of the landlord in coming to
       his conclusions in relation to the issue of the reliability of the
       tenancy agreements this is not correct. The Judge states at [22]
       that he had regard to the witness statement of the stated landlord
       and the Schedule of Rent payments in joint names which he states he
       has considered as part of the exercise of looking at the evidence in
       the round. However, given his concerns in relation to the tenancy
       agreements he finds that reliance could not be placed on those
       documents. It was open to the Judge to conclude in the light of the
       inconsistencies that he identified in the agreements and in the
       light of his findings in relation to the signatures on the documents
       that they were not reliable evidence of cohabitation.


   12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that there was an inconsistency
       in the Accountant's letter at page 54 of the Appellant's bundle
       which identified the business as "Ms A Goncalves T/A Care & Clean"
       rather than as a partnership identity. Further, the accounts were
       stated to be in the name of "Ms A & Ms GS Goncalves T/A Care &
       Clean" whereas the partner was stated to be Ms R Goncalves as was
       the undated letter from her at page 53. The First-tier Tribunal
       found that this letter did not explain why any correspondence had
       been sent to her address for several years when she had only been a
       partner for 2 years. Further, he found that there was no attempt to
       produce corroborative evidence to show that this was the EEA
       national's sister's address. Further, the tax return at pages 61 to
       69 had the EEA national's address as [ ~ ] despite it being her
       Personal Tax Return.

   13. At [19] of his skeleton argument in his appeal bundle the Appellant
       states that the letter issued by his partner's accountant at page 54
       of the bundle filed with the First-tier Tribunal was obtained for
       his partner only. She did not ask the accountant to confirm the
       business address of her sister. The letter from his partner's sister
       confirmed that her address was being used for business purposes and
       that official correspondence was sent to her address.

   14. I find that it was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to find on
       the evidence before him that there were discrepancies in the
       documentation relating to the Appellant's sponsor's business. The
       initials of her business partner/sister differed as between the
       documents as her name was given as both "Ms GS Goncalves" and "Rita
       Goncalves". Further, the address on her personal tax return was not
       her home address and although her sister was appointed as partner in
       January 2016 there was no evidence to show that the accounts or tax
       returns had been sent to the Appellant's address, rather than his
       sponsor's sister's, before that date. It was therefore open to the
       Judge to find that this evidence did not assist the Appellant in
       demonstrating that he was in a durable relationship with his sponsor
       for a five year period.

   15. Further, it is clear from [22] of the decision that notwithstanding
       the fact that the bank statements were not before the First-tier
       Tribunal Judge, he accepted that they were before the Respondent and
       this was not a matter that he held against the Appellant.
   16. In all the circumstances therefore, it was open to the Judge to find
       that the evidence before him did not establish that the Appellant
       had resided in the UK with the EEA national in accordance with the
       Regulations for a 5 year period or that he was in a durable
       relationship.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material error  of
law and I do not set it aside.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 2 October 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

