
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal ref: EA/01257/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 1 October 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Cyprien NGALEMO-TCHOKOTCHIEU
                                                                  Respondent


                                DETERMINATION

 1. Parties are as above.  For continuity and ease of  reference,  however,
    the rest of this decision refers to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon, born on 1 June 1992.

 3. On 6 August 2018, the appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  as  the
    husband of an EEA national,  Geanina  Nistor,  a  citizen  of  Romania,
    residing in the UK.    The marriage took place on 4 April 2017.

 4. The ECO refused the application by a decision dated 17 September  2018,
    finding the relationship not to be  "a  suitably  subsisting  one"  for
    these reasons:

      i) discrepancies  over  dates  of  beginning  of  relationship,  first
         meeting, and last seeing each other, between application  form  and
         covering letter from solicitors;

     ii) 18 month gap in evidence of contact, prior to marriage;

    iii) 7 month gap in evidence of contact, after marriage;

     iv) no supporting evidence for claim of financial support from  sponsor
         to appellant.

 5. The appellant lodged notice of appeal to the FtT on 11  December  2018,
    case reference EA/07760/18.   In  his  grounds  he  said  that  he  was
    complaining  about  errors  made  by  his  former  solicitors  in   the
    application, and that  he  would  be  represented  by  counsel  at  the
    hearing.

 6. That appeal came before FtT Judge Suffield-Thompson on  10  June  2019.
    The appellant was not represented, and provided  no  further  evidence.
    The sponsor did not attend.

 7. In her decision, promulgated on 13 June 2019,  Judge  Suffield-Thompson
    found the evidence of  the  relationship  lacking,  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 8. In the meantime, on 11 January 2019, the applicant applied again for an
    EEA family permit.  The ECO refused his application by a  notice  dated
    21 February 2019.  The notice does not refer back to previous  reasons.
    It is based  on  inconsistencies  between  the  answers  given  by  the
    appellant and the sponsor at  interviews  held  on  20  February  2019,
    giving "reasonable grounds to suspect that the marriage ... is  one  of
    convenience for the  sole  purpose  of  you  obtaining  an  immigration
    advantage".

 9. The appellant lodged notice of appeal to the  FtT  on  12  March  2019,
    which has the present case reference, EA/01257/2019.  He asked for this
    to be "linked to his existing appeal" (which had not yet  been  heard).
    He said that he was attaching two  witness  statements,  and  would  be
    sending other evidence, detailed at section 3, but  none  of  that  has
    been produced, either with the application, or since.  His grounds  are
    that the respondent reversed the burden of proof; the  interviews  were
    not properly reflected in  the  refusal;  and  although  the  interview
    record was requested, it had not been provided.  He says that he  would
    be represented by counsel at the hearing.

10. This appeal came before FtT Judge Bell on 4 October  2019.  Again,  the
    appellant was not represented, and provided no  further  evidence,  and
    the sponsor  did  not  attend.   The  respondent's  presenting  officer
    provided copies of the decision of Judge Suffield-Thompson and  of  the
    sponsor's interview.  She asked for an adjournment to provide a copy of
    the appellant's interview.  The judge declined, because copies of  both
    ought to have been provided in compliance with the FtT's directions.

11. In her decision, promulgated on 8 October  2019,  Judge  Bell  directed
    herself correctly on the burden of proof  on  the  ECO.   At  [26]  she
    declined to "rely" on the decision of Judge  Suffield-Thompson  because
    it "does not appear to deal with the issue of marriage  of  convenience
    and does not apply the burden of proof to the respondent".  She held at
    [28-30] that the ECO's "suspicions" were not enough to shift the burden
    to the appellant, and  allowed  the  appeal.   However,  she  suggested
    finally at [31] that it would be wise to re-interview  the  parties  on
    "whether there had been a relevant change of circumstances such as that
    the sponsor is no longer living in the UK or the marriage  has  ended".



12. The SSHD sought permission to appeal, on these grounds:

      i) inadequate reasons / misdirection  in  law  -  nothing  to  warrant
         departure from previous decision, in terms of Devaseelan;  glossing
         over dearth of evidence from the appellant;

     ii)   procedural   irregularity   -   interview   record   crucial   to
         discrepancies; case should have been adjourned for a decision based
         on all relevant evidence.

13. Permission was granted by a decision  dated  on  28  January  2020  and
    issued  on  3  March  2020,  on  the  view  that  Judge  Bell  arguably
    misunderstood the earlier decision, which found the relationship not to
    be genuine, and so in effect did deal with whether it was a marriage of
    convenience; and that it was arguably unfair not to adjourn, given  the
    importance placed on absence of a transcript, and the suggestion of re-
    interview.

14. The UT issued directions on 7  April  2020  with  a  view  to  deciding
    without a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether  its
    decision should be set aside.   An opportunity was also given to submit
    on whether the UT should proceed without a hearing.

15. In a response dated 1 May 2020, the respondent relied upon the  grounds
    and asked the UT to decide the case "on the papers".

16. The case came before me for further decision.   There  was  nothing  on
    file from the appellant in response to directions.  I noted that he had
    been served with those, and with the response on behalf of the ECO,  to
    the email address he provided.  In my decision and directions issued to
    parties on 3 July 2020, I took  the  view  that  the  UT  might  justly
    proceed to decide the above questions without a hearing.  The substance
    of that decision is repeated herein.

17. On ground (i), Judge Bell was right  in  noting  a  deficiency  in  the
    previous decision.  Judge Suffield-Thompson treated the case  the  case
    as one where the burden was on the appellant, rather than initially  on
    the ECO.

18. However, Judge Bell was wrong in thinking that Judge  Suffield-Thompson
    had not considered whether this  was  a  marriage  of  convenience;  in
    substance, that is what the previous decision was about, and  it  stood
    unappealed.

19. This may not have been  a  classic  instance  for  applying  Devaseelan
    principles and taking the previous decision as the starting point;  but
    the reasons for leaving it entirely out of account do not stand  up  to
    scrutiny.

20. It is not obvious that on a correct appreciation of the initial  burden
    of proof, the decision  of  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  would  have  been
    different.

21. The appellant had said he would address the issues raised in the  first
    decision of the ECO, which remained relevant, but had  never  done  so.
    Those are matters which Judge Bell overlooked as a result of her error,
    so it was material.

22. On ground (ii),  the  respondent  was  at  fault  for  not  making  the
    transcript of the appellant's  interview  available  to  the  FtT;  and
    despite founding on the point in the grounds, the transcript has  still
    not been tendered.

23. However, although this is not quite the point made by ground (ii),  the
    decision under appeal specified clear discrepancies.  The judge, in  my
    view, was entitled to refuse an adjournment, and non-production of  one
    of the transcripts might have weighed in her conclusion;  but  she  was
    wrong to think that non-production automatically meant that the  burden
    did not shift.  The ECO was entitled  to  an  answer  to  the  case  on
    discrepancies set out in the decision.

24. The grounds show that Judge Bell fell into two traps, which misled  her
    into failing to consider the substance of the case.

25. The decision of Judge Bell was set aside.  Directions permitted parties
    to make further submissions within 14 days of 3 July 2020.   As  of  28
    September 2020, no submissions are on file from either side.

26. There is a record on the file, dated 7 April  2020,  that  the  sponsor
    stated to a member of the  tribunal's  administrative  staff  over  the
    telephone that she no longer supported the appeal.

27. The evidence is sufficient for the respondent to discharge the  initial
    onus of showing a marriage of convenience; and taken as  a  whole,  the
    evidence does not show that the appellant is entitled to an EEA  family
    permit as the spouse of an EEA national.

28. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
      28 September 2020







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

