
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/01068/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17th January 2018                       | On 8th February 2018            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                            Prisca Chidera Nnaji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Siaw instructed by R Spio & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against decisions of the Secretary of State dated 12th January
    2016 to revoke her residence card and to refuse an  application  for  a
    residence card  on  the  basis  of  her  retained  right  of  residence
    following her divorce from an EEA national.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Khawar dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  19th  April
    2017. The Appellant  now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 30th October 2017.

 2. The issue in this appeal relates  to  the  Appellant's  application  to
    withdraw the appeal and the judge's consideration of that application.

 3. In the decision the judge noted that at the hearing on 10th April  2017
    his attention was drawn to a letter dated 7th April 2017 faxed  to  the
    Tribunal  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  stating  that   they   were
    instructed to withdraw the appeal stating  "our  client  has  indicated
    that she does not wish to proceed  with  the  appeal  due  to  personal
    reasons."  The judge considered  Rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 which
    states that a party may give notice of the withdrawal of  their  appeal
    in writing or orally at the hearing "and in either  case  must  specify
    the reasons  for  that  withdrawal".   The  judge  indicated  that  the
    Presenting Officer objected to the withdrawal  under  Rule  17  on  the
    basis that the claimed personal reasons do not satisfy the  requirement
    that reasons should be specified.

 4. The judge agreed with that saying

         "10. ... To simply assert  "personal  reasons"  does  not  in  fact
         provide  any  or  at   all   adequate   reasons   for   withdrawal.
         Consequently I concluded that the purported notice of withdrawal is
         defective and this appeal remains a live issue.

         11. I came to the aforesaid conclusion especially in light  of  the
         fact that the Appellant has failed to file any documentary evidence
         to engage with this appeal and in view of the nature of the  issues
         raised in the Respondent's refusal letter - to the effect that  the
         Appellant and indeed her partner Mr Chukwuemeka  Michael  Chibuike-
         Nebo, both  entered  into  marriages  of  convenience  with  Polish
         nationals but nevertheless remained living together.

         12. As evident from  the  above  circumstances  the  Appellant  has
         chosen not to attend this appeal and clearly has also chosen not to
         engage with matters raised in the Respondent's reason for refusal."



 5. The judge  went  on  to  consider  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    documentary evidence before him and concluded that the  Respondent  had
    provided sufficient evidence to establish reasonable suspicion that the
    Appellant's marriage to the Sponsor was a marriage of convenience.  The
    judge found, in accordance with the authority of Papajorgi (EEA  spouse
    - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038  (IAC),  that  the
    burden of proof was upon the Appellant to establish  the  marriage  was
    not one of convenience but had she had failed  to  do  so.   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 6. In the Grounds of Appeal the Appellant  contends  the  judge  erred  in
    determining the appeal when he clearly had notification that the appeal
    was withdrawn.  It is contended that the Appellant provided reasons for
    withdrawing the appeal by informing the Tribunal it was due to personal
    reasons.  It is contended that these  reasons  were  adequate.   It  is
    further contended that the Appellant's representatives received a  call
    from the Tribunal indicating that the notice  of  withdrawal  had  been
    received and confirming that the  appeal  would  be  withdrawn.  It  is
    therefore contended that it was perverse for the judge  to  decide  the
    appeal in the absence of the Appellant after having  been  notified  of
    the reasons for withdrawing the appeal.

 7. In granting permission to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
    considered it arguable that the judge erred in refusing  to  treat  the
    appeal as withdrawn under Rule 17.  It was further considered  that  if
    the Appellant is able to establish that there was a telephone  call  to
    indicate that the appeal had been withdrawn then it was  arguable  that
    it was a procedural error amounting to an error of law to determine the
    appeal in the Appellant's absence.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Siaw submitted a photocopy of  a  telephone
    attendance sheet dated 10th April 2015 with the initials RSA indicating
    that there was a telephone call to the Tribunal to  enquire  about  the
    fax sent on 7th April requesting withdrawal of the  Appellant's  appeal
    saying that the caller spoke to someone who  said  they  would  send  a
    message to Taylor House to enquire if the request  had  been  received.
    There is a further note of a telephone call from the Tribunal  on  10th
    April 2017 "saying a fax had been received  and  the  appeal  would  be
    withdrawn" and that has initials WMA.  Mr Melvin did not accept this as
    sufficient evidence of a telephone call.  In his submission, had such a
    telephone call taken place, there was no reason why the Tribunal  would
    not have acted upon that and taken the case out of the list.

Error of law

 9. I do not accept  that  the  copy  telephone  attendance  is  sufficient
    evidence of a purported telephone call from the Tribunal advising  that
    an appeal had been treated as  withdrawn.   It  is  not  clear  who  is
    alleged to have made or received the two telephone calls  referred  to.
    No reason has been given as to why someone from the solicitor's  office
    has not provided better evidence of this purported call.  There  is  no
    evidence as to the timing of these calls.  They could have  been  after
    the judge dealt with the case.  I note that the judge said  that  there
    was a delay in the Home Office Presenting  Officer's  arrival  and  the
    case did not start till approximately 11:30 [7]. It is not at all clear
    when these telephone calls were made.

10. In any event Rule 17 is clear.  The Rule was further considered in  the
    case of TPM (FTT appeals - withdrawal) Vietnam [2017] UKUT 00295  (IAC)
    where the then president Mr Justice McCloskey made clear that  judicial
    evaluation of both the withdrawal of  an  Appellant's  appeal  and  the
    withdrawal of the Secretary of State's case for appeal is required.  In
    a decision which refers to the Presidential  Guidance  Note  and  other
    professional Regulations the Tribunal notes  at  paragraph  18  "...the
    central stipulation in Rule 17 is uncompromising.  The reasons for  the
    withdrawal 'must' be specified.   This  is  expressed  as  a  mandatory
    requirement,  subject  to  no  exceptions".   And  at   paragraph   20,
    "Fundamentally, I consider that Rule 17 envisages and  requires  active
    and properly informed judicial involvement and decision making".

11. At paragraph 22 the Upper Tribunal said that a requirement  to  provide
    the Tribunal with the reasons  in  support  of  a  proposed  withdrawal
    clearly envisages that there will be  judicial  consideration.   It  is
    noted  that  the  judge  must  be  satisfied  that  the  Appellant   is
    withdrawing the appeal  freely  and  understands  the  consequences  of
    withdrawal and this will not be so if, for example, it lacks  coherence
    or is based on a material misunderstanding or misconception.  It states
    at 22(vii) that the reasons must be such as to persuade the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that the course proposed is appropriate.  At  22  (viii)
    the tribunal says that in considering whether withdrawal is appropriate
    the judge will take into account, inter alia, that Tribunal proceedings
    do not partake of the essential characteristics of private  law  inter-
    partes litigation with the result that withdrawal requires, in  effect,
    judicial adjudication. At 22 (ix) the Tribunal notes that fundamentally
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge must be  satisfied  that  there  is  good
    reason for a withdrawal.  At 22 (x) the Tribunal says that there is  no
    obligation for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  approve  the  proposed
    withdrawal, in fact Rule 17 plainly contemplates  that  a  proposal  to
    withdraw may be refused.

12. In this case the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  the  application
    to withdraw and gave reasons for finding that no good reason  had  been
    given for the application to withdrawal and for refusing to  treat  the
    appeal as withdrawn.  It has not been asserted that these  reasons  are
    perverse or irrational.  The judge considered that the phrase 'personal
    reasons' was not a sufficient or adequate reason for withdrawal.   This
    was a decision open to the judge on the evidence and in accordance with
    Rule 17.

13. Accordingly in this case I  accept  that  the  judge  was  required  to
    consider the application for withdrawal and made a decision open to him
    on the basis of the evidence  before  him  and  on  the  basis  of  the
    application to withdraw.  In my view  the  evidence  submitted  at  the
    hearing before me by Mr Siaw was insufficient to corroborate the  claim
    that the Appellant's solicitor's had been notified that the appeal  had
    been treated as withdrawn and in any event  any  such  assurance  would
    have been inappropriate and clearly wrong in light of the  contents  of
    Rule 17.

14. Accordingly in my view the Grounds of Appeal have not  been  made  out.
    The judge made no material error in refusing to accept the  application
    to withdraw the appeal. The judge made no material error in  proceeding
    to consider the appeal in these circumstances.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.
No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Dated: 5 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
