
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01869/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                          Mr AHMAD ZOBEYER GHAFARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands, aged 21.  In a  decision
    sent on 4 May  2018  Judge  Hosie  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    dismissed his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on  23
    January 2018, refusing to grant him a permanent  residence  card.   The
    basis of his application for such a card was that  he  was  the  direct
    family member of an EEA national mother exercising Treaty rights in the
    UK.  The respondent refused to grant him EEA status on the  basis  that
    he had not furnished proof he was related as claimed.

2.   By the  time  of  the  appeal  the  appellant  produced  the  following
    documentation:

         "The Appellant submitted the following information  in  support  of
         his application: - letter to confirm that he is  attending  Cardiff
         High School; exam results for 2015/2016; Student  certificate  from
         University of South Wales; Council tax student certificate;  letter
         from Appellant's mother dated 11 February  2018;  and  evidence  of
         permanent residence of Dr Tania Ghafari dated 1 October 2015".

3.   The judge considered this documentation and concluded at paragraph 11:

         "No additional evidence has been provided by or on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant despite the additional time afforded to him.  He needs to
         provide proof of residence in  relation  to  himself  and  his  EEA
         sponsor mother together with proof that he is related  to  his  EEA
         sponsor mother.  Unfortunately, on the  evidence  before  me  I  am
         unable to find that the Appellant meets the EEA regulations".

4.   The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  enclosed,  inter  alia,  DNA  test
    results and P60 forms relating to his mother's employment in the UK for
    six consecutive years.

5.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Judge Grimmett on  31
    October 2018 on the  footing  that  "As  a  person  is  entitled  to  a
    residence card upon production of  [the  requisite  evidence]  I  grant
    leave to appeal notwithstanding that the Judge made no error of law  in
    concluding as he did on the evidence before him".  With  respect,  that
    was not a proper basis for granting permission, but the case  has  been
    listed and I shall proceed to address the grounds as they stand.

6.   The grounds cannot be made out.  Manifestly at the date of hearing  the
    appellant had not produced evidence to establish  either  that  he  was
    related as claimed or that his mother was in the UK  exercising  Treaty
    rights for  five  consecutive  years.   Evidence  produced  post-appeal
    cannot found a material error of law, save in exceptional circumstances
    which do not obtain here.  Accordingly, my conclusion is that the judge
    did not materially err in law. As I indicated at the hearing, it  would
    appear that the appellant  is  now  in  a  position  to  make  a  fresh
    application to the Home Office, producing the requisite evidence to the
    respondent establishing that he is a direct  family  member,  in  which
    case failure in this appeal will not mean anything more than  temporary
    failure in his bid to establish treaty rights; but that is not a matter
    for me in the context of this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

