
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
EA/01453/2016

                                                 ea/01446/2016

                                                 ea/01451/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |       Determination & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 22nd June 2017                     |       On 4th July 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        (1) mrs syeda shagufta mazhar
                            (2) mr syed asad ali
                         (3) miss syeda nida mazhar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Shergill,  promulgated  on   24th   November   2016.    In   the
    determination, the judge  dismissed  the  appeals  of  the  Appellants,
    whereupon the Appellants subsequently applied for,  and  were  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants comprise a family of a mother, the first Appellant,  who
    was on 14th August 1963, and her two children,  the  second  Appellant,
    her son, born on  27th  January  1990,  and  her  daughter,  the  third
    Appellant, who was born on  6th  December  1988.   All  claimed  to  be
    dependants of an EEA national, Mr Syed Abbas Mazhar, who was a  citizen
    of  Italy.   They  appealed  against  the  Respondent's  refusal  of  a
    residence card as a confirmation that they were entitled to  reside  in
    the UK as the family members  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge  Shergill,  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    Sponsor had been a qualified person  throughout  the  period  from  his
    application to the decision, and up to the date  of  the  hearing  (see
    paragraph 9) but the  issue  was  whether  the  three  Appellants  were
    dependent upon the  Sponsor,  Mr  Syed  Abbas  Mazhar.   As  the  judge
    explained, she queried "where the evidence was relating to this in  the
    bundle", but she was met with a reply that, "it was submitted that this
    was not a live issue relied on by the Respondent", to which  the  judge
    stated, "I explained that I had to be satisfied  that  the  Regulations
    were met" (paragraph 17).

 4.  The  judge  offered  the  Appellants  an   adjournment   for   further
    instructions to be taken and this was  declined  (paragraph  17).   The
    judge went on to then conclude that she could not  be  persuaded  about
    the evidence relating  to  dependency  because  there  were  two  adult
    children, who were fast approaching 30 years of age, and there  was  no
    satisfactory  evidence  about  dependency,  and  how  it   arose.    In
    particular, the second Appellant failed to explain  what  he  had  been
    doing with his time and there is no real explanation  given  about  the
    third Appellant, and what she did in Italy or in the United Kingdom.

 5. In fact, the judge went  on  to  quote  that,  "those  issues  went  to
    credibility and to assess that  there  was  not  an  abuse  of  rights"
    (paragraph 18).  The judge went on  to  note  that  the  son  had  been
    educated to a level whereby he could have worked as  an  accountant  in
    Italy and it begged the question as to why he remained a  dependant  at
    the age of 27 years (paragraph 18).

 6. The second reason why the judge could not conclude that the  Appellants
    were dependants as claimed was that there was "very  little  disposable
    income in the household" and, "it begs the question  whether  there  is
    true dependency on the Sponsor alone" so that the judge was  driven  to
    the conclusion that there must be income from other sources  (paragraph
    19).  In short, the judge was not satisfied that there was a dependency
    such as to meet with the requirements of European law.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in raising a  new
    matter not relied upon by the Respondent and that the  judge  erred  in
    finding that the EEA national had to show he was  working  continuously
    between the date of the decision and the hearing.

 8. On 6th April 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    given that the  judge  had  accepted  that  the  EEA  national  was  in
    employment, it was arguable that the judge erred in finding him not  to
    be a worker.  It was also arguable that the judge erred  in  raising  a
    new issue in circumstances where the  Respondent  was  represented  and
    present at the hearing and had not sought to raised this issue.

 9. On 2nd May 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that  the
    judge had directed himself appropriately.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing before me, the  Appellants  were  unrepresented.   Their
    sponsoring EEA national, Mr Syed Abbas Mazhar, undertook to explain  to
    the Tribunal how the appeal was being pursued.  He said that he was now
    working.  He had brought evidence with him.  He said that there was  no
    proof earlier on.  The proof was now provided and he wanted  to  submit
    it.

11. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that this appeal could not succeed for
    the following two reasons.  First, any evidence that was not before the
    judge, could not now be presented, unless this Tribunal  first  made  a
    finding of an error of law, so as to allow the Tribunal  to  admit  new
    evidence.  Second, it was simply incorrect to say that  the  judge  was
    raising issues that had not been raised before.  Mr  Mills  handed  out
    the Presenting Officer's typed notes, which are detailed and clear,  to
    show that the judge at the outset set out that there were three  issues
    that needed to be determined.  The first was the  relationship  of  all
    three Appellants with the EEA national.

12. The second was the dependency of the second and third Appellant on  the
    EEA national in the light of them being over 21.

13. The third was whether or not the EEA  national  was  exercising  treaty
    rights.  The refusal letter had  only  concentrated  on  the  issue  of
    relationship,  but  in  order  for  the  Appellants  to  meet  the  EEA
    Regulations, all parts had to be met for a residence card to be granted
    under Regulation 17.  The Presenting Officer states in his  notes  that
    he accepted that this must be right.  He also  states  that  the  judge
    then gave the representative of  the  Appellants,  Mr  Nazir  Ahmed  of
    Counsel, who is a skilful and knowledgeable practitioner  of  EEA  law,
    the opportunity to  take  further  instructions  and  to  consider  his
    position in the light of the documentary evidence only  addressing  the
    one issue.

14. The notes say that, "he declined to take the opportunity of either  and
    said he was content to deal with it in the hearing.  The  judge  double
    checked and  Counsel  confirmed  his  willingness  to  continue".   The
    Presenting Officer records that no  concessions  or  undertakings  were
    given by either party.

15. Mr Mills went on to submit that, once Counsel for  the  Appellants  had
    decided to proceed, it could no longer be argued  that  they  had  been
    taken by surprise and that a new issue had been raised.  Second, and in
    any event, the Rules had to be complied with, and dependency had to  be
    proven, in the appropriate manner, and in this case the judge  was  not
    satisfied that there was a dependency.   It  was  accepted  that  there
    could be a dependency "of choice", but the judge was not satisfied that
    even this was the case, because he was of the  view  that  some  income
    must be  coming  into  the  family,  given  the  paucity  of  financial
    resources that the Sponsor enjoyed, and the judge was entitled to  come
    to this view.  As for the  issue  of  Regulation  8(B)  raised  in  the
    determination, this was a "red herring" because the  judge  only  dealt
    with this because it featured in Mr Ahmed's skeleton argument, but  did
    not go to the central issue which was before the judge, and  which  the
    judge properly decided.

16. For his part, Mr Syed Abbas Mazhar, the Sponsor, explained that he  had
    enquired at the reception before coming to  the  courtroom  whether  he
    could tender the new evidence that he had brought with him, and he  was
    told that he could present it  to  this  Tribunal,  and  he  should  be
    allowed the chance to have the matter considered on the  basis  of  the
    new evidence, now that he could show that he was working.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, both the judge's determination, and the typed up  notes  of  the
    Presenting Officer on the day, confirm that the  judge  set  out  three
    issues, under EEA law that he had to decide, in the light of that  gave
    Counsel  for  the  Appellants   the   opportunity   to   take   further
    instructions, and if necessary to seek an adjournment, but  this  offer
    was declined.  In  fact,  the  offer  was  put  twice  to  Counsel  who
    indicated that he was content to proceed with the hearing and  to  deal
    with issues as they arose.  Having taken this stance, it was  not  open
    then to the Appellants to say that they had been taken by  surprise  by
    an issue that was not in the refusal letter.

19. Second, and in any event, a decision maker cannot make a decision  that
    is not empowered by law to be made.   Compliance  with  the  Rules  and
    Regulations is essential.  In that respect, there had to be evidence of
    dependency.  It is a fact that the only assertion that the Sponsor  was
    working before the decision letter was one that was  made  orally.   By
    the time that the hearing arose before Judge Shergill, all that existed
    were witness  statements.   There  were  no  payslips,  no  letters  of
    employment, and no P60, or other financial documentation.

20. The Sponsor is now aggrieved that he has been prevented from presenting
    evidence about his employment but this Upper Tribunal can only  proceed
    to that extent if there is firstly a finding of an error of law.

21. As explained to the Sponsor, I  can  make  no  such  finding  unless  I
    conclude that the judge was wrong on the material that  existed  before
    the judge on 21st November 2016.  That is a conclusion I cannot come to
    given  the  careful  and  sensitive  manner  in  which  the  judge  has
    approached the hearing  and  the  comprehensive  manner  in  which  the
    determination is set out.  Accordingly, the Appellants cannot succeed.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 2nd July 2017


