
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01344/2015
     EA/01518/2015
     EA/01520/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5th January 2017                        |On 23 January 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     MARGARET KOROMA (FIRST respondent)
                 HAJARATU RADIATU KOROMA (SECOND respondent)
                      Gibrill KOROMA (THIRD respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Mr Hussain, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Robson) which in a decision promulgated on  8th  August
    2016 allowed the appeals of the Respondents against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal  to  issue  them  with  permanent  residence  cards  as
    dependent family members of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

 2. For the sake of clarity throughout this decision I shall refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and to Margaret Koroma, Hajaratu
    Koroma  and  Gibrill  Koroma  as  "the  Appellants,"  reflecting  their
    respective positions before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  also  set  out
    here that originally before the First-tier Tribunal there was a  Fourth
    Appellant Isatha Koroma, but there is no challenge to the  decision  in
    respect of her appeal.

Background

 3. The Appellants are all citizens of Sierra Leone.  They are  all  adults
    and were all aged over 21 years on  26th  April  2015  when  they  made
    application for permanent residence cards as dependent  family  members
    of an EEA national.

 4. The Appellants are siblings and  are  the  natural  children  of  Frank
    Koroma their father.  Frank Koroma is married to Zeinab Koroma  who  is
    an Austrian national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 5. In 1994 Frank Koroma entered into a traditional  marriage  with  Zeinab
    Koroma. Zeinab Koroma then travelled to Austria  in  January  2002  and
    subsequently acquired Austrian citizenship.  Zeinab  and  Frank  Koroma
    then underwent a church wedding ceremony in January 2004 and in January
    2005 Frank Koroma joined his wife Zeinab as an EEA family member.

 6. The three Appellants  (together  with  another  sibling)  travelled  to
    Austria and joined their father and step-mother as dependent EEA family
    members.

 7. In September 2009 the Appellants arrived in the UK  with  their  father
    and step mother and applied for residence cards.  Residence cards  were
    granted to the Appellants to expire on 22nd September 2015.

 8. On 26th April 2015 the Appellants applied for permanent residence cards
    on the basis of five years' residence in the UK as  the  dependants  of
    their  EEA  national  step-mother.   The   Respondent   refused   these
    applications under Regulation 7 of the 2006 EEA Regulations and  it  is
    this refusal which forms the basis of the present appeals.

 9. The issue in each case, is one of dependency.  In short the  Respondent
    was  not  satisfied  that  any  of  the  three  Appellants  could  show
    dependency within the meaning of the EEA Regulation, for  a  period  of
    five continuous years.

First-tier Tribunal

10. When their appeals came before the First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Robson
    took into account the documentary evidence set out in the  Respondent's
    bundle and also took oral evidence from each of the Appellants in turn.
     He also heard oral evidence from Zeinab and Frank Koroma.

11. He then made findings at [102] to [119].

12. Before making his findings the judge noted that he had been directed to
    two cases, Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Regulation 8(2)) Mauritius  [2012]
    UKUT 79 and Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT  00341  (Paragraphs
    [95] and [96] of his decision).

13. Both of those cases deal with the situation of extended family members.
     That is not the position in the present appeals, all three  Appellants
    are accepted as direct family members and it is hard to see what  point
    is being made by the introduction of those cases. I am  satisfied  that
    this has contributed to an erroneous approach being taken by the judge.

14. The issue before  Judge  Robson  was  one  of  dependency  and  whether
    dependency could be established over a continuous five year period. The
    dependency had to be shown to  be  one  of  necessity  within  the  EEA
    Regulations.  I find that the judge has failed to adequately deal  with
    what is the central issue in these appeals, no  doubt  because  he  has
    misunderstood the position and focused on dealing with  the  Appellants
    as extended family members rather than direct family members.

15. So far as the First Appellant  is  concerned  the  judge's  finding  on
    dependency appears to be confined to three abbreviated sentences  which
    simply concludes as follows

         "She therefore had demonstrated some financial  dependency  on  her
         parents."

    So far as the Second Appellant is  concerned  the  judge's  abbreviated
    findings seem to amount to a conclusion that she  is  still  very  much
    dependent on her parents even though she has a partner Mark  with  whom
    she spends most nights, and he provides some financial support for her.
    There is no analysis of why in these circumstances she  is  still  very
    much dependent on her parents.

16. So far as the Third Appellant is concerned the judge  makes  a  finding
    that he is in full-time employment  and  has  a  partner  but  that  he
    regularly sees  his  family  and  that  he  is  very  much  financially
    dependent on his parents.  Again  this  misses  the  central  issue  of
    explaining why someone, an adult,  in  employment  with  a  partner  is
    financially dependent upon his parents.

17. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the judge had not assessed the question of
    dependency in the round and had not engaged in the  task  of  assessing
    whether the dependency is of necessity. There is no engagement with the
    question of why the Appellants were unable to  provide  for  their  own
    essential needs at a time when they lived in their own  properties  and
    held down jobs. It is essential that these points are covered. I  agree
    with those submissions.

18. Despite Mr Hussain's argument  that  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are sustainable and that the Respondent's application  amounts
    to no more than a disagreement, I find otherwise.  The  FtT's  decision
    lacks clear and proper findings and reasoning on the central issues and
    this amounts to a material error.  I therefore set aside  the  decision
    in its entirety.

19. Both representatives were of the view that should I find  an  error  of
    law  which  was  due  to  lack  of  proper  reasoning,  then  the  only
    appropriate course would be to remit  this  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for full rehearing and for fresh findings of fact to be  made.
    I agree with that course.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby  set  aside  for  material
error.  The matter is remitted to that Tribunal (not  Judge  Robson)  for  a
full hearing de novo, with no findings of fact being preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     21 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


