
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01541/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2019                  |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    R B R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel, instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order protecting the identity
    of the appellant's children and stepdaughter.  It is not  clear  to  me
    that they are a major part of the reasoning in the decision but neither
    do I see any public interest in  their  identities  and  I  repeat  the
    anonymity order made pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 but I emphasise  it  is  only  restricting
    anything that discloses the identity of the  appellant's  children  and
    stepdaughter.  The appellant is not anonymised.  Breach of  this  order
    can be punished as a contempt of court. I make this  order  to  protect
    the privacy of children.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant" against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  on  3
    February 2017 to refuse him a registration certificate as  confirmation
    of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.

 3. The claimant is subject to a deportation order made on 11 January  2016
    and served in August 2016.  The claimant is an EEA national.  He  is  a
    citizen of Portugal.  At the risk  of  stating  the  obvious,  the  law
    concerning the deportation of EEA nationals is very different from that
    concerning foreign criminals  and  there  are  many  hurdles  that  the
    Secretary of State  must  negotiate  before  an  EEA  national  can  be
    deported lawfully.  The provisions derive from an EEA Directive but are
    put into English  law  by  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations  2006  and  their  successors  the  Immigration   (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  Both have played a part in this  case
    but I am not aware of any material difference between their  provisions
    in this case.

 4. The claimant has been in trouble on  many  occasions.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  referred,  appropriately,  to  the  claimant  appellant
    having "an appalling criminal record".  He first got  into  trouble  in
    May 2002 for an offence of dishonesty.  He then made court  appearances
    at least once a year until 2009 when he was sent to prison for  fifteen
    months.  There was then a  short  interlude  of  apparently  acceptable
    behaviour but he appeared before the Crown Court on three occasions  in
    2013 for different matters and was in trouble again in February 2015.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal  essentially  for  two
    reasons.  First he decided  that  the  claimant  was  entitled  to  the
    protection appropriate to someone who had resided in the United Kingdom
    for a continuous period of ten years, that is to say the decision could
    only  be  taken  on  "imperative  grounds  of  public   security"   and
    additionally the judge decided that the claimant was  not  someone  who
    "represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society,  taking  into
    account past conduct of the person and that the threat does not need to
    be imminent."  (Paragraph 83).

 6. The Secretary of State must show  that  both  findings  were  for  some
    reason wrong before the decision can  be  shown  to  be  materially  in
    error.

 7. I begin first with the finding that the decision could only be taken on
    "imperative grounds".

 8. The judge's reasoning to justify this is skimpy.  He says,  simply,  at
    paragraph 37 that:

         "the appellant falls under the category of 'imperative  grounds  of
         public security' because he has lived continuously  in  the  United
         Kingdom for more than ten years."

    This is clearly a gross simplification of the law.  I was referred, for
    example, to the decision of  the  Court  of  Justice  to  the  European
    Communities in Franco Vomero (C-424/16) which is reported at  [2018]  3
    WLR 1035.  This confirms that the ten years' residence must  be  lawful
    which will usually mean spent  exercising  treaty  rights  and  that  a
    period of imprisonment  is  likely  to,  but  may  not,  interrupt  the
    integrated process with the consequence that the protection is lost.

 9. Ordinarily I would expect a First-tier Tribunal Judge to have  gone  to
    some length to  explain  a  finding  that  a  person  was  entitled  to
    "imperative grounds" protection.  On the facts of this case  I  do  not
    criticise the judge for what  might  at  first  seem  a  rather  casual
    approach.  As is explained in some detail  in  the  Rule  24  response,
    which was served very promptly by the  claimant's  solicitors,  it  was
    never argued before the First-tier Tribunal that the claimant had other
    than "imperative grounds" protection and  it  was  very  reasonable  to
    assume that he did because that had been found in other  cases  and  no
    reason had been given to suggest that it was still the case.

10. I also note with some surprise, not to say concern,  that  the  Reasons
    for Refusal does not  state  clearly  what  degree  of  protection  the
    Secretary of State considers the EEA national to have acquired.  I find
    this a troubling omission because I cannot see how a  decision  can  be
    reasoned properly without clear reference to the degree  of  protection
    that is appropriate.  Generic quotations from  large  sections  of  the
    Rules are not an acceptable alternative  to  an  unequivocal  statement
    about which Rules are said to apply.  Nevertheless  the  obligation  on
    the judge was to make clear findings  of  fact  which  must  be  either
    reasoned or based on an identified express concession.   There  was  no
    such concession here and there is no reasoning.  I can sympathise  with
    the claimant to some extent because he now finds the Secretary of State
    raising something rather  emphatically  that  was  not  raised  in  the
    refusal letter or in the hearing and so it is a challenge that was with
    some justification unexpected.  Nevertheless  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred.  There was no express concession and the skimpy  reasoning  that
    was given was inadequate to show proper consideration of the issues.

11. I agree with Mr Jarvis that the fact of further offending after earlier
    Tribunal decisions that the person is entitled to "imperative  grounds"
    protection is sufficient reason to dislodge any  presumption  that  the
    protection continues to apply.

12. However this does  not  dispose  of  the  appeal.   Whatever  level  of
    protection is appropriate the claimant cannot be refused a card  unless
    the conditions of paragraph 27(5)(c) are satisfied,  namely  that  "the
    personal conduct of the person must represent a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, taking into account past conduct of the person and that the
    threat does not need to be imminent".

13. The judge's finding that the claimant  does  not  represent  a  present
    threat  is  based  on  several  strands  of  evidence.   First  is  the
    claimant's own evidence.   A  person  can  decide  to  stop  committing
    offences and can resolve to live industriously  and  can  be  believed,
    although it would be bold, if not perverse, to believe an appellant who
    made such a claim, however sincerely expressed, if it is not  supported
    by other strands of evidence.

14. The judge notices as well the claimant has been out  of  trouble  since
    his release from prison in 2015.  Whilst that is  not  an  impressively
    long period of time it represents quite an achievement for the claimant
    given his history.  Obviously he knows that any further trouble at this
    stage of his dealings with the Secretary of  State  would  impact  very
    severely but given that he is characterised as being  weak  and  easily
    influenced this period of good behaviour it is worth something and  the
    judge has given it some weight.

15. Perhaps more importantly the judge gave weight to written evidence from
    two directors of the company that has employed  the  appellant  knowing
    that he has a criminal record.  The fact that  he  has  thrown  himself
    into a job and achieved sufficient respect  to  be  given  some  modest
    responsibility is relevant.  The judge noted at page  69  that  "taking
    the evidence in the round, I find the  [claimant's]  steady  employment
    and work commitment is a material change in his circumstances."

16. The judge also had regard to evidence from the  claimant's  mother  and
    mother-in-law. The judge noted that neither of  them  were  independent
    witnesses, although the mother-in-law could draw on experience from her
    experience as a foster mother of difficult children and the judge  felt
    that  her  opinion  in   particular   was   worthy   of   some   weight
    notwithstanding its lack of obvious objectivity.

17. There was also some support from a  consultant  clinical  psychologist.
    The judge found that  less  than  entirely  satisfactory  evidence  but
    worthy of some weight because of the way it fitted in  with  everything
    else.

18. In short, the judge found that the claimant is  not  a  present  threat
    because he has undergone a change of heart which he  has  evidenced  by
    his own conduct and which claim is supported by  people  who  know  the
    claimant.  Anyone with any experience of the  criminal  justice  system
    learns to be exceedingly cynical about claims of a  new  beginning  but
    that is true sometimes.  Most criminals eventually give  up  and  start
    behaving properly.

19. Whilst the Secretary of State's grounds challenging  the  finding  that
    the claimant was entitled to "imperative grounds" protection  are  made
    out, I do not accept  the  second  ground  which  is  characterised  as
    "failing to provide adequate findings and/or resolve  material  issues"
    are justified.  They are no more than a complaint about  findings.   It
    follows that the error is not material because the "other  reason"  for
    allowing the appeal has not been challenged successfully.

    Notice of Decision

20. It follows therefore that I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 April 2019                   |





