
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01591/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|By UK Court Skype                  |                                   |
|On 28 May 2021                     |On 15 June 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                           Mr BOGDAN-CORNEL CAZACU
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fratila, Counsel instructed by Cabinet Individual
                    de Avocatura Biber Bianca
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


           DECISION MADE PURSUANT TO RULES 34, 39 & 40 (3) OF THE
               TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Sangha sent on 7 December 2020.

      2. Both parties agreed that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         involved the making of an error of law in that the judge had made a
         mistake of fact which led him to fail to give weight to  supporting
         evidence.

      3. The judge determined the appeal on the papers without a hearing and
         had before him the  respondent's  bundle  which  contained  various
         evidence about the appellant's residence, ties and work history  in
         the UK.

      4. The  bundle  also  included  a  document  translated  into  English
         entitled 'release from prison'. From this, it was apparent that the
         appellant's detention commenced on  13  February  2017  and  on  28
         August 2018.

      5. The judge failed to have regard  to  these  dates  and  erroneously
         found at [19] that the appellant had only arrived in the  UK  after
         his release from detention  after  28  August  2018  and  that  his
         residence in the UK amounted to one year and five  months;  whereas
         in fact the appellant had first entered the  UK  in  January  2015,
         some years earlier. The judge  gave  considerable  weight  to  this
         short period of residence when looking at the issue  of  length  of
         residence and social and cultural integration into the UK.  I  take
         into account that it  is  more  difficult  to  understand  evidence
         without  the  benefit  of  hearing  oral  evidence  or   having   a
         representative present to clarify matters and  that  the  appellant
         could have set out his chronology more clearly, nevertheless  there
         was evidence in relation to the appellant's dates of  incarceration
         before the judge and there exists an error of fact.

      6. As a result of this factual error the judge  also  failed  to  give
         weight to some supporting evidence in respect  of  the  appellant's
         employment including references from  various  employers  providing
         character references for instance the reference from Alex Forman.

      7. I am satisfied that the error is material because it  goes  to  the
         proportionality  of  the  decision.  Had  the  judge   taken   into
         consideration the length of time the appellant had remained in  the
         UK, his work history, good character and lack of  offending  during
         that period he may have come to a different decision when  deciding
         whether the decision to deport was proportionate. When finding that
         the error is material, I take into account  the  principles  in  IA
         (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 323 and  SSHD  v  Robinson  [2018]
         EWCA Civ 85.

      8. I would also comment that  at  [5]  and  [23]  the  judge  errs  by
         referring to the appellant bearing  the  burden  of  proof.  In  an
         deportation appeal it is for the respondent to discharge the burden
         of proving that the personal conduct of the individual represents a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of  society  and  that  the  decision  is
         proportionate  in  accordance  with   Arranz   (EEA-   Regulations-
         Deportation - test) [2017] UKUT 00294.

      9. In respect of disposal, while mindful of statement 7 of the  Senior
         President's Practice Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case
         that the appellant has yet to have an adequate consideration of his
         deportation appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and  I  am  satisfied
         that the appropriate course of action is to set aside the  decision
         as well as all of the factual findings in order for the  appeal  to
         be heard de novo by the First-tier Tribunal.

     10. Rule 40 (1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008
         provided that the Upper Tribunal may give a decision  orally  at  a
         hearing which I did. Rule 40 (3) provides that the  Upper  Tribunal
         must provide written reasons  for  its  decision  with  a  decision
         notice unless the parties have consented to the Upper Tribunal  not
         giving written reasons. I am satisfied that the parties have  given
         such consent at the hearing.

    Notice of Decision

     11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and is set aside.

     12. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
         in front of a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha.

    Direction

     13. The appellant indicated that he would like to have an oral  hearing
         of the remitted appeal and the appeal should be listed  accordingly
         with an appropriate interpreter if necessary.






    Signed                 Date: 28 May 2021


    R J Owens
    Upper Tribunal Judge Owens


