
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01102/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st July 2020                    |On 3rd August 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               ravinder singh
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following the adjournment of this hearing listed for 27 March 2020  due
    to the pandemic, directions were sent to the parties on 24  April  2020
    indicating a provisional view  that  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, it would be appropriate in this case to determine the  issue
    of whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an
    error of law and if so whether the decision should be set aside.

 2. Written submissions in accordance with those directions  were  received
    on behalf of the Appellant on 7 May 2020 and there was no objection  on
    his behalf to the issues being determined without a hearing.  A rule 24
    response was received from  the  Respondent  on  8  July  2020,  making
    written submissions as to the issues in the appeal  and  requesting  an
    oral hearing.  There were however no reasons as to why an oral  hearing
    was requested  or  why  it  was  not,  in  all  of  the  circumstances,
    appropriate or in the interests of justice  to  deal  with  the  issues
    without a hearing.   In  circumstances  where  both  parties  had  made
    written submissions on the issues and in accordance with the overriding
    objective, it is in the interests of justice to  proceed  to  determine
    this appeal on the papers in light of the written submissions and  full
    appeal file.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Boyes promulgated on 6 September 2019, in which the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his  application  for
    an EEA Residence Card as the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  dated  25  February  2019  was
    dismissed.

 4. The Appellant is a national of India, born  on  20  January  1987,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom with valid leave as a Tier  4  student
    in 2009 and again in the same capacity in 2012.  He has since  remained
    in the United Kingdom without leave.

 5. The Appellant applied for an EEA Residence Card which was refused on 24
    April 2015 on the basis that  he  had  entered  in  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience and an appeal against that refusal  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, Judge James,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  15
    September  2016.   The  Appellant  subsequently  made   three   further
    applications for an EEA Residence Card, all of which were  refused  and
    certified the last one.  A further application was made on  14  January
    2019, the refusal of which is the subject of this appeal.

 6. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant had
    entered into a marriage of convenience with an EEA national on  2  July
    2014.  The previous refusals, following  a  marriage  interview  on  24
    March 2015 were  relied  upon,  as  were  the  findings  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James in 2016.  The further evidence submitted with  the
    application which may (or may not) show residence with the  Sponsor  at
    the time of application were not accepted as relevant to the  issue  of
    whether there was a marriage of  convenience,  nor  did  the  documents
    address the concerns of the Tribunal in 2016.

 7. Judge Boyes dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  6
    September 2019 on all grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal  began  with  a
    reference to the previous decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  James
    and the conclusion therein that the  Appellant  had  entered  in  to  a
    marriage of convenience and then identifies  the  new  material  relied
    upon by the Appellant which was not before the previous Tribunal.  This
    included notebook entries from Immigration Officers  who  attended  the
    Appellant's home and a record of an interview conducted with  both  the
    Appellant and his spouse on their wedding day.  There was  further  new
    evidence which the Appellant did not  continue  to  place  reliance  on
    before the First-tier Tribunal, including  a  tenancy  agreement,  bank
    statement and letters of support from friends.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal identified that the previous Tribunal  decision
    was  the  starting  point,  in  accordance  with  the   principles   in
    Devaseelan, with a need to consider the new material to see if  it  may
    cause the findings made previously to be looked at again.  The decision
    then sets out findings on the new evidence and concludes that there  is
    no reason to depart from the  findings  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James and the appeal was therefore dismissed.

The appeal

 9. The Appellant appeals on three grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in misdirecting himself  in
    paragraphs 24, 25, 26 and  27  of  the  decision  concluding  that  the
    Respondent only visited the  Appellant's  property  once,  whereas  the
    evidence shows two visits to the property and additional notepad  entry
    for the interview on 2 July 2014 (the date of the Appellant's marriage)
    in which an Immigration Officer wrote that the relationship was  deemed
    genuine.  The First-tier Tribunal erred as to the number of visits  and
    failed to address the evidence from 2 July 2014.   Secondly,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to consider  the
    evidence from the interview on 2 July 2014,  in  which  the  Respondent
    accepted that the relationship was genuine and the  marriage  proceeded
    This evidence was not before the previous Tribunal and  was  not  taken
    into account in the decision under appeal.  Thirdly,  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law in recording that  the  Appellant
    did not  call  any  further  evidence  in  support  of  his  appeal  in
    circumstances where the Appellant, his spouse and his spouse's daughter
    attended court but not called for cross-examination  on  their  written
    statements.

10. The written submissions received on behalf of the Appellant continue to
    rely on the written grounds of appeal and the grant of permission.   In
    addition, in relation to the first ground it is added that the  failure
    of the First-tier Tribunal to realise there  were  two  visits  to  the
    Appellant's home demonstrates that there was a lack of anxious scrutiny
    of the evidence which undermines the findings overall.  In relation  to
    the second ground of appeal, it is emphasised that Immigration Officers
    interviewed the Appellant and his spouse for three hours on 2 July 2014
    before allowing their marriage to  proceed;  which  is  contemporaneous
    evidence of assessment of the relationship at the relevant date for the
    purposes of considering whether there was a  marriage  of  convenience.
    This evidence was simply not  taken  into  account  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in terms of the substance of  the  interview  record  or  the
    conclusion reached that the relationship was genuine.

11. The Respondent, in her written submissions, opposes the appeal and made
    the following submissions.  First, that whether or not there  were  one
    or two visits to the Appellant's property in 2014 or 2015 is immaterial
    to the consideration of the evidence by First-tier Tribunal Judge James
    in 2016, which  is  correctly  identified  as  the  starting  point  in
    considering the evidence.  Secondly, it was at the Appellant's  request
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  focused  on  the  new  evidence  in  the
    notebooks and distanced himself from the other materials submitted with
    his application.  Thirdly, the Respondent submits that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered this new evidence with care and  assessed  what  it
    could show, before concluding that  the  notebook  evidence  could  not
    displace the  succinct  findings  from  2016.   Finally,  the  decision
    expressly states that all of the evidence provided in  the  Appellant's
    bundle has been considered, including the matters which the Appellant's
    solicitors drew attention to and the failure to specifically record the
    Appellant's spouse's evidence, or her daughter's is not  material.   It
    is noted that the Appellant's grounds of appeal  do  not  specify  what
    evidence could have made a difference to the outcome of the appeal  and
    it appears her evidence did not in any event go  beyond  what  she  had
    previously said in 2016.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first ground of appeal primarily concerns the number of visits made
    to the Appellant's property by Immigration Officers, but also refers to
    the evidence of the interview on 2 July 2014, which I deal with as part
    of ground two which is focused on  this  aspect  of  the  evidence  and
    decision.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal's reasoning in relation to the number of visits
    to the Appellant's home is in paragraph 24 as follows:

         "With regards to the officer's notebooks  I'm  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant is mistaken with regards  to  the  number  of  times  the
         notebooks record visits.  The notebooks as disclosed  do  not  show
         that there were two separate visits on two  separate  occasions  at
         which the appellant was located at the same address  together  with
         his EEA national.  It is, I am satisfied,  more  than  one  officer
         attending on the same occasion and each writing their own note with
         regards to what they, the particular officer, did on attendance.  I
         am supported in this view by the fact that  the  officers'  details
         are recorded in each other's notebooks and the timings  of  arrival
         at the premises, of entry to the premises and of departing from the
         premises are also close so as to be obvious that  it  is  the  same
         visit."

 3. The First-tier Tribunal finds that this evidence shows that on one date
    in 2014, the appellant, his spouse and her daughter  were  together  in
    the same house in the early morning.  At  it's  highest,  this  is  not
    accepted as in any  way  undermining  the  comprehensive  and  complete
    assessment of the entirety of the  Appellant's  claim  as  put  to  the
    Tribunal in 2016.  That conclusion is unassailable when  one  considers
    the detailed reasons given by First-tier Tribunal Judge James  in  2016
    and would inevitably be the same even if there were two  such  distinct
    visits confirming the  Appellant  and  his  spouse  were  at  the  same
    property.  However, I consider whether  in  any  event  there  was  any
    factual error in the findings made on such visits.

 4. The Appellant has not, in the grounds of appeal or otherwise, specified
    the two separate dates upon which he states there was a  visit  to  his
    home nor the evidence supporting himself, his spouse and  her  daughter
    being present on  both  occasions.   In  these  circumstances,  I  have
    considered the notebook evidence for myself and can discern that  there
    are three separate entries from different officers on 14 May 2015; none
    of which refer to the  Appellant,  the  Sponsor  or  her  daughter  and
    identify the target of the visit  as  Amit  Kumar;  and  four  separate
    entries from different officers on 30 May 2015; one of which identifies
    the Appellant and Sponsor by name, one of which identifies the  Sponsor
    and her daughter by name with reference to the  Sponsor's  spouse  (not
    named) and the other two do not refer at  all  to  the  Appellant,  the
    Sponsor or her daughter.  Again, the target of this visit is identified
    as Amit Kumar.  The visits were all to the same residential address.

 5. On this basis, the First-tier Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude  in
    paragraph 24 that there was only evidence of one single visit with  the
    Appellant, Sponsor and  her  daughter  present,  as  confirmed  by  two
    different officers in attendance on the same date (even if  there  were
    two visits to the same property) and there was no material misdirection
    or mistake of fact as claimed in the first ground of appeal.  The First-
    tier Tribunal's findings  were  wholly  consistent  with  the  evidence
    before it and do not in any way support the assertion that there was  a
    lack of anxious scrutiny of the evidence.  If anything,  the  findings,
    which refer to the detail of the notebook entries in terms of times  of
    visits and names of officers show thorough and detailed  assessment  of
    that evidence.  For these reasons, there is no  error  of  law  on  the
    first ground of appeal.

 6.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the notebook evidence from the officers interviewing  the
    Appellant and his spouse on 2 July 2014, the  day  of  their  marriage.
    The First-tier Tribunal's findings on this were as follows:

         "29. In addition, the appellant relies on the opinion of an officer
         who performed an interview with the appellant/spouse.  The  opinion
         is said to be that the marriage was not one  of  convenience.   The
         ultimate decision of the Home Office in respect of  that  interview
         and claim that it was a marriage of convenience and such a  finding
         was upheld by Judge James.  Taking  the  evidence  as  provided  to
         Judge James and adding that aspect in to the equation I'm satisfied
         that it does not disrupt or undermine the findings of  Judge  James
         in any way.  The opinion of an officer, albeit important no  doubt,
         is not binding upon the decision-maker, the Secretary of State or a
         Judge.

         30.  The fact that there is an opinion expressed is surprising  and
         perhaps unwise  however  taken  together  with  all  of  the  other
         evidence it does not enable me to depart from the findings of Judge
         James.  I cannot  depart  from  the  findings  of  Judge  James  in
         relation to this particular evidence or indeed the evidence of  the
         notebooks as  the  evidences  of  such  is  in  reality  of  little
         consequence and of little weight in the grand scheme  of  the  case
         that it does not disrupt the findings made."

 7. It is clear  from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    expressly refers to the evidence of these interviews  and  specifically
    refers to the Appellant's reliance on an officer's view that  this  was
    not a marriage of  convenience;  that  this  evidence  was  taken  into
    account and assessed together  with  all  of  the  other  evidence  and
    previous findings in 2016.  It can not  be  said  that  the  conclusion
    itself was not taken into account, it was, it was just  not  sufficient
    to outweigh the other evidence or depart from the  findings  previously
    made on much broader and more detailed evidence.  Further, although not
    expressly stated by the First-tier Tribunal, there is also a difference
    between the Appellant's reliance on the notebook showing  that  it  was
    concluded that this was not a marriage of convenience  and  the  actual
    words in the notebook that 'relationship deemed genuine' which  is  not
    actually the same thing or determinative of whether the marriage itself
    was one of convenience.

 8. Whilst there is no express reference by the First-tier Tribunal to  the
    substance of the interviews with the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  on  2
    July 2014, the Appellant does not identify what, if  anything,  in  the
    substance of the notebook records assists him claim any further  beyond
    the conclusion about his relationship being genuine.  Having considered
    that evidence for myself, there is nothing  clearly  identifiable  that
    assists and if anything, there are inconsistencies between the  answers
    given by the Appellant and the Sponsor, for example as to the  cost  of
    the rings and how much money was given for them.  It is  also  of  note
    that although it is said that these interviews lasted three hours, they
    are in substance much  shorter  and  less  detailed  than  the  further
    marriage interview conducted by the Respondent (a record of  which  was
    available to the previous Tribunal and the most recent one); which  was
    considered by the Tribunal in 2016 together with the oral  evidence  of
    the Appellant and Sponsor.  There is nothing to indicate that the First-
    tier Tribunal failed to have regard to the substance of  the  interview
    on 2 July 2014 even if not expressly referred  to,  but  in  any  event
    there is nothing in that evidence that could have affected  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's conclusions specifically on that point or overall.  The
    First-tier Tribunal simply dealt expressly with the high point of  that
    notebook evidence and gave reasons for rejecting  it  when  considering
    the evidence as a whole.  For these reasons there is no error of law on
    the second ground of appeal.

 9.  The  third  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    assessment of the evidence of the Sponsor and her  daughter;  which  is
    not expressly referred to  in  the  decision.   It  is  said  that  the
    statement in paragraph 32 that the Appellant did not call  any  further
    evidence or information in support of his appeal is not correct or fair
    given that the Appellant, Sponsor and her daughter all  attended  court
    but were not cross-examined.  There is however nothing of substance  in
    this criticism given that  in  paragraph  33  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    confirms that  it  is  has  considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  the
    Appellant's bundle and that nothing therein justifies a departure  from
    the previous Tribunal finding, the new material  being  inconsequential
    and immaterial.  The  evidence  in  the  bundle  included  the  written
    statements of the Appellant, Sponsor and  her  daughter  and  there  is
    nothing to suggest that these have not been considered  or  taken  into
    account.

10. Again in relation to this ground of appeal the Appellant has failed  to
    specify what evidence in particular was relied on before the First-tier
    Tribunal and what is relevant and material to the outcome of the appeal
    to be considered now.  Having considered the written statements of  the
    Sponsor and her daughter it is notable that they are relatively  brief,
    do not refer to the notebook  evidence  heavily  relied  upon,  do  not
    respond in any way to the detailed adverse findings made by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James in 2016 and  do  not  raise  any  new  matters  or
    evidence which was not available to the  previous  Tribunal.   On  this
    basis, there is nothing in that  evidence  which  could  have  had  any
    material bearing on the outcome of this appeal and in any event, it was
    strictly correct that there was no further oral evidence and nothing to
    indicate that the written evidence was not properly taken into account.
     For these reasons there is no error of law  on  the  final  ground  of
    appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G  Jackson                                Date           21st  July
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

