
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01714/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd August 2017                     |On 20th September 2017               |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                   mr Ahmed Sayed Ahmed Abdelmoaty Gebril
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Colvin, promulgated on 14th  December  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 30th November 2016.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt, a male, and was born on 5th  March
    1987.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  6th
    October 2015 refusing  to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card,  as  a
    confirmation of his right of residence under European Community law, as
    the spouse of an EEA national, exercising treaty rights in  the  United
    Kingdom on the grounds that it was not accepted that the Appellant  was
    legally married.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that the sole reason that his application  was
    refused was that the  marriage  certificates  issued  by  the  Egyptian
    Embassy had not been recognised in relation to his  marriage.   He  and
    his EEA Sponsor had been married by proxy in Egypt.  They attempted  to
    register the marriage with the Registry Office in  the  UK.   They  had
    been cohabiting as a married couple for almost two years and  his  wife
    was expecting their first child in July 2017 (paragraph 4).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard oral evidence from the  Appellant  and  considered  the
    Respondent's case that, although the Appellant had submitted  an  Egypt
    marriage certificate, no consulate in the UK was  currently  registered
    as an  approved  building  to  conduct  marriage  ceremonies,  and  the
    marriage to his EEA Sponsor took place in  the  Egyptian  Consulate  in
    London on 2nd April 2015, thereby raising serious questions  about  the
    veracity of his claim.

 5. The judge further considered the evidence before him that, although the
    Appellant  had  arranged  a  proxy  marriage  in  Egypt  and  submitted
    documents claiming that this marriage  was  recognised  under  Egyptian
    law, these documents had not yet been considered by  the  Home  Office,
    "as they were submitted during the course of the appeal and I am not in
    a position to authenticate them" (paragraph 11).   Finally,  the  judge
    applied the case of Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal: Albania)  [2016]  UKUT
    411.  This confirmed that  there  was  no  statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a residence
    card to a person  claiming  to  be  an  extended  family  member  under
    Regulation 8(2) of the 2006 Regulations.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me the Appellant was not in  attendance  and  nor
    was there any explanation for his failure to attend.  Nor  indeed,  was
    any legal representative here to act on his behalf.

 7. Mr Armstrong, appearing as Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  on
    behalf of the Respondent, stated that the decision of the Tribunal  was
    sustainable for two reasons.  First, the marriage certificate dated 2nd
    April 2016 shows that the marriage took place in the Egyptian Consulate
    in London but as the judge found, "no consulate in the UK is  currently
    registered as an approved  building  to  conduct  marriage  ceremonies"
    (paragraph 7). Second, although the Appellant had then  also  furnished
    documentation claiming that the marriage was recognised under  Egyptian
    law these documents, as the judge found, "have yet to be considered  by
    the Home Office as they were submitted during the course of the appeal"
    (paragraph 11).

 8. Against this, there was the background of the Appellant's status in the
    UK.  He had come to this country on a visit visa and did not return.

 9. As for the question that the Appellant and his EEA national were  in  a
    durable relationship under Regulation 8(2) the case of  Sala  confirmed
    that the current state of the law  was  that  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal.

10.   The  Appellant  had  not  attended  and  had   not   provided   legal
    representation to argue otherwise.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCA 2007) for the reasons put before me by Mr  Armstrong.   First,  the
    Appellant cannot rely upon the Egyptian marriage certificate dated  2nd
    April 2015 because this  is  from  the  Egyptian  Consulate  in  London
    suggesting that the marriage took place in that building which  is  not
    registered for such purposes (see paragraph 11).

12. Second, insofar as there is an argument that  the  proxy  marriage  was
    arranged in Egypt, these documents have  yet  to  be  verified  by  the
    Respondent, because they were produced during the course of the  appeal
    hearing.  Third, insofar as the Appellant claims  to  be  living  in  a
    durable relationship with his EEA national the case  of  Sala  suggests
    that there is no right of appeal with respect to Regulation 8(2) for  a
    extended family member.

13. The Appellant has not attended to argue otherwise and I must  take  the
    current position as it stands under the law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  no  error  of  law.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017
