

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01401/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 February 2019                    |On 15 May 2019                      |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                NAVEED AHMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mrs R. Bagral instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  22  January
    2016 to refuse to issue a permanent residence card as the family member
    of an EEA national  under  The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations  2006.  The  Secretary  of  State  concluded,  although   a
    residence card as a family member was issued previously, that this  was
    in fact a marriage of convenience.
2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Skehan ("the judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 16 October 2018. The judge made clear that
    she understood the burden of proof lay on the respondent to  show  that
    it was a marriage of  convenience  contracted  solely  for  immigration
    purposes. The judge summarised the reasons  for  refusing  a  residence
    card [5]. She considered the report of  the  immigration  officers  who
    conducted a visit to the appellant's address on 03 January 2016,  where
    he claimed to live with the EEA sponsor [5.c]. The judge heard evidence
    from the appellant and the EEA sponsor, Miss [S],  and  summarised  the
    main aspects [6]. The judge was in a position to assess the credibility
    of the witnesses and pointed out aspects of their  evidence  that  were
    inconsistent [10]. She placed  little  weight  on  the  report  by  the
    immigration officers because it was not supported by witness statements
    and was internally inconsistent [11]. However, the judge was  satisfied
    that the respondent had discharged  the  initial  burden  of  proof  of
    showing that this was likely to  be  a  marriage  of  convenience.  The
    appellant previously fabricated an application for leave to  remain  as
    the unmarried partner of a British citizen in June 2009. The timing  of
    the marriage to Miss [S] (December 2009)  and  her  original  incorrect
    statement that they had been living together for six months at the date
    of the initial residence card application were enough to discharge  the
    initial  burden  [12].  The  judge   considered   the   "multitude   of
    inconsistencies" in the evidence given by the  appellant  and  the  EEA
    sponsor. The fact that Miss [S] attended to give evidence was a  matter
    that supported his claim. She  also  considered  the  large  volume  of
    documentation addressed to the appellant and the  EEA  sponsor  at  the
    address given. She found that the fact that  there  was  correspondence
    sent to that address did  not  assist  her  in  assessing  whether  the
    marriage genuine. Having considered the evidence that might support the
    appellant's  claim,   she   concluded   it   did   not   outweigh   the
    inconsistencies arising from the evidence given by the witnesses  [13].



3.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:

       i)  The  judge  gave  insufficient  reasons  for  finding  that  the
          appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  of  his   wife's   family   was
          "inconsistent with that  normally  expected  of  a  husband"  and
          failed to conduct an adequate analysis of the evidence  that  was
          given to justify her finding.

      ii) The judge should not have attached any weight to  the  report  of
          the visit to the appellant's address  and  failed  to  take  into
          account relevant evidence, including the affidavit  of  Mr  Khan,
          which was not challenged by the  respondent  at  the  hearing  or
          other relevant evidence from the appellant's landlord.

Decision and reasons

4.    This is a borderline decision because many  of  the  judge's  findings
    were open to her to  make  in  light  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history and having heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  his  wife.
    However, I am concerned that some of the evidence that might have  been
    relevant to a holistic assessment of the credibility of  the  witnesses
    was not considered adequately and may have been  capable  of  making  a
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

5.    The judge listed the main points given  in  evidence  at  [6]  of  the
    decision and then listed a number of  points  that  she  identified  as
    negative to the credibility assessment at [9]. However, in doing so she
    did not explain how or why  she  considered  the  appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge about his wife's family was inconsistent with that  "normally
    expected of a husband" in light of the evidence given by his wife  that
    they didn't talk about her father  or  brother  due  to  "abuse  issues
    during her childhood" [6.c-d].

6.    Clearly the judge was concerned that some of the oral  evidence  about
    the furniture in the room where the couple  claimed  to  live  was  not
    consistent [9.d-e]. However, there was other evidence produced from the
    appellant's landlord addressed to the appellant and his  wife.  Another
    resident at the property also testified to the couple  living  together
    at the address. The judge did  not  make  specific  reference  to  this
    evidence. Even if the reference  to  "correspondence  relating  to  the
    tenancy" at [13] was a reference to the evidence from the landlord  and
    Ms  Hettiarachchi  the  judge  needed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting it. It was not sufficient to use  the  discrepancies  already
    identified to reject this evidence, which should have  formed  part  of
    holistic assessment of the credibility of the  witnesses  claim  to  be
    living together in a genuine marriage.

7.    The judge found that the  weight  to  be  placed  on  the  immigration
    report was lessened considerably by the fact that it was not  supported
    by comprehensive witness statements from the officers  concerned  [11].
    The  report  was  in  a  standard  format  usually  produced  in   such
    circumstances. Although the judge  found  that  less  weight  could  be
    placed on it she clearly  placed  some  weight  on  it.  As  such,  the
    evidence from the landlord and Ms Hettiarachchi  was  relevant  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim to live in Room 1 in the  multiple
    occupancy property with his wife. The judge needed to consider evidence
    both for and against the appellant.

8.    In her letter, Ms Hettiarachci said that she was at  the  property  on
    the day of the visit and spoke to the immigration  officers.  She  said
    that she was shown a photograph of the appellant and she told them that
    he and his wife lived at the address. Although she was  not  called  to
    give  oral  evidence,  the  letter  was  accompanied  by  a   copy   of
    correspondence from HMRC addressed to Ms Hettiarachchi at [~] which did
    at least support her  claim  to  live  at  the  same  address.  In  the
    circumstances, her evidence was relevant to a proper  determination  of
    the issue.

9.    For the reasons given above, I conclude that the judge failed to  give
    adequate consideration to evidence that might support  the  appellant's
    claim and failed to  consider  the  evidence  as  part  of  a  holistic
    assessment of the credibility of the witnesses.

10.   Having found that the credibility findings involved the making  of  an
    error of law the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  necessary
    to the decision to be  remade  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]                                     Date 14 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








