
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA010922015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2017                             |On 2nd May 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                              Ms Thi Huyen Phan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Mac of Mac & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Vietnam,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  23rd
    September 2015 to refuse her application  for  a  derivative  residence
    card under  15A(2)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (as
    amended) as the primary carer of an  EEA  national  child.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C  A  Parker  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.   The
    Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal  is  that  the  Appellant's  child  is  a
    Bulgarian national.  The Appellant previously applied for  a  residence
    card  as  the  child's  primary  carer  on  10th  August  2013.    That
    application was refused on the basis that the Appellant had  failed  to
    provide documents to show that the  child  had  sufficient  funds  that
    would be sustainable during his period of  residence  in  the  UK.  The
    Appellant applied again on 13th April 2014  but  that  application  was
    refused for the same reasons and no appeal against  that  decision  was
    lodged.  The Appellant applied again for a residence card on 18th April
    2015 on the same basis. That application was refused on 23rd  September
    2015 on the basis that the evidence  submitted  failed  to  demonstrate
    that the child is a self-sufficient person as  required  by  Regulation
    15A(2). That decision is the subject of this appeal.

 3. The relevant provisions of 15A of the  2006  EEA  Regulations  for  the
    purposes of this appeal are as follows:





    "Derivative right of residence

          15A. (1) A person ("P") who is not  an  exempt  person and  who
        satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5)  of
        this regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in  the
        United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.
          (2) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
             (a)P is the primary carer of an EEA national ("the relevant
             EEA national"); and
             (b)the relevant EEA national-
                  (i)is under the age of 18;
                  (ii) is residing in the United Kingdom as a self-
                  sufficient person; and
                  (iii) would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if P
                  were required to leave.
          ...
          (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if
             (a)P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and
             (b)P-
                  (i)is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                  person's care; or
                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's
                  care with one other person who is not an exempt person.
          ..."

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that  the  Appellant  attended  the
    hearing but  did  not  give  oral  evidence,  instead  relying  on  the
    documentary evidence.  The judge referred to  the  Home  Office  policy
    guidance for derivative rights  of  residence  of  7th  April  2015  in
    relation to how income from the primary  carer  should  be  treated  in
    assessing whether the  child  is  self-sufficient  in  accordance  with
    regulation 15A (2)(b)(ii). The judge noted that  the  income  from  the
    Appellant could only be considered in the context of  the  Respondent's
    policy which states that the EEA national child must be self-sufficient
    first before the primary carer starts his employment in a Chen capacity
    (C-200/02) [2004] ECR I-9925.

 5. The judge took into account the letter submitted after the hearing from
    the Appellant's landlady stating that she provides  the  Appellant  and
    her son with free accommodation.  The judge considered the  Appellant's
    employment but considered that this  income  could  not  be  considered
    because it did related to the tax years ending  April  2015  and  April
    2016 and therefore did not arise from lawful employment from before the
    application  for  a  derivative  right  of  residence[15].   The  judge
    concluded that there was no evidence that the Appellant's son was self-
    sufficient before the Appellant began working in the UK trading as  Tan
    Nails Design and her income from this employment  could  not  be  taken
    into account when assessing whether her son was self-sufficient [17].

 6. The judge noted at paragraph 19 that the Respondent's  guidance  states
    that income from other sources may be taken into account if the primary
    carer is not lawfully working in the UK.  Other sources  are  noted  as
    being described as bank statements showing income from  other  sources,
    for example family or friends or savings accounts showing  funds  which
    are accessible to the primary carer and child.

 7. The judge noted at paragraph 20 that the deposits  in  the  Appellant's
    bank account do not correspond with the amounts on her  payslips.   The
    judge noted that the  Appellant's  representative  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had a large sum of money with her  when  she  came  into  the
    country but there was no oral or documentary evidence of this  nor  was
    the amount specified.  The judge said that in the absence  of  evidence
    concerning this source of funds she could not take it into  account  as
    income from other sources.

 8. The judge said that having regard to all of the evidence in  the  round
    she was not satisfied that the Appellant is entitled to have her income
    from employment taken into account when assessing whether she  and  her
    son are self-sufficient as she did not have any permission to work when
    she made her Chen application to remain.  The judge was  not  satisfied
    on the evidence that the Appellant had access to other funds  nor  that
    they were adequate in order to establish self-sufficiency [20].

 9. The judge finally noted that the Appellant is required  to  demonstrate
    that she and her son have comprehensive sickness insurance.  The  judge
    said that the Appellant relied upon documents relating to "Aviva travel
    insurance covering herself and her son" [21].  The judge concluded:

         "Whilst this is evidence that some insurance is in place there  was
         no evidence as to the content of the policy and the  Appellant  has
         not established, on a balance of probabilities,  that  this  policy
         amounts to 'comprehensive health insurance'." [21]

    Error of Law

10. The Appellant appeals against that decision on three grounds which were
    amplified at the hearing by Ms Mac.  The first ground is that the judge
    erred in failing to take account  of  the  HSBC  bank  statements  from
    February and March 2015 showing deposits which  came  from  independent
    sources which amounted to support from friends and family.  Although Ms
    Mac submitted to me that the judge had heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant as to the source of these funds I note that the judge  stated
    at paragraph 8 that the Appellant did not actually give oral  evidence.
    In her witness statement dated 15th September 2016 the  Appellant  made
    no reference to the funds in the HSBC bank account or as to the  source
    of those funds.  Ms Mac accepted that the Appellant was working in  the
    UK from February 2014 following grant of permission to work in  a  Chen
    capacity. Ms Mac did not point to any  evidence  before  the  judge  in
    relation to the source of any funds available to the Appellant separate
    from her earnings from her employment on foot of the permission granted
    by the Home Office pending the resolution  of  her  application  for  a
    derivative residence card (granted on 28th  April  2014  and  4th  June
    2015).  In the absence of any evidence to the contrary before the judge
    I see no error in the decision by the judge at paragraph 20 that  there
    was no evidence as to any other funds available to the Appellant. There
    is no error in the judge's decision in relation to this matter.

11. The second Ground of Appeal contends that the judge failed to take into
    account the fact that the Appellant's landlady provides free board  and
    accommodation to the Appellant and not just  free  accommodation.   The
    judge referred to this evidence at paragraphs  11  and  14.   This  was
    based on the letter from the Appellant's  landlady  dated  6th  October
    2016 submitted after the hearing.  That letter states that the landlady
    provides the Appellant with rent-free accommodation in return for  free
    housework. The judge took full account of this evidence  at  paragraphs
    11 and 14.  Contrary to Ms Mac's submission that letter does not  refer
    to the provision of board, just  to  the  provision  of  accommodation.
    There is no other  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  landlady  provides
    anything other than accommodation.  The judge took full account of  the
    fact that the Appellant was provided with  free  accommodation  by  her
    landlady.  There is no error in the judge's  decision  in  relation  to
    this matter.

12. The third Ground of  Appeal  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    treatment of the evidence of sickness insurance with  Aviva.   I  agree
    that it appears that the judge made a mistake at paragraph 21 where she
    referred to the documents as relating to Aviva 'travel insurance'.   It
    is clear that the documents in the Respondent's bundle relate to  Aviva
    health insurance.  The judge appears  to  consider  that  the  evidence
    shows that  there  is  some  insurance  "in  place".   However,  having
    considered the Aviva documents it is clear that the Appellant  and  her
    child have medical insurance.  The documentation provided is sufficient
    to demonstrate that the medical  insurance  is  comprehensive  for  the
    purposes of the Regulations.

13. In these circumstances I do consider that the judge made  an  error  in
    relation to  her  treatment  of  the  Aviva  health  insurance  policy.
    However, this  is  not  a  material  error  in  light  of  the  judge's
    sustainable findings in relation to  self-sufficiency.   The  Appellant
    must demonstrate that she meets  all  of  the  provisions  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

14. Considering all of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  I
    am satisfied that the judge made findings open to her on that  evidence
    and no material error of law has  been  disclosed  by  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.

    Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not contain any  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 28th April 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 28th April 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

