
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01877/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|via Skype for Business                        |                              |
|On 28 September 2020                          |On 1 October 2020             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               SERGESS FROLOVS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah, instructed by ARKAS Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a 'non-citizen of Latvia', was born on 22  May  1974  of
    Russian parentage. He had been issued with an Alien's passport  by  the
    Latvian authorities in August  1998.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Head) against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 3 April 2019 to refuse to issue him with a residence card  as  an
    extended family member of an EEA national. The First-tier Tribunal,  in
    a decision promulgated on 18 November 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing, Mr McVeety, who appeared for the  Secretary  of
    State, told me that the respondent agreed that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had fallen into material legal error and that the  decision  should  be
    set aside. I shall, therefore, be brief. Both parties are  agreed  that
    the First-tier Tribunal judge, whilst applying the rule in Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002]  UKIAT  00702  *,  has
    overlooked the fact that a previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Black) promulgated on 13 August  2018  had  been  considered  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR) following the  refusal  of  human
    rights  application  by  the  Secretary  of  State  who  had  issued  a
    deportation order against the appellant under the UK Borders Act  2007.
    The appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  is  a  subject  the
    current proceedings, arose from a refusal to issue a residence card  to
    the appellant and engaged Regulation 18 of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016. Whilst the factual findings  of  Judge
    Black may be relevant in the current proceedings, it  is  difficult  to
    see how a simple reliance upon D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702 *  such  as
    that in the judge's decision at [27]  was  sufficient  to  discharge  a
    decision maker's requirement under Regulation 18(5) to  carry  out  'an
    extensive examination of the personal circumstances of the ...  and  if
    the application is refused, [to] give reasons  justifying  the  refusal
    unless this is contrary to the interests  of  national  security.'  The
    judge was clearly not helped by the fact that  documents  were  missing
    from the file, including another decision of 2019;  Ms  Jegarajah,  who
    appeared for the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal, told me that she had seen this document and had prepared  the
    grounds of appeal by reference  to  it  but  had  returned  it  to  the
    appellant. I confirmed that there was no copy of  it  on  the  Tribunal
    file. Mr McVeety has helpfully agreed to email copies to both the Upper
    Tribunal and the appellant's representatives.

 3. Mr McVeety told me that the confusion  of  the  judge  as  regards  the
    nature of the previous  appeal  and  the  absence  of  any  substantive
    reasoning beyond that of following the findings of a previous Tribunal,
    which had considered an appeal on a different legal  basis  effectively
    vitiated the First-tier Tribunal's decision. I agree. I set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I return the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision at or  following
    a hearing. The findings of Judge Black shall stand (indeed, there  have
    not been challenged) but such findings as have been made Judge Head are
    set aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 18 November  2019  is
set aside. The appeal is returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge
Head; 1.5 hours; no interpreter; first available date at Hatton  Cross)  for
that Tribunal to remake the decision at or following a hearing.


Signed                              Date 28 September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
