
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01661/2017
                                                               EA/01664/2017
                                                               EA/01668/2017
                                                               EA/01750/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th October 2018                       |On 08th January 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     sz
                                     MZ
                                     AZ
                                     SZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of Counsel, instructed by Rahman and
                  Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Pears promulgated on 26 April 2018, in which  the  Appellants'  appeals
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse their applications  for  an
    EEA Residence Card under regulation  9  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  (the  "EEA  Regulations")  dated  26
    January 2017 were dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are all nationals of Afghanistan and are three  siblings
    and their step-mother, who applied for EEA Residence Cards on the basis
    of being family members  of  their  father/husband,  the  "Sponsor",  a
    naturalised British Citizen.

 3. The Respondent refused the applications the  basis  that  although  the
    relationships were accepted, as was that the Sponsor  was  a  qualified
    person in the United Kingdom, it was not accepted that he had genuinely
    resided as a qualifying person in Ireland such as to engage  regulation
    9 of the EEA Regulations by the exercise of treaty rights by a  British
    Citizen.  In particular, the Respondent accepted that the  Sponsor  had
    worked in Ireland between September 2015 and January 2016, followed  by
    a claimed period of self-sufficiency and jobseeking before returning to
    the United Kingdom in July 2016.  The Respondent did  not  accept  that
    the residence was genuine as there was no evidence of  any  integration
    in Ireland, the Appellants arrived in Ireland at the same time  as  the
    Sponsor, the Sponsor had no employment in Ireland for the  first  three
    months and only then undertook unskilled work.

 4. Judge Pears dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 26  April
    2018 on the basis  that  although  the  family  relationships  and  the
    exercise of treaty rights in Ireland by the Sponsor were  accepted,  it
    was found that the  residence  in  Ireland  was  not  genuine  for  the
    following reasons.  The Sponsor had no connections  to  Ireland,  there
    was no evidence of integration in Ireland, no evidence of  the  Sponsor
    trying to buy or establish a business there, the  Sponsor  had  only  a
    brief period of unskilled work in Ireland, he returned home to the same
    house in the United Kingdom and the same job having decided  to  return
    on the same day.  The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  sponsor  had
    acted deliberately to try to circumvent the Immigration  Rules  as  the
    Appellants could not meet the requirements set out therein for a  grant
    of entry clearance to the United Kingdom.

The appeal

 5. The Appellants appeal on four  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in  failing  to  make  credibility  findings  about  the
    Appellants themselves; secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    its  approach  to  the  Sponsor's  credibility  which  was  irrational;
    thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal misapplied the law  on  residence
    and abuse of rights; and finally, that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to consider Zambrano or the issue of proportionality with respect to  a
    settled resident.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Landes on 13 August  2018  on
    all grounds.

 7. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant relied  on  the  written
    grounds of appeal and expanded  upon  them  in  oral  submissions.   In
    relation to the first two grounds as to credibility, it  was  submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to make  any  credibility  findings
    about  the  Appellants  or  whether  their  evidence  was  accepted  or
    rejected.  It is not possible from the decision for the  Appellants  to
    understand why their evidence, which was corroborative of the Sponsor's
    activity in Ireland, was rejected.  Counsel submitted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  was  duty  bound  to  articulate  the  reasons  why  the
    Appellants' evidence did not show an intention to settle in Ireland and
    why the consistent evidence that the Sponsor sought to buy  a  business
    in Ireland was rejected.  The Appellants' claim  that  the  failure  to
    make credibility findings in relation to their  evidence  infected  the
    adverse credibility findings made against the Sponsor.

 8. The second ground of appeal is pursued as a matter of principle  rather
    than any factual or substantive error as to how the First-tier Tribunal
    treated a  letter  from  the  Appellants'  solicitors  as  if  it  were
    evidence.  The letter referred to a decision being taken  to  move  the
    family back to the United Kingdom and they left the same day.   Counsel
    confirmed at the hearing before me  that  the  Sponsor's  evidence  was
    entirely consistent with the solicitor's letter, that he decided to and
    did move back to the United Kingdom on 8 June 2016.  Despite no claimed
    error of fact, Counsel maintained the ground of appeal as a  matter  of
    principal  and  submitted  that  it  was   material   because   adverse
    credibility findings were made by the First-tier Tribunal  against  the
    Sponsor.

 9. In the written grounds of appeal, the Appellants also submit  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in its credibility assessment of the  Sponsor
    in relying on the lack of evidence of integration in Ireland,  without,
    for example, specific questions being put to the Appellants about which
    mosque they attended; and lack of evidence prior to the hearing of  the
    Sponsor seeking to buy a business in Ireland.  These matters  were  not
    pursued orally.

10. In relation to the third ground of appeal, the Appellants' case is that
    the Sponsor had established genuine residence in  Ireland  pursuant  to
    his accepted exercise of treaty rights there as a worker and his motive
    for doing so is irrelevant to that further to Directive 2004/38/EC  and
    the  ECJ  decision  in,  inter  alia,  Case  53/81,   D   M   Levin   v
    Staatssecretaris van Justitie.  It can not be an abuse of rights for an
    EEA national to exercise treaty rights in another country even  if  the
    motive for doing so is to confer an  immigration  advantage  on  family
    members.

11. The fourth ground of appeal was not  pursued  separately  at  the  oral
    hearing, the comments made in the grant of permission  to  appeal  that
    there is nothing in the last ground in relation to Zambrano and Article
    8 being accepted.

12. On behalf  of  the  Respondent,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted  that  in  relation  to  credibility,  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellants was based entirely on what the Sponsor had told them and  at
    its highest, confirms his account to them.  It was submitted  that  the
    Appellants' evidence added very little given the finding  that  all  of
    the information was coming from the Sponsor who made the decisions  for
    the whole family.  There was little evidence from the Appellants on the
    other issues about the Sponsor seeking work/to buy a business.  Even if
    the Appellants were entirely credible and that was  expressly  accepted
    by the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  would  not  materially  affect  the
    adverse credibility findings made in relation to the Sponsor.

13. The Respondent's position in relation to the second and fourth  grounds
    of appeal are that they amount to disagreement with the decision and/or
    are immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.  The Respondent relies  on
    the comments given in the grant of permission to appeal as to the  lack
    of merit in these grounds and highlighted the almost complete  lack  of
    evidence of any integration into Ireland.

14. In relation to the third ground of  appeal,  the  Respondent  submitted
    that in accordance with AA v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] CSIH 38, the parties' intentions  are  a  relevant  factor  when
    considering the genuineness of residence and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was entitled on the evidence to find this  was  not  genuine.   In  the
    alternative, the Respondent maintains the position that the scenario in
    this case where a person exercises treaty rights for  the  purposes  of
    securing an immigration advantage for family members can amount  to  an
    abuse of rights.

Findings and reasons

 1. I start by considering the third ground of appeal as it is the one with
    arguably the greatest substance to consider, as to the correct  law  to
    be applied as to the Sponsor's residence in  Ireland.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal set out the domestic provisions in regulation  9  of  the  EEA
    Regulations in paragraph 9 of the decision and went on  to  quote  from
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Akrich C-109/01 [2004]  QB
    756 (paragraphs 55 and 56) and AA v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] CSIH  38  (paragraphs  52  to  56).   The  First-tier
    Tribunal does not undertake any further detailed analysis of this  case
    law and instead simply states at paragraph 38, "Motive is not  relevant
    what is relevant is whether there was genuine residence  in  Ireland.".
    There follows a lengthy list of findings to support the  conclusion  in
    paragraph 52, which states as follows:

         "I do not find the evidence of the claim as credible.  I find  [the
         Sponsor] had artificially created the necessary conditions, that he
         and they had no intention of trying to settle in Ireland, and  that
         such residence which they had could not meet the necessary tests of
         being genuinely resident.  I find without hesitation on the balance
         of probabilities that the residence of the family  in  Ireland  was
         not genuine and that [the Sponsor] had not transferred  the  centre
         of his life to Ireland."

 2. It must be inferred from the First-tier Tribunal decision that the case
    of AA was relied upon, not in respect  of  abuse  of  rights  (although
    reference is made to that as a finding not necessary for  the  decision
    in the final paragraph) but in  a  qualitative  assessment  of  whether
    residence in Ireland was genuine.

 3. The origin of rights for family members of British Citizens on re-entry
    to the United Kingdom having exercised treaty rights in another  Member
    State comes not from Directive 2004/38/EC  but  from  the  case  of  C-
    370/90, Surinder Singh and subsequently for different  reasoning,  from
    the case of O and B v Minister voor Immigratie,  Intergratie  en  Asiel
    [2014] QB 1163.

 4. The general conclusion of the Court in O and B is as follows:

         "Article 21(1) TFEU must be interpreted as  meaning  that  where  a
         Union citizen has created or strengthened  a  family  life  with  a
         third-country national during genuine residence, pursuant to and in
         conformity with the conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2)  and
         Article 16(1) and (2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European
         Parliament and of the Council of 29 April  2004  on  the  right  of
         citizens of the Union and their family members to move  and  reside
         freely  within  the  territory  of  the  Member   States   amending
         Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and  repealing  Directives  64/221/EEC,
         68/360/EEC,   72/194/EEC,   73/148/EEC,    75/34/EEC,    75/35/EEC,
         90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC, in a Member State other  than
         that of which he is a national, the provisions  of  that  directive
         apply by analogy where that Union citizen returns, with the  family
         member in question, to his Member State of origin.  Therefore,  the
         conditions for granting a derived right of residence  to  a  third-
         country national who is a family member of that Union  citizen,  in
         the latter's Member State of origin, should not, in  principle,  be
         more strict than those provided for by that directive for the grant
         of a derived right of residence to a third-country national who  is
         a family member of a Union citizen who has exercised his  right  of
         freedom of movement by becoming established in a Member State other
         than the Member State of which he is a national."

 5. In Surinder Singh, the European Court of  Justice  confirmed  that  the
    rights for family members did not include situations  of  an  abuse  of
    rights, stating in paragraph 24 as follows:

         "As regards the risk of fraud referred to by the United Kingdom, it
         is sufficient to note that, as the Court has consistently held (see
         in particular the judgements in Case 155/78 Knoors v  Secretary  of
         State for Economic Affairs [1979] ECR 399, paragraph 25, and Case C-
         61/89 Bouchoucha [1990] ECR I-3551, paragraph 14),  the  facilities
         created by the Treaty  cannot  have  the  effect  of  allowing  the
         persons who benefit from them to evade the application of  national
         legislation and  of  prohibiting  Member  States  from  taking  the
         measures necessary to prevent such abuse."

 6. Similarly, the Court stated in O and B in paragraph 22:

         "It should be added that the scope of Union law cannot be  extended
         to cover abuses  (see,  to  that  effect,  C-110/99  Emsland-Starke
         [2000] ECR I-11569, paragraph 51, and Case C-303/08 Bozkurt  [2010]
         ECR I-13445, paragraph 47).   Proof  of  such  an  abuse  requires,
         first, a combination of objective circumstances in  which,  despite
         formal observance of the conditions laid down by the European Union
         rules, the purpose of those  rules  has  not  been  achieved,  and,
         secondly, a subjective  element  consisting  in  the  intention  to
         obtain an advantage from the European Union rules  by  artificially
         creating the conditions laid down for obtaining it (Case  C-364/10)
         Hungary v Slovakia [2012] ECR, paragraph 58)."

 7. The issue of abuse of rights  was  specifically  considered  in  Akrich
    where it was held that the motives of a  person  in  exercising  treaty
    rights in another Member State were not relevant for  the  reasons  set
    out in the following paragraphs:

         "55. As regards the question of abuse mentioned at paragraph 24  of
         the Singh judgment, cited above, it should be  mentioned  that  the
         motives of which may have prompted a worker of a  Member  State  to
         seek employment in another  Member  State  are  of  no  account  as
         regards his right to enter and  reside  in  the  territory  of  the
         latter State provided that he there pursues or wishes to pursue  an
         effective and genuine activity (Case 53/81 Levin [1982]  ECR  1035,
         paragraph 23).

         56.  Nor are such motives relevant in assessing the legal situation
         of the couple at the time of their return to the  Member  State  of
         which the worker is a national.  Such conduct cannot constitute  an
         abuse within the meaning of paragraph 24 of the Singh judgment even
         if the spouse did not, at the time when the couple installed itself
         in another Member State, have a right to remain in the Member State
         of which the worker is a national."

 8. The matter was considered further in AA which although is  not  binding
    as it is  a  Scottish  case,  it  is  persuasive.   The  Court  therein
    considered separately the requirements of residence in paragraphs 46 to
    51 and abuse of  rights  in  paragraphs  52  to  53,  with  the  latter
    interpreted consistently with the authorities set out above.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did  not,  in  the  present  case,  quote  from
    paragraphs 46 onwards in relation to residence which is  more  relevant
    to the present appeal and provides as follows:

         "46. In O and B the Court noted that it would  be  an  obstacle  to
         free movement were equivalent rights not available on return to the
         citizen's home state: however, a refusal to grant such rights would
         only create such an obstacle if (para 51):

             "... the residence of the Union citizen  in  the  host  member
             state has been sufficiently  genuine  so  as  to  enable  that
             citizen to create or strengthen family  life  in  that  member
             state."

         Not every residence will qualify:  for  example,  someone  pursuing
         residence under article 6 does not intend to settle in such  a  way
         as to create and strengthen family life.  The opposite may  be  the
         case where someone "intends to exercise his rights"  under  article
         7: genuine residence in conformity with that article  would  engage
         the derivative right (paras 52-54).  The more so would the right be
         engaged had permanent residence in the  host  state  been  acquired
         under article 16.

         47.  The Appellant relied on these paragraphs to argue that as long
         as the residence in question lasted for at least three months,  the
         terms of the article had been  met  and  were  sufficient  for  the
         purposes  of  Regulation  9.   However,  that  argument  fails   to
         recognise the context in which the discussion takes place.   It  is
         central to the decision in O and B that for "residence in" the host
         state it is a "genuine residence" which requires to be established,
         not a residence of any specific duration.  Of course, duration  may
         be a relevant factor, but its is only one  factor.   As  the  Court
         went on to say in O and B

             "57. It is for the referring court to determine  whether  [the
             sponsors],  who  are  both  Union   citizens,   settled   and,
             therefore, genuinely resided in  the  host  member  state  and
             whether, on account of living as a family during  that  period
             of genuine residence [the spouses] enjoyed a derived right  of
             residence in the host member state.

             58.  In that  regard,  short  periods  of  residence  such  as
             weekends or holidays spent in a member state other  than  that
             of which the citizen in question  is  a  national,  even  when
             considered together, fall within the scope  of  article  6  of
             Directive 2004/38 and do not satisfy the conditions."

         Elsewhere the Court stated that on  return,  the  conditions  which
         apply should not be more strict that those  which  apply  when  the
         citizen  has  exercised  his  right  of   movement   by   "becoming
         established" in a host state (para 61).

         48.  The reference to "becoming established"  echoes  the  approach
         taken in Metock v Minister for Justice,  Equality  and  Law  Reform
         [2009] QB 318.  In that case, the Court rejected an  argument  that
         the spouse's derivative right to reside in the host state  depended
         on that spouse having previously been lawfully  resident  within  a
         member state.  ...

         49.  The use of the word "established"  is  significant.   In  that
         paragraph, and elsewhere, the Court discusses  the  nature  of  the
         derivative rights as those which follow when the  EU  national  has
         become "established" in the host state  (paras  68;  81;  89;  90).
         This was noted by the Advocate  General  in  Surinder  Singh,  from
         whose opinion it is apparent that there was  already  jurisprudence
         of the ECJ to the effect that the economic activity which  required
         to be the subject of free movement had to be effective and genuine;
         and that in assessing  the  genuine  and  effective  nature  of  an
         activity, courts were entitled to take into account  the  irregular
         nature and limited duration of work done (para 14, p370).  The same
         point arose in LN where the  activity  required  to  be  more  than
         marginal or ancillary.

         50.  ...

         51.  As in the present case, the argument advanced in CPC was  that
         Regulation  9  created  minimal  criteria,  and  that  the   phrase
         "residing in an EEA state as a worker" meant no  more  than  "being
         present in an EEA state as a worker".  The UT subjected O and B  to
         a careful analysis, concluding (para 31) that "the Court's  concern
         was, if not with habitual residence, with a  concept  of  residence
         which went beyond mere physical presence."  The concern was with  a
         residence which was "sufficiently genuine" as to enable a person to
         create  or  strengthen  family  life  there,  which   indicated   a
         qualitative element.  What is required of the decision maker  (para
         40)

             "... is to make a judgment of fact and degree  as  to  whether
             the individual has lived in the EEA  State  in  question  with
             sufficient permanence, continuity or at least some expectation
             of continuity, to warrant the  conclusion  that  he  "resided"
             there within the ordinary meaning of the word."

10. The above is consistent with the factors set out in Regulation 9 of the
    EEA Regulations, which in any event have to be interpreted consistently
    with EU law.  As above, although not strictly binding, the decision  is
    persuasive and I find no error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision which is entirely consistent with this approach to  residence.
    The First-tier Tribunal expressly did not consider motive alone  or  as
    the basis of a finding that there was an abuse of rights,  but  instead
    considered it as one of  the  relevant  factors  to  determine  genuine
    residence.

11. The Appellants' contention is essentially that the above is  wrong  and
    that once an EEA  national  is  genuinely  and  effectively  exercising
    treaty rights in another Member State (as the Sponsor was  accepted  to
    have done by the Respondent and First-tier Tribunal), then that  person
    is resident in another Member State  regardless  of  their  motive  for
    doing so.  The Appellants further  state  that  a  resident  will  have
    settled in a Member State if the character  of  their  residence  there
    most closely matches that of a person who has a right of  residence  of
    more than three months compared to a person of shorter duration or  has
    goes on holiday to another Member  State.   Duration  is  of  course  a
    relevant factor but so is motive, integration and so on.

12. The submission above inherently recognises that there is a  qualitative
    assessment to be made as to "residence", which is what  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did in the present case, consistent with the authority set out
    above.   There  is  no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the Sponsor's residence, which  takes  into  account  the
    relevant factors as to whether this was genuine and  established.   The
    appeal is dismissed on the third ground.

13. As to the first ground of appeal, I do not find any material  error  of
    law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   Although  there  is  no
    express finding in relation to the Appellants' credibility, the  issues
    in this appeal clearly focus on the position of the Sponsor.  The First-
    tier Tribunal did expressly find that the Sponsor was  the  person  who
    made the decisions for the family  and  against  that  background,  the
    Appellants' evidence of what he told them adds little  if  anything  to
    his credibility.   Even  if  considered  to  be  corroborative  of  the
    Sponsor's claim, this would go only to a limited number of the  reasons
    for the adverse credibility findings (set out in paragraphs 39 to 51 of
    the decision)  and  the  overall  conclusion  that  residence  was  not
    genuine.  In particular, the Appellants' evidence as to  the  Sponsor's
    work  and  intentions  was  lacking,  as  was  evidence  of  their  own
    integration beyond the children attending school in Ireland, such  that
    even if credible, they simply didn't  address  these  points  in  their
    evidence.

14. The second ground of appeal is  entirely  without  merit  and  in  part
    misreads  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  in  part  pursues
    something as a matter of  principle  which  is  accepted  can  have  no
    material bearing on the outcome of the appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal
    highlighted the lack of information and evidence both prior to  and  at
    the oral hearing.  These were  not  matters  upon  which  any  specific
    questions needed to be asked but, for example in relation to the mosque
    attended, were used as illustrative examples of the lack of the general
    evidence of integration in Ireland which could reasonably  be  expected
    if the Appellants' claim was credible.

15. As to matters contained in a letter from  the  Appellants'  solicitors,
    the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take the contents of  the  same
    into account even if not formally  a  witness  statement.   The  strict
    rules of evidence do not apply in the Tribunal and the contents of  the
    letter clearly  represented  the  Appellants'  case  and  in  fact  was
    entirely factually correct.  In  those  circumstances,  on  the  facts,
    there can be no material error of law even if the Appellant  was  right
    as a matter of principle (which I do not accept).

16. The final ground of appeal was  not  formally  withdrawn  at  the  oral
    hearing but was not pursued with any vigour and  the  comments  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal as to its lack of merit were accepted.  I
    find no merit in the final ground of appeal which does  not  amount  to
    any error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   It  is  not
    clear that any  Zambrano  points  were  argued  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the fourth Appellant is of  course  entitled  to  make  an
    application on that basis if she so wishes.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    has no jurisdiction to consider Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human rights more broadly with in an EEA appeal for the reasons set out
    in Amirteymour v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA
    Civ 353.

17. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the
    making of a material  error  of  law  and  the  decision  is  therefore
    confirmed.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     17th December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

