
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01465/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2019                  |On 10 December 2019                  |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Mr Hussain Ahmed                                  |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Immigration officer, Heathrow                     |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, of Counsel, instructed by Londonium
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The issue in this case is whether  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Rowlands (hereafter the "judge") materially erred in  law  in  reaching
    his finding, at para 19 of his decision, that the appellant's wife,  Ms
    Yordanka  Bogdanova,  a  Bulgarian  national  born  on  2  March   1975
    (hereafter  the  "sponsor"),  "had  not  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    exercising Treaty rights for at least six months  if  not  longer"  and
    that therefore the respondent was correct in making his decision of  23
    March 2019 to revoke the residence card that had been  issued  in  July
    2017 (valid until 14  June  2022)  to  the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Bangladesh born on 27 June 1982.

 2. The appellant came to the attention of the respondent on 23 March  2019
    because he travelled to Bangladesh on 2 January 2019 and arrived in the
    United Kingdom on 22 March 2019. He presented  his  residence  card  in
    order to be re-admitted to the United Kingdom. He  was  interviewed  on
    the same day, at 21:50 hours. The record of the interview is  at  pages
    34-39  of  the  respondent's  bundle.  In  the  decision  notice,   the
    respondent stated:

         "I am satisfied that Yordanka Bogdanova Toleva is not currently  in
         the United Kingdom, that you are not therefore seeking to  join  an
         EEA national in the United Kingdom who has a right to reside  there
         under those Regulations and that you do not therefore have a  right
         to be admitted under regulation 11.

         When you arrived in the United Kingdom today, you stated that  your
         wife has been out of the United Kingdom for  over  six  months  and
         that she had last been in employment in 2017.  You  confirmed  that
         your wife has been residing in Bulgaria to take care of her son and
         help her mother in her mother's accountancy firm.  I  am  satisfied
         that  your  wife  is  not  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom,  not
         exercising her Treaty Rights and you are not therefore  seeking  to
         join a EEA/EU national who is resident in the United Kingdom.

         You have not sought entry in any other  capacity  and  I  therefore
         revoke your EEA residence permit and refuse your admission  to  the
         United Kingdom in accordance with Regulation 24(5)(a) and  23(4)(a)
         respectively."

 3. The respondent's decision was  made  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (hereafter the "2016 Regulations").

 4. At his interview, the appellant had said, inter alia, as follows:

         Qn 8:    When was the last time your wife was in the UK?
         Ans:     She's been in Bulgaria for more than six  months.  I  even
                met her there in October [?] year.

         Qn 9:    Why has she been in Bulgaria for more than six months?
         Ans:     Because she is just helping her mother and  looking  after
                her son. Her mother looks after her son,  only  her  mother.
                She was going to bring her  son  here,  but  her  ex-husband
                complained not to bring the son here.

         Qn 10:   So where does your wife live now?
         Ans:     She has a house over there, she lives  both  here  and  in
                Bulgaria.

         Qn 11:   Would you say that your wife is exercising Treaty Rights?
         Ans:     On Sunday she is coming back to live with me, she's  still
                my wife.

 5. At question 12, the appellant was asked whether he had  understood  all
    of  the  questions  and  he  answered:  "yes  sir"  (page  38  of   the
    respondent's bundle).

 6. Before the interview commenced, the appellant confirmed by signing  his
    signature (page 34 of the respondent's bundle)  that  he  was  fit  and
    happy to be interviewed.  At the end of the  interview,  the  appellant
    confirmed by signing his signature (page 34) that he had  read  or  had
    the record of his interview read to him,  he  had  understood  all  the
    questions and that the interview record was an accurate record.

The judge's decision

 7. There was no issue  before  the  judge  over  the  genuineness  of  the
    marriage, entered into on 8 February 2017, between  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor.

 8. The judge noted, inter alia, that the appellant had said in his witness
    statement that the sponsor had  spoken  by  telephone  to  one  of  the
    immigration officers at Heathrow explaining her position and  that  she
    had returned to the United Kingdom the next day  (24  March  2019).  He
    said that she was a self-employed person since  2017;  that  they  have
    been living together "since long"; that due some emergency the  sponsor
    frequently visits Bulgaria as her son from  her  previous  marriage  is
    disabled and she has to look after him "now and then"; and that she had
    never been out of the United Kingdom for more than 6 months at a  time.
    At para 7 of his decision, the judge summarised the following aspect of
    the appellant's witness statement:

         "7.      ... he said that she had never been out of the country for
             more than six months at a time. He couldn't remember saying to
             anybody that she hadn't been working here. He had left home at
             midnight and had caught a flight at six o'clock in the morning
             from Sylhet and it was an eleven hour journey to Heathrow.  He
             hadn't been feeling particularly well on arrival, he  said  he
             was suffering from a headache. The interview took place at ten
             to ten at night."

 9. The judge then summarised the witness statement of the  sponsor,  which
    was in similar terms, at paras 9 and 10. At para 11, he summarised  her
    oral evidence. Paras 10 and 11 read:

         "10.     She said that she had not been out of the  United  Kingdom
             for more than six months at a time, she had to travel  because
             of her son. She was in Bulgaria at the time when  her  husband
             returned but she came back two days later. She had gone  there
             around 27th December and had actually worked  the  day  before
             she left.

         11.      In cross-examination she confirmed that the day before she
             left was Boxing Day. She had no documents with her. The office
             required  to  cleaned  before  it  opened  again.  She  worked
             cleaning an office in Camberley in  Surrey.  In  answer  to  a
             question from me she said it was a big office but she couldn't
             identify it any further. That was the end of the evidence."

10. At para 16, the judge said that he had considered all of  the  evidence
    in reaching his decision. He then gave his reasons for his decision  at
    paras 17-18, assessing the appellant's explanation for the  answers  he
    gave at his interview at para 18. Paras 17-18 of the  judge's  decision
    read:

         "17.     There is no issue over the genuineness of their  marriage,
             the only issue is whether, when  he  returned  to  the  United
             Kingdom she was actually exercising treaty rights or had  done
             so recently. The answers given by the Appellant  in  interview
             seemed to suggest that she had been out  of  the  country  for
             "over six months". I  had  produced  to  me  a  boarding  pass
             indicating that she returned on 24th March  2019  from  Sofia.
             There is no evidence at all supplied of her date of  departure
             for Bulgaria. In fact, the first time it was mentioned at  all
             was by her at the  hearing  when  she  claimed  to  have  been
             working up until Boxing Day and  returned  to  Bulgaria  after
             that. I find it rather surprising that she should do  so  when
             she has a son in Bulgaria with apparent  health  problems  who
             she had not seen for Christmas. I also note that the Appellant
             himself said that he visited her in Bulgaria in October. I  am
             satisfied that the Respondent was right to conclude  that  she
             had been out of the country, as the  Appellant  himself  said,
             for more than six months. The financial  documents  showed  no
             payments made to her from income only from the  Appellant  and
             the tax document related to tax year 2017/2018 which ended  in
             April 2018. There is no evidence whatsoever of her having  any
             income or employment since April 2018.

         18.      At the hearing, the Appellant tried to suggest that he was
             tired and confused when interviewed but he has never suggested
             this until now. In the grounds of appeal  he  states  that  he
             answered the Immigration Officers questions "very honestly and
             sincerely"  yet  he  now  suggests  that   the   answers   are
             unreliable.  I  reject  this  completely  as  an  attempt   to
             disassociate himself from  the  answers  that  he  gave  which
             undermine his entitlement to a residence card. Nowhere in  the
             grounds of appeal is there any  mention  whatsoever  of  those
             answers being unreliable."

11. At para 20, the judge purported to consider Article 8, concluding  that
    the decision was not unlawful.  He then proceeded to dismiss the appeal
    on EEA grounds and purported to dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

The grounds and the grant of permission

12.  The  application  for  permission  contained  two  grounds.  Ground  2
    challenged the judge's reasoning in relation to  Article  8.  Mr  Swain
    accepted at the hearing that the judge had no jurisdiction to  consider
    Article  8  pursuant  to  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Amirteymour [2017] EWCA Civ 353. Accordingly, he agreed that  he  could
    not pursue ground 2. Furthermore, it was agreed at the  hearing  before
    me that the judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds had to be set aside for lack of jurisdiction.

13. Ground 1 challenged the judge's finding that the sponsor had  not  been
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom for at least 6 months if
    not longer.

14. Ground 1 opens by stating "This is a  perversity  challenge".  It  then
    states that the judge's finding that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    sponsor was exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom for at least
    6 months was incorrect for two reasons as follows:

         (i)      The judge placed undue weight on the interview record  but
             failed to consider the appellant's circumstances at  the  time
             of his interview that rendered him incapable of  understanding
             and responding to the questions put to him accurately.  It  is
             contended that the appellant was  physically  and  emotionally
             exhausted during his interview,  he  did  not  understand  the
             questions and does not remember what  was  said  exactly.  The
             interview  record  was  therefore  rendered   unreliable   and
             inadmissible due to the respondent's failure  to  observe  the
             procedures of  the  interview  such  as  to  ensure  that  the
             appellant was physically fit to understand the questions  and,
             furthermore, the appellant was not  given  an  opportunity  to
             read the interview sheet before signing it.

         (ii)     The appellant had provided "background evidence"  to  show
             that the sponsor had been working as  a  self-employed  person
             before  leaving  in  late  December  2018  and  that  "further
             evidence submitted with this application  also  supports  this
             assertion".

15. Permission was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page
    (hereafter the "permission judge"). His reasons are set out at  para  2
    of his decision which reads:

         "I am satisfied that an arguable error of law has  been  identified
         in the judge's decision that could  cause  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
         interfere. The appellant's grounds of appeal engage with  what  the
         judge decided, beyond disagreement with the judge's conclusions. In
         the judge's conclusions at paragraphs 16-20 there is a  paucity  of
         reasoning to explain why  he  concluded  that  the  respondent  was
         correct to find that the appellant's wife had been out  of  the  UK
         for over 6 months - and the judge has strayed into considering  the
         appeal under Article 8. The complaint made is that  the  judge  has
         erred in finding that  the  appellant's  wife  was  not  exercising
         treaty rights as claimed and  made  mistakes  of  fact.  The  judge
         accepted the marriage was genuine. Permission to appeal is  granted
         on all grounds argued."

Submissions

16. Mr Swain informed me that the "further evidence"  referred  to  in  the
    grounds was the sponsor's tax return for the  tax  year  2018/2019.  He
    informed me that this tax return was not submitted to the judge and  he
    therefore accepted that it could not be relied upon in order to  impugn
    the judge's decision. Likewise, he confirmed that  the  fresh  evidence
    submitted to the Upper Tribunal  under  cover  of  a  letter  dated  26
    November 2019 from Londonium Solicitors was fresh evidence  that  could
    not be relied upon in order to impugn the judge's decision.

17. Mr Swain said that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal concerns the weight
    that the judge accorded to the appellant's answers  at  his  interview.
    The appellant's evidence was that he left his  home  in  Bangladesh  at
    midnight and flew from Sylhet at 6 a.m. He endured an  11-hour  journey
    to the Heathrow, arriving at 5 p.m.  local  time.  The  interview  took
    place just before 10 p.m. The interview had placed the appellant  under
    strain which was compounded by his journey. Neither the judge  nor  the
    respondent had challenged the appellant's evidence about the length  of
    his journey.

18. Mr Swain submitted that there should have been some acknowledgement  on
    the part of the  judge  of  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant,  as
    explained in the previous paragraph, whereas the judge  had  completely
    rejected the appellant's explanation. He acknowledged that it  was  not
    argued in the grounds that the judge should have taken some account  of
    the appellant's explanation as opposed to rejecting it completely.

19. In addition, the permission judge had said that there was a paucity  of
    reasoning in the judge's decision.

20. Mr Swain submitted  that  the  fact  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had  a  genuine  marriage  should  have  been
    factored into the judge's reasoning in making his finding as to whether
    or not the sponsor was away from the United Kingdom  from  28  December
    2018 or longer. He submitted  that  the  fact  that  the  marriage  was
    genuine means that it can be assumed that the parties meet  each  other
    regularly. He submitted that the fact that the judge did not take  into
    account the fact that the appellant and the sponsor had a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage shows that the judge had an unbalanced approach  in
    assessing the evidence and deciding whether the sponsor was  away  from
    the United Kingdom from 27 December 2018 or from October 2018.

21. Finally, Mr Swain submitted that  the  judge  should  have  taken  into
    account the tenancy agreement that was before the judge. I informed  Mr
    Swain that this was not part of his grounds. He replied to say that  he
    would leave the matter there as he did not think that he needed to rely
    upon the tenancy agreement. This was, of course, a matter for Mr  Swain
    as I told him.

22. I heard briefly from Mr Tarlow who essentially said that the  appellant
    was merely trying to re-argue his case and disagree  with  the  judge's
    reasoning.

23. In his submissions in reply, Mr Swain attempted to  raise  yet  another
    new issue, i.e. that the judge was wrong to criticise the appellant for
    not submitting a tax return for the  2018/2019  tax  year  because  the
    deadline for submitting this tax return is 31 January 2020.

24. I informed Mr Swain that not only was this not part of his grounds,  it
    is based upon a misreading of the final sentence  of  para  17  of  the
    judge's decision where he said that "there is no evidence whatsoever of
    her having any income or employment since April 2018" and not that  the
    appellant had not submitted the 2018/2019 tax return.

25. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

26. I have considered the grounds, the grant of permission and  Mr  Swain's
    submissions very carefully.

27.  The  opening  sentence  of  ground  1,  that  "This  is  a  perversity
    challenge", is in truth the only real ground. I will deal with it after
    I have disposed of the two reasons advanced in the grounds  in  support
    of this perversity challenge and Mr Swain's submissions.

28. I can dispose of the second reason  advanced  in  the  written  grounds
    (para 14.(ii) above) in brief terms. As I said  (para  16  above),  the
    "further evidence" referred to was not  before  the  judge.  There  was
    simply no "background evidence" to show that the sponsor had  left  the
    United Kingdom in late December or that she had  been  working  in  the
    United Kingdom before leaving at that time. The only evidence  to  this
    effect was the oral evidence of the sponsor which she mentioned for the
    first time at the hearing and which the judge plainly considered.

29. The first reason advanced in support of the grounds (para 14 (i) above)
    was also  hopeless.  The  submission  that  the  interview  record  was
    inadmissible was misconceived. The interview record was admissible  but
    evidence about the circumstances explained  by  the  appellant  to  the
    effect that he was exhausted after his journey and tired etc go to  the
    weight to be given to the answers he gave at his interview.

30. The remainder of the first reason advanced in support  of  the  grounds
    plainly amounts to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    reasoning and an attempt to re-argue his evidence.

31. The weight to be given to it was a matter for  the  judge.  He  plainly
    took into account the appellant's explanation and was entitled to reach
    the conclusion he reached for the reasons he gave.

32. There was therefore nothing at all in the appellant's  written  grounds
    that could be said to give rise to any arguable error of law, let alone
    any arguably material error of law, even if one leaves aside  the  fact
    that the opening sentence of ground 1 contended that the challenge  was
    in reality a perversity challenge.

33. At para 90.2 of R (Iran) and others v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,  the
    Court of Appeal said, in giving guidance:

         "2.      A finding might only be set aside for error of law on  the
             grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable  in
             the Wednesbury sense, or one that was  wholly  unsupported  by
             the evidence."

34. Any challenge on the ground of perversity was doomed  to  fail  in  the
    instant case, given that it is plain  from  paras  17  and  18  of  the
    judge's decision that he gave the following reasons for his finding  at
    para 19 that the sponsor had not been exercising Treaty rights  in  the
    United Kingdom for at least 6 months if not longer:

         i) that there was no evidence at all before him of the date of  her
         departure from the United Kingdom;

         ii)      that she mentioned at the hearing for the first time  that
         she had been working up until Boxing Day and returned  to  Bulgaria
         after that;

         iii)     that it was surprising that she would return  to  Bulgaria
         after Boxing Day given that she has a son in Bulgaria with apparent
         health problems who she had not seen for Christmas;

         iv)      that the appellant had himself stated that he had  visited
         the sponsor in Bulgaria in October 2018;

         v) that there was no evidence before him at all  that  the  sponsor
         had received any income from employment since April 2018; and

         vi)      that the appellant had said in his grounds  of  appeal  to
         the First-tier Tribunal that he had answered the questions  at  his
         interview "very honestly and sincerely" and had not suggested until
         his  witness  statement  that  he  was  tired  and  confused   when
         interviewed.

35. For all of the above reasons, I have no hesitation at all in  rejecting
    ground 1 as advanced in the appellant's written grounds.

36. I turn to Mr Swain's submissions to the extent not already dealt with.

37. Mr Swain suggested that the fact that  the  marriage  was  genuine  was
    relevant and should have been  factored  into  the  judge's  reasoning.
    There is simply no basis at all for Mr Swain's submission that the fact
    that the marriage was genuine means that it can  be  assumed  that  the
    parties meet each other regularly.  This is a submission that Mr  Swain
    ought not to have advanced as he could not properly make it. Judges  in
    this jurisdiction often deal with applications for entry clearance from
    parties  who  are  in  genuine  marriages  but  have  lived  apart  for
    considerable periods. There is therefore simply no basis for Mr Swain's
    submission that the judge's failure to factor into  his  reasoning  the
    genuineness of the marriage shows that he had an unbalanced approach in
    assessing the evidence. Mr Swain is in effect clutching at straws.

38. In any event, as is plain from the judge's decision, he was fully aware
    that the marriage was a genuine one. He referred to it in  the  opening
    sentence of para 17.

39. Finally, in view of the decision  in  AZ  (error  of  law:  judge;  PTA
    practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 00245 (IAC) and Durueke  (PTA:  AZ  applied,
    proper approach) [2019] UKUT 00197 (IAC),  it  is  appropriate  that  I
    should turn to the decision of the permission judge. In head-note  (3),
    the Upper Tribunal said:

         "3.      Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  be
             granted on a ground that was not advanced by an applicant  for
             permission, only if:

             (a) the judge is satisfied that  the  ground  he  or  she  has
                  identified is one which has a strong prospect of success:

                  (i)  for the original appellant; or

                  (ii) for the Secretary of State, where the ground  relates
                      to a decision which, if undisturbed, would breach the
                      United Kingdom's international Treaty obligations; or

             (b) (possibly) the ground  relates  to  an  issue  of  general
                  importance, which the Upper Tribunal needs to address."

40. The permission judge referred to there being "a paucity  of  reasoning"
    in the decision of the judge. It is important to note that the  written
    grounds that were before the permission judge did not contend that  the
    judge's reasons were inadequate, much less that there was a paucity  of
    reasoning in the judge's  reasoning.  The  permission  judge  therefore
    raised an issue that was not advanced in the written grounds that  were
    before him.

41. The permission judge did not state why he was raising a ground that had
    not been raised in the grounds before him.

42. At para 90.3 of R (Iran), the Court of Appeal explained the  test  that
    has to be applied before a decision can be set aside for inadequacy  of
    reasons, as follows:

         "3.      A decision should not  be  set  aside  for  inadequacy  of
             reasons unless the adjudicator failed to identify  and  record
             the matters that were critical to  his  decision  on  material
             issues, in such a way that the IAT was  unable  to  understand
             why he reached that decision."

43. Mr Swain did not identify any evidence or aspect of the  evidence  that
    had not been considered by the judge other than his submission that the
    judge had failed to take into account the genuineness of  the  marriage
    which was not advanced in the written grounds  and  therefore  was  not
    before the permission  judge.  He  did  not  submit  that  the  judge's
    reasoning was such that one is unable to understand why he reached  his
    decision.

44. To the contrary, the  judge  gave  several  reasons  for  reaching  his
    conclusion at para 19 of his decision, as I have set out at my para  34
    above.

45. In view of what I have said at paras 42-44 above, it is  impossible  to
    see how the permission judge could have reached the view that there was
    arguably a paucity of reasoning in the decision of the judge. His  view
    was simply untenable and the fact that this was so is  demonstrated  by
    Mr Swain's failure to substantiate this ground in any way save  to  say
    that he relied upon the  permission  judge's  view  that  there  was  a
    paucity of reasoning in the decision.

46. The permission judge referred to the judge having made mistakes of fact
    but he made no attempt to explain what mistakes of fact he had in mind.
    He referred to the fact that the judge had accepted that  the  marriage
    was genuine. If it was in his mind that this was a relevant  factor  in
    deciding whether the sponsor was absent from the United Kingdom or  had
    been exercising Treaty rights, he was plainly wrong, for the reasons  I
    have given.

47. Finally, the permission judge recognised that  the  judge  had  strayed
    into considering the appeal under Article 8 and yet granted  permission
    "on all grounds argued", i.e. including ground 2.

48. For all of the reasons give above, I have no hesitation in saying  that
    this was a hopeless appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  that  permission
    should not have been granted.

49. Mr Swain did not pursue the points I have described at my paras 21  and
    23-24. In any event, he did not have permission to argue that the judge
    had failed to take into account the tenancy  agreement  and  the  issue
    described at paras 23-24 was based on a misunderstanding of para 17  of
    the judge's decision as stated at my para 24.

50. As explained at para 12 above, it was agreed that the judge's  decision
    to dismiss the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds stands to  be
    set aside for want of jurisdiction. This did not  warrant  a  grant  of
    permission. It could have been dealt with adequately by the  permission
    judge.




    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on human rights grounds is set aside for want of jurisdiction.

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on EEA grounds did not involve the making of any error  of  law.
    The appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  EEA  grounds  is
    dismissed.


[pic]
Signed      Date: 7 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

