
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/01995/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 February 2018                       | On 29 March 2018                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                            MASALU BEATRICE FREE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                THE SECRETARYOF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi instructed by Samuel Ross Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Tanzania.  She appealed to  a  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  on  16
    February 2017 refusing to issue her with a residence card.

2.   The appellant has been- in the United Kingdom since  3  November  2002.
    She married Mr Free on 24 April 2004 and was issued  with  a  residence
    card on 15 July 2004, valid  until  9  September  2009.   She  made  an
    application for a permanent residence card on 16 March  2010  and  this
    was refused by the respondent and a subsequent  appeal  was  dismissed.
    On 26 October 2010 she was issued with a decree absolute dissolving her
    marriage with Mr Free.  On 24 September 2013 she applied for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of  family  private  life  as  the  partner  of  Mr
    Athumani.  This was refused on 16 October 2013 with no right of appeal,
    there was a judicial review and a further decision made on  7  November
    2014.  The human rights application was refused and an  appeal  against
    that was dismissed in 2015 by Judge Cope.  A  further  application  for
    permanent residence on the basis  of  retained  rights  under  the  EEA
    Regulations was made on 19 October 2015 but refused and  not  appealed.
    A further such application was made on 4 May 2016 and again refused and
    not appealed.  The current application was made on 1 December 2016.

3.   The judge noted the appellant's evidence as regards  her  work  history
    and also the work history of Mr Free.  He also took  into  account  the
    Devaseelan guidance in respect of  the  earlier  decisions,  noting  in
    particular what was recorded by Judge  Cope  at  paragraph  79  of  his
    decision in 2015 that the appellant had told him she had not worked and
    she had been advised that she had no  right  to  do  so  following  the
    dismissal of her earlier appeal.  Her evidence before the judge in 2015
    was that her relationship with Mr Free had broken down in mid-2007.  On
    the basis of the Devaseelan  guidance  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant was not entitled to work and had in  fact  not  worked  since
    September 2010 up to the date of the decision of the judge in  February
    2015 because that judge had heard direct evidence on the issue and that
    had to be the starting point for this judge's decision.

4.   The judge noted the appellant's evidence that  she  had  in  fact  been
    working for the Mortgage Advice Centre  from  July  2010  (the  company
    later changed its name to Wallsend Lets in 2012) and she said  she  had
    been employed there ever since.  She gave the reason  for  telling  the
    judge in February 2015 that she had not worked since the  dismissal  of
    her appeal in 2010 on the basis that she was asked about full-time work
    and was only working part-time.  The judge's decision had recorded that
    she said she had not worked since she had been advised that she had  no
    right to do so following the dismissal of her appeal by  the  judge  in
    2010.

5.   The judge was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had  told  the  truth
    about her employment history.  He did not find credible the reason that
    she gave for saying to the judge in 2015 that she had not worked  since
    2010.  The judge was not satisfied that the appellant  had  worked  for
    Wallsend Lets since 2010.  The letter from the company did not make any
    mention of when she was supposed to have begun her employment  and  her
    relationship with them, the only copy of the contract of employment was
    a photocopy and the respondent had not  seen  the  original,  the  wage
    packets in the bundle were handwritten on generic wages  envelopes  and
    there were no pay slips from this employment in the bundle of documents
    and no one from  Wallsend  Lets  had  attended  the  Tribunal  to  give
    evidence and as a consequence the letters, contract  and  wage  packets
    from Wallsend Lets were given little weight.

6.   With regard to Mr Free,  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  he  was
    exercising his treaty rights whilst in employment prior to the  divorce
    in October 2010 as set out in the HMRC  records  in  the  bundle.   The
    evidence relating to Mr Free's national  insurance  contributions  only
    related to the amount of tax and national insurance he paid but did not
    state the dates he  started  and  finished  working  for  the  relevant
    employers, as there were several changes of employer during that period
    and  it  was  therefore  impossible  to  ascertain   whether   he   was
    continuously exercising his free movement rights up  to  the  point  of
    divorce or whether there were any breaks in continuity or the  duration
    of such breaks.  The judge concluded that the appellant had not met the
    requirements of Regulation 10(5) or (6)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  and
    therefore had not retained a right of residence following  her  divorce
    and had not met the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(f) as she had  not
    resided under the Regulations for five continuous years.

7.   The appellant sought, and was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that there was arguably a lack of clear findings with  regard  to
    the material requirements of the EEA Regulations,  and  it  was  argued
    that the judge had been satisfied that Mr Free was working at the  time
    of the divorce rather than working continuously up to the divorce which
    was not required, according to Amos [2011] EWCA  Civ  552.   The  judge
    granting permission considered  that  there  was  arguably  a  lack  of
    sustainable findings on the material matter concerning whether Mr  Free
    was exercising treaty rights at the time of divorce and there was a pre-
    occupation with strict continuity of exercise of treaty rights contrary
    to a purposive construction of EU treaty rights and authority and there
    was an arguable lack of material findings and findings which  were  not
    reasonably sustainable on the evidence.

8.   In his submissions Mr Pipi relied on and developed points made  in  his
    skeleton argument.  He argued that the judge had erred with  regard  to
    both Regulation 15(1)(b) and Regulation 15(1)(f).

9.   The judge had not addressed the first of these at all  and  the  appeal
    should have been allowed under this provision.   Mr  Free  had  been  a
    worker throughout.  The judge had referred to frequent changes  of  job
    though he could not say if he had exercised treaty rights  continuously
    for five years.  The key issue was whether the ex-husband Mr Free was a
    worker.  He met the conditions as set out at paragraph  16  onwards  in
    the skeleton.  The case of Barry could be seen  as  relevant  to  this.
    There the EEA citizen had worked for only two  weeks  in  a  six  month
    period but nevertheless was held to be a worker.  The judge had focused
    too much on the change in the work over a long period  of  time  so  it
    could not be said that he had worked continuously but the question  was
    whether he was a worker and if so that did not matter.  It  was  enough
    that he was engaged in genuine economic activity  within  that  period.
    The national insurance contributions which could be seen at  paragraphs
    70 to 100 of  the  bundle  showed  genuine  economic  activity.   As  a
    consequence the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) were made out.

10.  With regard to the Regulation 15(1)(f) issue, paragraph 25  onwards  in
    the skeleton addressed this.  The judge had found that Regulation 10(5)
    was not met as there was no evidence that the  husband  was  exercising
    treaty rights before the divorce and that was  wrong  on  the  evidence
    before the judge.  The national insurance  records  went  back  to  the
    1980s and it was clearly an error to say there was no evidence  of  the
    exercise of  Treaty  rights  prior  to  the  divorce.   It  was  not  a
    requirement in any event.

11.  The judge had also erred with regard to the appellant's  work  history.
    It was not a requirement that had to  be  proved.   It  could  only  be
    possibly the case if the  appellant  had  not  accumulated  five  years
    before the divorce.  Once there had been five years before the  divorce
    there was no requirement to carry on working after that and that was  a
    further error of law.  It did not appear from the decision  that  other
    parts of Regulation 10 were in issue.

12.  In his submissions Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24  reply.   The  judge
    had looked at the pay slips and found they  could  not  be  relied  on.
    Looking at that it was a finding open to him and he had  also  properly
    relied on the Devaseelan guidance.  Taken as a whole there was no error
    of law in the decision and if the Tribunal disagreed the  matter  could
    be re-made by it.

13.  By way of reply with regard to the documents considered  at  paragraphs
    164 and 165 of the bundle, the judge addressed these  at  paragraph  46
    and did not say they were relied on and also the documents  related  to
    2010 and if the main submission was accepted that the appellant did not
    have to work  after  the  divorce  it  did  not  matter  whether  these
    documents were accepted or not.

14.  I reserved my decision.

15.  Helpful guidance was provided by the Court of Appeal  in  the  case  of
    Amos to which I have referred above in respect  of  cases  of  retained
    residence.  Both appellants in that case were non-EU nationals who  had
    married  EU  nationals  and  subsequently  divorced  and  applied   for
    recognition of their right to permanent residence.  At paragraph 29 the
    Court of Appeal set out the following  requirements  of  the  Directive
    that were applicable to the appellants:

         "(1) At all times  while  residing  in  this  country  until  their
             divorce, their spouse must have been a worker or self-employed
             (or otherwise satisfied the requirements of Article 7.1).


         (2)  Their marriages had to  have  lasted  at  least  three  years,
             including one year in this country.


         (3)  They must be able to show  that  they  are  workers  or  self-
             employed persons or otherwise satisfy the requirements of  the
             penultimate paragraph of Article 13.2".

16.  The Court of Appeal went on to say the following:

         "30.  The  Regulations  are  consistent  with  these  propositions.
             Regulation 10(5)  provides  that  a  'family  member  who  has
             retained the right of residence' must in a case  such  as  the
             present appeals satisfy the following conditions:


             (a)  His or her divorce from the EEA national.


             (b)  He or she was residing in the UK in accordance  with  the
                  Regulations at the date of the divorce.  He  or  she  will
                  have been so residing if Regulation 14  applied,  i.e.  if
                  the EEA national spouse was a 'qualified person' i.e.  for
                  present purposes a worker or self-employed person  (as  to
                  which see the definitions in Regulations 2 and 6).


             (c)  He or she  is  a  worker  or  self-employed  person,  and
                  therefore satisfies paragraph (6).


             (d)  Three years' marriage,  including  at  least  one  year's
                  residence in the United Kingdom.


         31.  Provided these conditions continue to be satisfied, after five
             years' continuous residence in the UK a non-EEA national  will
             be entitled to a permanent right of residence under Regulation
             15(1)(f)".




17.  On applying this guidance to the findings of the judge  in  this  case,
    it is clear that the marriage had lasted for at least three years prior
    to the initiation of the divorce, the couple having married in 2004 and
    the divorce taking place in 2010.

18.  As regards the evidence respecting Mr Free, it is clear from the  above
    guidance that at all times while residing in the UK until  his  divorce
    he had to have been a worker or self-employed  or  otherwise  satisfied
    the requirements of Article 7.1.  In this regard as can  be  seen  from
    the judge's decision, he was not satisfied that Mr Free was  exercising
    Treaty rights whilst in employment prior  to  the  divorce  in  October
    2010.  The judge's concern was that the evidence relating to Mr  Free's
    national insurance contributions only related to the amount of tax  and
    national insurance he paid but did not state the dates he  started  and
    finished working for the  relevant  employers  as  there  were  several
    changes of employer during this period and it was therefore  impossible
    to ascertain whether he was continuously exercising his  free  movement
    rights up to the point of divorce or whether there were any  breaks  in
    continuity or the duration of such breaks.

19.  I consider that the reasoning at paragraph 52 in the  judge's  decision
    is consistent with the guidance set out at  paragraph  29(1)  of  Amos.
    The judge was not satisfied that it had been shown that  at  all  times
    while residing in the UK until his divorce Mr Free was a worker or self-
    employed.  There were  concerns  about  the  lack  of  evidence  as  to
    continuity and that was a finding in my view that was properly open  to
    the judge.

20.  As regards the  third  requirement,  again  it  is  necessary  for  the
    appellant to show that she was a  worker  or  self-employed  person  or
    otherwise satisfied the requirements of the  penultimate  paragraph  of
    Article 13.2 of the Directive.  On the judge's findings  this  was  not
    done.  Again, I consider it was open to  the  judge  to  conclude  that
    despite the documentary evidence put in, weight was  to  be  placed  on
    what the appellant had said before the judge in 2015, and  the  judge's
    reasons for not accepting her explanation as to why she said  that  set
    out at paragraph 47 of his decision, were fully open to him.  The judge
    went on to give careful consideration to the Wallsend Lets evidence but
    for the reasons set out at paragraph 49 did not  give  that  more  than
    little weight and it clearly did not satisfy the judge that it went  to
    show that it should override the evidence given  by  the  appellant  in
    2015 which was clear.  The judge was also, as part of the reasoning  in
    this regard, entitled to attach weight to the absence of employment  or
    wages documents from the Wallsend  Mortgage  Advice  Centre  which  the
    appellant said she had worked at one time and the  lack  of  pay  slips
    from Wallsend Lets.  The concerns about the documents at pages  164  to
    165, the wage packets, were also fully open to the judge.   Accordingly
    I consider that the judge's decision was consistent with  the  guidance
    in Amos and the decision reached was one which was fully  open  to  the
    judge.

21.  I  should  say  with  regard  to  the  arguments  made  in  respect  of
    Regulation 15 by Mr  Pipi  with  regard  to  Regulation  15(1)(b),  the
    appellant is not a family member as she is required to  be  to  benefit
    from Regulation 15, bearing in mind the definition of family member  at
    Regulation 7.  She can only at best be a family member who has retained
    the right of residence and that is a  different  legal  entity  from  a
    family member.  Accordingly I do not accept the argument that once  she
    had resided for five years in the United Kingdom with Mr Free that that
    meant she  was  entitled  to  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 15(1)(b).  The argument with regard  to  paragraph  15(1)(f)
    depends upon the arguments set out above from Amos, and  the  appellant
    cannot be said to be a person who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years
    and was at the end of that period a family member who had retained  the
    right of residence.  Accordingly I uphold the  judge's  decision.   The
    appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

