
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01228/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd January 2018                  |On 21st February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               LEVAN MIKELADZE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed, instructed by M A Consultants (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence dismissed Mr Mikeladze's  appeal
         against the decision to refuse him a residence card as  the  spouse
         of an EEA National exercising Treaty Rights.


      2. The judge failed to have regard to evidence that was  relied  upon;
         in particular:



          a. His son had been granted entry clearance as the stepson of  Mr
             Mikeladze's spouse;


          b. Bank statement showing her income from her claimed employment;


          c. Her registration as self-employed with HMRC.





      3. The judge failed to make any findings on  the  credibility  of  the
         appellant and his partner and their oral evidence and fails to give
         adequate reasons for rejecting  the  documentary  evidence  of  the
         receipt books or why individuals would sign contracts.


      4. Ms Willocks-Briscoe stated that she could not object to the grounds
         as set out in the application for permission  to  appeal  and  upon
         which permission had been granted.


      5. For all these reasons, I am satisfied that there is an error of law
         such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside


      6. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
         assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.


      7. When I have set  aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First-
         tier Tribunal with directions or remake it for myself.


      8. The Practice Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration
         and Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal states:


         "7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
         to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and  considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal; or
             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
             is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."


      9. In this case there has been an overwhelming failure to have  regard
         to evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  to  make
         reasoned findings. Accordingly I remit the appeal to the First-tier
         Tribunal to be heard afresh.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    remade.

         Date 3rd January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
