
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01151/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                            |On 25 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                             Mujibullah Omarzai
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Mardner, Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 23 October 1982.  He
    originally appealed against the respondent's decision dated 11  January
    2018 in which the respondent refused to issue him with a residence card
    as the direct family member of a British  citizen  who  has  previously
    exercised treaty rights in Ireland.

 2. Originally the refusal by the respondent was on the  basis  that  there
    was insufficient evidence of the  family  member  being  a  worker  and
    exercising treaty rights in Ireland or having genuine residence  there.
    It was noted that there had been a recent refusal  of  entry  clearance
    into the United Kingdom.

 3. On 27 September 2018, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mace  dismissed  the
    appeal.  Although it was accepted that the couple had lived together in
    Ireland, the sponsor, the wife, had only worked for  a  period  between
    the end of January and the end of March and not the ten-month period as
    had originally been claimed.  The sponsor had also returned to the same
    job in the United Kingdom and there were no credible reasons for moving
    to Ireland.  Again, it was  noted  that  there  was  a  previous  entry
    clearance refusal.  There was also a finding by the First-tier Tribunal
    that the purpose of  the  residence  in  Ireland  was  as  a  means  of
    circumventing immigration laws applying to non-EEA nationals which they
    would otherwise be subject to.

 4. The appellant duly applied for permission to appeal which  was  granted
    on the papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  on  26
    October 2018.  The appeal comes before us today essentially on a single
    ground which is that although the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  accept
    that the sponsor had worked in Ireland for a period of ten  months,  it
    was accepted that she had worked in Ireland.  Reliance  was  placed  on
    the case of O and B v Minister voor Immigratie,  Intergratie  en  Asiel
    [2014] QB 1163 to the effect that three months' residence as a  worker,
    self-employed person, self-sufficient person or student is required and
    no longer period is necessary to show genuine  residence  or  effective
    residence and exercise of treaty rights.

 5. The difficulty for the appellant which is apparent before us today,  is
    that on the facts, even  if  that  submission  is  right  in  law,  the
    appellant does not meet it.   Although  there  is  no  express  finding
    precisely on the dates of employment, it is clear from  paragraphs  24,
    26 and 27 of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  that  a  much  shorter
    period of employment than was claimed by the sponsor was  in  fact  the
    case.  The  closest  the  finding  of  fact  gets  is  that  there  was
    documentary evidence of employment between the end of January  and  the
    end of March 2016.  The payslips before the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    dated within that period from 14 January to 24 March 2016.  That  is  a
    period short of three months.  For  that  reason,  even  if  the  legal
    submission on the basis of O and B  is  correct,  the  appellant  falls
    short of it on the facts and the appeal must therefore fail.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]             Date     17th December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
