
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01981/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th December 2018                         |On 25th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                           miss priscilla adamoah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Hyams, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Rodger, promulgated on 20 September 2018, dismissing her appeal against
    the respondent's refusal her application  for  an  EEA  family  permit,
    essentially on the basis that no complete DNA  report  had  been  filed
    with the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  therefore  the  Tribunal  was  not
    satisfied that the relationship was as claimed  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor.

 2. The respondent had initially refused an EEA family permit on 25 January
    2018 for the sole reason that the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and her stepfather as the sponsor was not accepted because a  full  DNA
    report had not been provided.  The DNA report referred to was  for  the
    purposes of proving the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her
    mother, the marriage between her  mother  and  stepfather  having  been
    accepted.

 3. The appeal was determined on the papers by the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    20 September 2018, but it appears from the decision that no bundle  was
    available from the  appellant  at  the  time  the  decision  was  made.
    However, on the file it is clear that the bundle of paperwork had  been
    submitted on behalf of the appellant on 14 September 2018 and that  did
    include a full copy of the DNA report from Anglia DNA.

 4. Those papers, for whatever reason, obviously did not  reach  the  Judge
    and that failure is a procedural irregularity which amounts to an error
    of law in this case.  The papers  were  submitted  on  time,  prior  to
    determination of the appeal and were clearly material to the outcome of
    the appeal.  For these reasons I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 5. The sole issue  in  the  appeal  was  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and her stepfather.  The sole reason
    for  refusal  in  the  respondent's  initial  decision  was  that   the
    relationship was not accepted because the full DNA report had not  been
    provided.  On behalf of the Home Office, Mr Tufan  has  confirmed  that
    there is nothing obviously missing from the copy of the DNA report that
    was provided to the First-tier Tribunal and is  also  available  before
    me.  On the balance of probabilities there is  no  reason  to  doubt  a
    genuine  relationship  as  claimed  and  therefore  I  also  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on the basis that the family relationship  has  been
    accepted.  No  other  reasons  for  refusal  have  been  given  by  the
    respondent initially or at the oral hearing.

 6. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  failing  to  take
    into account documents which had been submitted by the appellant  prior
    to the determination of the appeal, which included the full DNA  report
    on which there can be no doubt that the relationship is as claimed.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  therefore  set  aside  for
    error of law and the appeal remade  to  allow  it  in  the  appellant's
    favour.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake the  decision
as follows:

The appeal  is  allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     14th January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


