
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01137/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 8 November 2018                   |On 15 November 2018                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  SUNJU [D]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant      Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent  Present, no representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The SSHD's decision dated 19 January 2017, refusing  to  issue  the
         appellant a derivative residence card under the  Immigration  (EEA)
         Regulations 2006.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge David C Clapham SSC, allowing the appeal,
         promulgated on 7 June 2018.

     iv) The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT, stated in  the  application
         for permission to appeal dated 18 June 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge D O'Callaghan, dated  12  July
         2018.

 3. The grounds allege that there was an insufficient basis in the evidence
    and in the reasons given by the judge for  finding  in  favour  of  the
    appellant on (a) whether he was the primary carer for his son  and  (b)
    whether his son was residing in the UK as a self-sufficient person.

 4. On issue (a), I indicated at the hearing that the judge heard the  oral
    evidence of the appellant on the issue, which was not subject to cross-
    examination, found him credible and reliable, and that nothing  further
    was legally required.  On issue (b), which Mr  Govan  advanced  as  the
    stronger point, I reserved my decision.

 5. Mr Govan submitted that there was a lack  of  documentary  underpinning
    for what the appellant said  about  his  finances,  in  particular  his
    income from property in Nigeria.  He went through the  bank  statements
    the appellant had provided, and pointed to a number  of  payments  from
    individuals, which he  said  were  not  explained  in  the  appellant's
    evidence.

 6. The appellant said that he had received some support from the church he
    joined in Edinburgh, and that the payments into his account were mostly
    from a Mr Egharhevwa, by way of reimbursement of the  appellant  having
    met the medical expenses in Nigeria of Mr Egharhevwa's late mother.  He
    referred to the evidence in  his  bundle  of  rental  income  from  two
    properties in Nigeria, remitted to him in the UK,  which  he  said  the
    respondent misinterpreted in the refusal decision.   He  said  that  he
    retains a construction business in Nigeria.  He explained how  it  came
    about that, having arrived as a visitor, he sought to remain in the  UK
    to look after his son, who does not wish presently to go back  to  live
    in Nigeria.

 7. Those submissions, on  both  sides,  were  of  the  nature  of  further
    exploration of the case in a way which might have  been  undertaken  in
    the FtT, rather than  of  identifying  error  of  law  by  the  FtT  in
    resolving the case which was put to it.  That is understandable on  the
    appellant's part, as he is not a lawyer, but it struck me that he had a
    natural and straightforward answer for all the  points  raised  by  the
    respondent (which perhaps reflects why the FtT accepted his  evidence).



 8. On issue (b) I find that the respondent's criticisms are an attempt  to
    make a case which might have been put by way of  cross-examination  and
    submission to the FtT, but which does not disclose that the  resolution
    by the FtT of the case before it involved the making of any error on  a
    point of law.  The appeal process is  not  an  opportunity  for  either
    party to bring a case which they failed to put to the FtT.   The  judge
    was bound to  take  account  of  the  matters  raised  in  the  refusal
    decision, but he did just that, and was entitled on the documentary and
    oral evidence to find both issues resolved in the appellant's favour.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            8 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




