
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/01757/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1st November 2018                    |On 29th November 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  mr S I U
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Muhammad (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bircher, promulgated on 21st May 2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 24th April 2018.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, a male, and  was  born  on  17th
    November 1988.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to refuse his application for a derivative residence
    card, such decision being dated 1st February 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he had first  visited  his
    mother in the UK at Christmas 2013 and returned back  to  Nigeria.   He
    then returned to visit again on 6th February 2015, and discovered  that
    his mother's health had deteriorated considerably.  This is because she
    was looking after her two nieces who had  been  living  in  Spain  with
    their own mother, who was undergoing serious psychological decline,  as
    well as looking after her own daughter.   The  Appellant's  mother  had
    already bought the Appellant a return ticket back to  Nigeria,  but  on
    this occasion, the Appellant  did  not  return  back  to  Nigeria,  but
    assumed a role in  the  emotional  and  practical  care  of  all  three
    children, namely, his two cousin  sisters  and  his  own  sister.   The
    Appellant felt he had no alternative but to remain in the  UK  to  help
    his mother with the care of all three children,  but  particularly  his
    sister.  He had put forward evidence that he was  heavily  involved  in
    the day-to-day care of the children.  He  was  responsible  for  taking
    them to school, collecting them from  school,  and  to  take  them  for
    medical appointments, as well as Sunday  school,  together  with  other
    extracurricular activities.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge Bircher, it was quickly determined that the
    Appellant could not satisfy the criteria of Regulation  15A(7)  of  the
    2006 EEA Regulations because he was not a direct  relative,  being  the
    brother of the child upon whom he seeks  to  rely  for  his  derivative
    residence card.  He was not a legal  guardian  of  his  sister  either.
    Accordingly he could not succeed on this basis (paragraph 30).

 5. The judge however, then went on to consider whether the Appellant could
    succeed on human  rights  grounds,  and  in  a  detailed  and  thorough
    analysis of the Razgar principles (from paragraphs 16 to  20)  together
    with the interplay with Section 117A of the Immigration  Act  2014,  it
    was concluded that the Appellant could stay in the UK on the  basis  of
    his Article 8 rights.  The judge gave cogent reasons for why  this  was
    the case (paragraphs 21 to 24).

 6. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law because it
    has been  well-established  since  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in
    Amirteymour v SSHD EWCA Civ 353 that human rights cannot form  part  of
    an EEA appeal.  Therefore, the judge should  not  have  considered  and
    allowed this EEA appeal on the basis of the Appellant's human rights.

 8. Second, the judge overlooked the fact  that  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules at paragraph 320(1)  was  not  considered  and  under  the  carer
    concession, the  Appellant  should  have  sought  to  find  alternative
    arrangements.  The judge has not made any reference to paragraph 276ADE
    and did not consider Article 8 in the Rules, before turning to  Article
    3 outside the Rules, as it was incumbent upon her to do.  The  approach
    to Article 8 was accordingly misconceived.

 9. A Rule 24 response was thereafter entered to the effect that,  firstly,
    this was a case where the Appellant was not represented  and  appeared,
    in  person,  whereas  the  Respondent  was  represented  by   a   legal
    representative.  Second, whilst it is  true  that  the  judge  did  not
    expressly refer to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) it was  not  incumbent  upon
    him to do so in terms because what he did do was to come  to  the  view
    that the circumstances here were clearly exceptional and then  to  have
    considered Article 8 meticulously by taking a  step  by  step  approach
    under Razgar.  Third, that the Court of Appeal guidance in  Amirteymour
    is not applicable because this was  a  case  where  there  had  been  a
    Section 120 "One-Stop Notice" and so the Appellant was allowed to raise
    the Article 8  issue  separately  from  the  EEA  part  of  the  claim.
    Finally, there was a favourable finding by the judge on  the  issue  of
    proportionality and it would be wrong to interfere with it.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 1st November 2018,  Mr  Tan,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State,  submitted  that  the  Rule  24   response   was   fundamentally
    misconceived as there had never been  a  Section  120  notice  at  all.
    Therefore, Amirteymour stood to be applied.  In an EA appeal  reference
    could not be made to human rights arguments  in  order  to  decide  the
    claim.  The judge had plainly  come  to  the  right  view  on  the  EEA
    Regulations and  held  that  the  Appellant  would  not  succeed  under
    Regulation 15.  However, it was wrong for her to go on  and  deal  with
    Article 8 arguments thereafter.  Indeed,  the  judge  herself  did  not
    refer to a Section 120 notice and there was no record of it ever having
    been served on the Appellant.

11. For his part, Mr Muhammad, most properly and commendably stated that it
    would be wrong for him to say that there had been a Section 120 notice,
    when he had no knowledge of its existence himself, not having  appeared
    before the Tribunal below.  Indeed, as far as he was aware,  there  had
    not been a Section 120 notice.  Mr Muhammad plainly acted  with  utmost
    probity and professionalism in making this clarification known  to  the
    Tribunal.  However, he then went on  to  say  that,  nevertheless,  the
    judge had before her a human rights situation where Article 8  fell  to
    be applied, and had gone on to deal with the issue as she saw fit,  and
    the decision should not be interfered with.

12. In reply, Mr Tan submitted that the refusal letter  always  maintained,
    that the Appellant could not succeed under the EEA Regulations, and the
    only way forward for the Appellant would now be to make a  fresh  human
    rights claim, and this was the position in which  this  Tribunal  found
    itself to be equally, because allowing the appeal on a basis which  was
    not permissible, was not something that the First-tier Tribunal  should
    have engaged in during the hearing below.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should  set  aside  the  decision.   My  reasons  are
    precisely those given by Mr Tan, and indeed agreed upon by Mr Muhammad.
     This is a case where there was no Section 120 notice.  It was not open
    to the judge to consider human rights arguments in an EA  appeal.   The
    strictures in Amirteymour applied given the judgment of  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  It was wholly wrong for the drafter of the Rule 24 response to
    first suggest that it had never been claimed that Section 120  had  not
    been served, because the implication of so stating is that it had  been
    served.  It was equally wrong to say that the Appellant  would  plainly
    succeed if the decision was set  aside,  and  upon  a  reconsideration,
    because this simply does not follow.  I have remade the decision on the
    basis of the findings of the original judge, the evidence  before  her,
    and the submissions that I have heard today.  I am allowing the  appeal
    of the Secretary of State.

14. An anonymity order is made.

15. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018

