


                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01562/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th January 2020                         |On 31st January 2020          |
|                                             |                              |




                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between


                                 ELIS COKAJ
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:


    For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, Syeds Law Office Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS



      1. The appellant is a national of Albania.  On 7th  February  2019  he
         applied for a residence card as an extended family member of an EEA
         national exercising treaty rights in the UK.  His  application  was
         refused for reasons set out in a decision by the  respondent  dated
         21st March 2019.  The appellant's appeal against that decision  was
         dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Law  ("the  judge")  for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 18th June 2019.


      2. The respondent did not accept the appellant is an  extended  family
         member of the EEA national. The appellant is the brother of a  non-
         EEA national, who is the spouse of an EEA national.  The respondent
         refused the application because the respondent considered  that  an
         EEA extended family member can no longer rely on their relationship
         with an EEA national's spouse, in order to meet the requirements of
         Regulation  8  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").


      3. The First-tier Tribunal was invited to  determine  whether  it  had
         jurisdiction to hear the appeal as a  preliminary  issue.   It  was
         common ground that those who are accepted to  be  'extended  family
         members' have a statutory right of appeal. The judge concluded  the
         appellant has not produced the documents referred to in  Regulation
         8(7) of the 2016 Regulations, and is not therefore, 'a relative  of
         an EEA national' for the purposes of Regulation  8(2).   The  judge
         concluded that as the  appellant  has  not  established  he  is  an
         'extended family  member'  he  has  no  right  of  appeal  and  the
         availability of judicial review in appropriate  cases,  is  not  an
         inadequate remedy.


      4. The appellant claims  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  the
         conclusion that there was no valid  appeal  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  The appellant refers to the decision in  SSHD  v  Banger
         (Citizenship of the European Union - Right  of  Union  citizens  to
         move and reside freely within the territory of the European Union -
         Judgment) [2018] EUECJ C-89/17 (12 July 2018),  which  makes  clear
         that member states have an obligation to facilitate  the  residence
         of extended family members and to provide an  accessible  right  of
         redress to challenge a disappointing decision.


      5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Omotosho on 24th July 2019.  The judge noted the  Home  Office  had
         identified a problem with the amended 2016 Regulations in that when
         providing for a right  of  appeal  to  'extended  family  members',
         Regulation 36(4)  read  literally,  makes  it  difficult  for  most
         'extended family members' to be able to  exercise  their  right  of
         appeal. As the CJEU judgment in Banger  has  direct  effect,  until
         such time as the Regulations  were  amended  the  respondent  would
         accept that Regulation 36 should be read down, so  as  to  make  it
         compatible with EU Law.


      6. Having had an  opportunity  to  consider  the  matter,  Mr  McVeety
         accepts the decision of the judge that there  is  no  valid  appeal
         before the First-tier Tribunal  is  erroneous  and  should  be  set
         aside.


Discussion


      7. Mr McVeety, rightly in my judgement, concedes there is an error  of
         law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Law.   On  28th
         March 2019, after the respondent's decision, the  exclusion  of  an
         appeal against a decision to  refuse  to  issue  a  document  under
         regulations 12(4), 17(5) or 18(4) to an extended family member, was
         revoked by the Immigration (European Economic Area  Nationals)  (EU
         Exit) Regulations 2019/468 (Part 3 reg.3(2).


      8. The respondent has recognised that Banger makes clear  that  member
         states have an obligation to facilitate the residence  of  extended
         family members and to provide an accessible  right  of  redress  to
         challenge a disappointing decision. The respondent has amended  the
         2016 Regulations so that the appellant has a right  of  appeal.  In
         any event, the respondent accepts Regulation 36(4) should  be  read
         down, so as to make  it  compatible  with  EU  Law  such  that  the
         respondent's decision gave rise to a right of appeal.


      9. As to disposal, I am urged by the parties to remit the  matter  for
         hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  In circumstances where the
         appellant has been denied the opportunity of having the  merits  of
         his appeal considered by First-tier Tribunal because  the  Tribunal
         judge was of the view that there was no  valid  appeal  before  the
         Tribunal, in my judgement, the appropriate course is for the matter
         to  be  remitted  for  hearing  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal.
         Furthermore,  having  considered  paragraph  7.2  of   the   Senior
         President's Practice  Statement  of  25th  September  2012,  in  my
         judgment, the  nature  and  extent  of  any  judicial  fact-finding
         necessary will be extensive.


     10. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


     11. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge  Law  promulgated
         on 18th June 2019 is set aside, and I  remit  the  matter  for  re-
         hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.




    Signed                                  Date 28th January 2020




    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





