
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/01045/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 12 April 2018                      |         On 18 April 2018             |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                               mr Zubair Zahid
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tinsley, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born  on  22  September
    1991.

 2. He appealed against the  respondent's  refusal  to  issue  him  with  a
    residence card dated 15 January 2016.  It was claimed the marriage  was
    one of convenience.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 30  May  2017  Judge  Widdup  (the  judge)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal because he found the appellant married
    the sponsor to improve his immigration status.  Notwithstanding that it
    was accepted the appellant and the  sponsor  were  friends,  the  judge
    found the appellant had not shown he was in a  subsisting  relationship
    akin to marriage with the sponsor.

 4. The grounds claim the  judge  made  findings  without  giving  adequate
    details or full reasons.  Further, that the findings  were  speculative
    and not based on the evidence given by the appellant and his spouse.

 5. The grounds claim there was no reference either to Papajorgi or Rosa in
    terms of the burden of proof.

 6. Judge Andrew in a decision dated 11 December  2017  found  no  arguable
    error of law.  She said at [2]:

         "The grounds complain there is no reference to either Papajorgi  or
         Rosa.  However, it is apparent from paragraph 31  of  the  decision
         the judge had these cases in mind  when  coming  to  his  decision.
         They go on to complain as to the judge's findings.  It is, however,
         apparent, the judge has considered his findings carefully, based on
         the evidence before him and then made sustainable findings.  He has
         given adequate reasons for arriving at those findings."

 7. Judge McGeachy granted permission to appeal  in  a  decision  dated  12
    February  2018.   He  considered  that,  particularly  given  that  the
    appellant is the father of the sponsor's child  that  the  judge  might
    have erred in concluding that the respondent had discharged the  burden
    of proof in showing that this was a marriage of convenience.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Mr Tinsley relied  upon  the  grounds.   Mr  Tinsley  acknowledged  the
    documentation before the judge as  prepared  by  the  appellant's  then
    solicitors was inadequate, as were some of the grounds.   Nevertheless,
    the judge erred in failing to give adequate weight to the fact that the
    appellant and the sponsor had a child between them.

 9. Mr Tufan submitted that all the judge could do was to take  account  of
    the evidence that was before him and comment on the absence of evidence
    he would have expected to see.  DNA  evidence  was  handed  up  at  the
    hearing which Mr Tufan intimated was not necessarily conclusive  as  to
    the appellant's parentage of the child.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10. The judge was placed in a difficult situation. It is  unfortunate  that
    there was no Presenting Officer at the hearing.  The preparation of the
    appeal in terms of the documents submitted was inadequate.

11. What appears to be a one-page photocopy of a DNA profiling test  report
    was handed up at  the  hearing.   It  seems  without  more,  the  judge
    accepted the same although a Presenting Officer might well have  raised
    issues.  Clearly the parentage of the child was a significant  concern.
    Given the judge found the appellant was the father  of  the  child,  he
    erred in his subsequent analysis because he  failed  to  make  adequate
    findings as to why it was that given the parentage of the child,  there
    was no genuine subsisting relationship akin  to  marriage  although  he
    found there was a friendship between the appellant and the sponsor.

12. In my view, an error of law has  been  established.  No  findings  will
    stand. The appeal will be remitted for re-hearing de novo so that fresh
    documentation can be submitted, the respondent  can  consider  the  DNA
    profiling test report in advance of the hearing and the sponsor and the
    appellant can be subjected to cross-examination.

Notice of Decision

13. I find the judge materially erred in law for the reasons I have set out
    above.  The decision is set aside in its entirety and shall  be  remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal after a de novo hearing.

Anonymity direction not made.






Signed                              Date 12 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart













