
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01651/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 April 2017                         |On 2 May 2017                     |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before:
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |Luz Marina Osorio Leiva                           |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |Entry Clearance Officer, Bogota                   |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Dirie, of Counsel, instructed by Kilic & Kilic
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND Directions



Introduction and background facts:


 1. The appellant is a national of Colombia, born on 19 September 1955. She
    has been granted permission to appeal the  decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Andrew who, following a hearing on  27  July  2016,
    dismissed her appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  of  24
    September 2015 to refuse to issue an EEA family permit as  confirmation
    of her right to join a Mr. Juan Carrasco Torrecilla (the "sponsor")  in
    the United Kingdom under to the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations").

 2. The sponsor is a national of Spain born on 12 April 1932. In  interview
    with the respondent, the appellant said that the sponsor is retired and
    came to live in the United Kingdom on 12 January 1967.  She  said  that
    she met the sponsor in the United Kingdom on 20 August  2004  when  she
    was in the United Kingdom. She left the United Kingdom 10 August  2015.
    She said that they were married in Colombia by proxy on 15 August 2015.

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  also
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

 4. The issues before me may be summarised as follows:

    i.      (issue 1) Whether it was conceded in the Notice of the decision
       dated 24 September 2016 (hereafter the "first decision"),  that  the
       appellant and the sponsor were married in Colombia by proxy; and

    ii.     (Issue 2) If yes, whether the judge materially erred in law  in
       failing to consider whether to permit the respondent to withdraw the
       concession.

 5.  The  grounds  also  contend  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
    consideration of the appellant's Article 8  claim.  However,  Ms  Dirie
    accepted that she could not realistically advance the Article 8 grounds
    (i.e. paras 3 and 5 of ground 1 and ground  3)  in  the  light  of  the
    judgments in TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 and Amirteymour
    [2015] UKUT 00466.

Issue 1

 6. It was disputed before the judge that the respondent had conceded  that
    the appellant and the sponsor were married by proxy. This much is clear
    from paras 5-6 of the judge's decision.

 7. The judge summarised this aspect of the proceedings before her at paras
    5-7 of her decision which read as follows:


        "5.      At the commencement of the hearing the question of whether
            there was a matrimonial relationship between the Appellant  and
            the Sponsor was raised. The Appellant's representative  was  of
            the view that as  a  sham  marriage  had  been  raised  by  the
            Respondent it was accepted there had been a valid marriage. The
            respondent's representative said  that  he  was  not  accepting
            there had been a valid marriage and that this was an issue that
            had to be determined. He confirmed that because the refusal was
            silent on this point this was  not  a  matter  which  had  been
            conceded  by  the  Respondent,  and  he   thus   withdrew   any
            concession, had there, in fact, been one.


        6. In response the Appellant's representative said that where there
            is a concession in a refusal letter  it  is  not  open  to  the
            Tribunal to go behind that concession. He referred to a further
            decision that had been made by the Respondent which  replicated
            the decision which is the subject of this appeal.


        7. I indicated to the Appellant's representative that  it  was  not
            the Tribunal who was going behind  the  refusal  but  that  the
            Respondent's   representative   had   withdrawn   any   implied
            concession   in   the   refusal   letter.   The    Respondent's
            representative made no application for an adjournment in  order
            that the validity of the marriage could be  explored.  In  this
            regard I accept that in his later submissions he  said  he  was
            unaware of the withdrawal of  any  concession  in  the  refusal
            letter  but  both  my  notes  and  those  of  the  Respondent's
            representative confirmed that this was the case, as I explained
            to him."

 8. Ms Dirie submitted that para 7 of the judge's decision shows  that  she
    was not aware that she had a discretion not to permit the respondent to
    withdraw the concession. She relied  upon  SSHD  v  Akram  Davoodipanah
    [2004] EWCA Civ 106 where, at para 22, Kennedy LJJ said:
      "22.  It is clear from the authorities that  where  a  concession  has
             been made before an adjudicator by either party the Immigration
             Appeal Tribunal can allow the concession to be withdrawn if  it
             considers that there is good reason in all the circumstances to
             take that course. (See, for example, Ivanauskieine v  Secretary
             of State for the  Home  Department  2001  EWCA  Civ  1271,  and
             Carrabuk v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department,  a
             decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal presided over by Mr
             Justice Collins on 18 May 2000.  Obviously  if  there  will  be
             prejudice to one of the parties if the  withdrawal  is  allowed
             that will be relevant and matters such as  the  nature  of  the
             concession and the timing may also be relevant, but it  is  not
             essential to demonstrate prejudice  before  an  application  to
             withdraw a concession can be refused. What the tribunal must do
             is to try to obtain a fair and just result. In the  absence  of
             prejudice, if a Presenting Officer has made a concession  which
             appears in retrospect to be a concession which he or she should
             not have made, then probably  justice  will  require  that  the
             Secretary of State  be  allowed  to  withdraw  that  concession
             before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal. But, as  I  have  said,
             everything depends on the circumstances, and each case must  be
             considered on its own merits."

 9. Ms Dirie submitted that the judge had failed to consider whether  there
    was good reason in all of the circumstances to permit the respondent to
    withdraw the concession.

10. I accept that there is nothing at paras 5-7  of  the  judge's  decision
    which indicates that she was  aware  that  she  had  discretion  as  to
    whether to permit a party to withdraw a concession.

11. However, the prior question is whether or not, as  a  matter  of  fact,
    there was a concession on the part of the respondent that the appellant
    and the sponsor had entered into a marriage. If there was  in  fact  no
    concession on the part of the respondent, the judge cannot be  said  to
    have erred by failing to consider whether there was good reason in  all
    of  the  circumstances  to  permit  the  respondent  to  withdraw   any
    concession.

12. The judge did not reach a decision as  to  whether  there  had  been  a
    concession on the part of the respondent.

13. Ms Dirie submitted that, given that the  first  decision  states  "your
    marriage is one of convenience", the respondent must have conceded that
    the appellant and the sponsor had entered into  a  marriage.  She  also
    drew attention to the fact  that  second  decision  accepted  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had formed a  subsisting  relationship  after
    the marriage.

14. Mr Jarvis accepted  that  the  second  decision  did  accept  that  the
    appellant  and  the  sponsor  had  formed  a  subsisting   relationship
    subsequent to their marriage. Nevertheless,  it  was  the  respondent's
    position that,  if  a  marriage  had  been  entered  into  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor, it was a  sham  marriage  at  inception.  He
    submitted that the respondent had not conceded that the  appellant  and
    the sponsor had entered into a marriage.

15. In my view, it must be clear and unequivocal that a party  has  made  a
    concession. It is not permissible to draw an inference to  that  effect
    from the circumstances. In my judgment, this is what Ms Dirie seeks  to
    do by relying upon the fact that the first decision contends  that  the
    marriage was a marriage of convenience. It is  perfectly  possible  for
    the respondent to take two alternative positions, i.e. that the parties
    had not entered into  a  marriage  but  that,  even  if  the  appellant
    established that they had entered into a  marriage, it was  a  marriage
    of convenience.

16. In order to decide whether there was a concession in the first decision
    that the appellant and the sponsor had entered into a marriage,  it  is
    necessary to consider the  terms  of  the  first  decision.  Since  the
    appellant has placed reliance also upon the second  decision,  I  shall
    consider  whether  this  sheds  light  on  the  question  whether   the
    respondent had conceded this issue.

17. The relevant parts of the two Notices read as follows:


    The first decision:


            "You have applied to join your husband in  the  United  Kingdom
             who is a Spanish passport holder.


                 I note that you first entered the  UK  in  2002  illegally
                 before you were detained in 2004 and  claimed  asylum.  You
                 were next encountered by immigration services in 2014  were
                 [sic] you claimed that you were planning to get married  to
                 Juan Carrasco Torrecilla. Considering the evidence provided
                 by immigration services and supporting documents  you  have
                 provided with your application I am satisfied that there is
                 an element of doubt over the credibility and genuineness of
                 your relationship.


            I am  therefore  satisfied  that  you  are  not  in  a  genuine
             relationship and your marriage is one of  convenience,  entered
             into for the sole purpose of obtaining entry  into  the  United
             Kingdom."


            (my emphasis)

      The second decision:


            "You have applied to join your husband in  the  United  Kingdom
             who is a Spanish passport holder.


                 I note that you made a  previous  application  for  a  EEA
                 family permit, in which  you  were  refused  as  the  entry
                 clearance officer was not satisfied  that  you  were  in  a
                 genuine relationship and that your marriage was not one  of
                 convenience, entered into for the sole purpose of obtaining
                 entry into  the  United  Kingdom.  I  note  that  you  have
                 submitted a statement in your own name where you attempt to
                 remedy the previous reasons  for  refusal.  Whilst  I  have
                 acknowledged  the  content  of  this  letter,  I  am  still
                 satisfied that your application for an  EEA  family  permit
                 falls for refusal.


                 I note that you  were  residing  with  your  husband  Juan
                 Carrasco Torrecilla  in  the  UK  in  2014  when  you  were
                 encountered  by  immigration  services.  Following   checks
                 undertaken by  our  office  and  the  information  we  have
                 collated I am satisfied that whilst your relationship might
                 be subsisting, I am  satisfied  that  you  entered  into  a
                 relationship with Juan Carrasco Torrecilla in order for the
                 sole purpose of obtaining entry into the United Kingdom. In
                 light of the above, I am satisfied that you are  not  in  a
                 genuine  relationship  and  your   marriage   is   one   of
                 convenience, entered into for the sole purpose of obtaining
                 entry into the United Kingdom."


            (my emphasis)

18. One important purpose of a decision notice is to set  out  the  reasons
    for refusing the application.  This is particularly important in  entry
    clearance cases since both entry clearance officers and  appellants  in
    entry clearance cases are not physically within the United Kingdom.  If
    they are represented at the hearing, their representatives will need to
    have clarity about the issues. Since neither party has  suggested  that
    the issues were clarified in any other documents or in any  other  way,
    only the first and second decisions fall for consideration.

19. In my judgement, it is clear from the terms of the first decision  that
    the respondent had conceded that the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  had
    entered into a marriage due to the combination of  the  fact  that  the
    sponsor was referred to as "your husband" in the opening line and  that
    there was no mention at all in the first decision of  any  concerns  on
    the part of the respondent as to whether the appellant and the  sponsor
    had entered into a marriage. When read as a whole, it is  clear  in  my
    judgement that the  respondent  considered  that  the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience because he considered that  the  appellant  was
    not in a genuine relationship.

20. This is consistent with the wording of the second decision which refers
    to the sponsor twice as "husband". The  first  sentence  of  the  first
    paragraph of the second decision  refers  to  the  first  decision  and
    appears to set out the issues raised in the first decision.  This  does
    not mention that the  respondent  also  took  issue  with  whether  the
    parties had entered into a marriage.

Issue 2

21. It is unfortunate that neither party referred the judge to  Carcabuk  &
    Bla v SSHD (00/TH/01426) (its correct  name  and  case  number)  or  NR
    (Jamaica) and thus the judge failed to consider whether the  respondent
    should be allowed to withdraw the concession.

22. Mr Jarvis relied upon the fact that Mr B Amunwa,  who  represented  the
    appellant  at  the  hearing  before  the  judge,  did  not  request  an
    adjournment. However, it is not necessary to show  that  a  party  will
    suffer prejudice if the withdrawal of the concession is  permitted  (NR
    (Jamaica) at para 11 and Davoodipanah at para 22).

23. It is clear from the last sentence of para 7 of  the  judge's  decision
    that the appellant's representative had proceeded in  his  submissions,
    until the point when he said he was unaware  that  the  concession  had
    been withdrawn, on a false footing. On this basis alone, I am satisfied
    that the appellant did not have a fair hearing, whatever  the  position
    as to whether or not the judge's failure to consider whether to  permit
    the respondent to withdraw the concession led to an unfair hearing.

24.  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that,  given  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    remaining issues, any error of law is not material. Given my conclusion
    that the appellant has not had a fair hearing, it is not necessary  for
    me to consider this issue, strictly speaking. However, I  will  proceed
    to do so.

25. At the time of the hearing  before  the  judge,  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  24  applied.
    Kareem is no longer good law following the judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178. However, the fact that  the
    judge applied Kareem does not affect my decision on  this  appeal,  for
    reasons which will become apparent below.

26. In applying Kareem, the judge concluded that the  appellant  could  not
    establish that she was a family member for the purposes  of  regulation
    7. In summary, her reasons were that there was no  translated  copy  of
    the marriage certificate and that there was no evidence before her that
    Spanish law recognises that the marriage was a valid marriage.

27. The judge then proceeded to  consider  whether  the  appellant  was  an
    extended family  member  on  the  basis  that  she  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with the sponsor.  She  decided  this  issue  against  the
    appellant. She gave her reasons at paras 16-19 which read:


        "16.     It is said that the Appellant and the  Sponsor  have  been
            living together for over four years. The difficulty that I have
            with this claim is that I have heard no evidence  at  all  from
            the Sponsor. I am unable to place any weight on  his  statement
            because I have not heard that evidence and there  has  been  no
            opportunity  for  the  Respondent's  representative  to   cross
            examine the Sponsor. As such there is no direct  evidence  from
            the Sponsor to confirm that  he  is,  in  fact,  in  a  durable
            relationship with the Appellant.


        17.      I accept that the witness  I  heard  from  claims  in  her
            statement  that  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  have  lived
            together for four years and even gives the date  on  which  she
            says they moved in together. Unfortunately her evidence  to  me
            was not so exact. She could only  remember  that  she  met  the
            Appellant 'about four years ago' and she was clearly unable  to
            remember dates with any certainty.


        18.      I do have before me Council tax bills at pages 29 to 33 of
            the Appellant's Bundle which are in  the  joint  names  of  the
            Appellant and the Sponsor. However,  I  cannot  take  these  as
            proof the Appellant and the Sponsor were  living  together,  as
            has been claimed. Anyone can ask that their name is placed on a
            bill. The same remarks apply to the letter at page  28  of  the
            Appellant's Bundle. It is of further note that some of  the  BT
            bills in the Appellant's Bundle have been sent to the Appellant
            at a time when she was clearly not living in  the  property  of
            the Sponsor as she was in Colombia.


        19.      In any event what is apparent is that  the  Appellant  and
            the Sponsor cannot have been in a  durable  relationship  after
            the Appellant left the United Kingdom for Colombia.  They  have
            not been living together now (if  they  were,  in  fact  living
            together) for a period of very nearly  a  year,  the  Appellant
            having left the United Kingdom on 10th August 2015."

28. Mr Jarvis submitted that, given the judge's reasoning on the  issue  as
    to whether the appellant was in a durable relationship, she would  have
    been bound to conclude that, even if the marriage was a valid  one,  it
    was a marriage of convenience.

29.  In my judgement,  this  submission  is  misconceived.  In  considering
    whether the appellant was in a  durable  relationship,  the  judge  was
    considering the evidence of the relationship over time and answering  a
    different question, whereas the issue was whether the marriage, at  the
    point of inception, was a marriage of convenience. Whilst  it  is  true
    that subsequent events can cast light on the situation at the  time  of
    the marriage, it is nevertheless  a  different  question  concerning  a
    specific point in time. There is insufficient in the judge's  reasoning
    for me to say that she would have  been  bound  to  conclude  that  the
    marriage was a marriage of convenience at the point of inception.  This
    difficulty is compounded by the fact that the  respondent  accepted  in
    the second decision that the appellant's relationship with the  sponsor
    may be a subsisting one as at the date of the second decision, although
    he still took issue with whether it was a genuine relationship.

30. Mr Jarvis drew my attention to  the  fact  that  the  sponsor  had  not
    attended the hearing before the judge nor before me. However, I do  not
    consider that this is determinative.

31. I am therefore satisfied that the judge  materially  erred  in  law.  I
    therefore set aside her decision under the EEA Regulations.

32. In relation to Article 8 claim, the judge erred in considering  Article
    8 because the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to decide the Article 8  (TY
    (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD  and  Amirteymour).  She  should  therefore  have
    dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction instead. Accordingly, her
    decision to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds  stands,  albeit
    for a different reason.

33. In relation to the EEA ground of appeal, Ms Dirie and Mr Jarvis  agreed
    that, if I were to conclude that the judge had materially erred in law,
    the appropriate course would be to remit the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

34. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

35. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2(b). In addition,  having
    regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) & Others  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 327, I am of the  view  that  a  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is the right course of action.

36. The appellant now has notice that the respondent wishes to withdraw the
    concession. She had notice of this issue  at  the  hearing  before  the
    judge which has been reinforced by the proceedings before me.  She  has
    ample time to prepare for the next hearing on this basis.  I  therefore
    permit the respondent to withdraw the concession.

37. Accordingly, the issues at the next hearing will be:

    i.     Whether the appellant  and  the  sponsor  have  entered  into  a
    marriage.

    ii.    If so, whether the marriage is valid, applying Awuku.

    iii.   If so, whether the marriage is a  marriage  of  convenience.  In
       this respect, it will be for the  judge  on  the  next  occasion  to
       decide the extent to which (if at all) the fact that the  respondent
       has accepted that the relationship between  the  appellant  and  the
       sponsor  subsequent  to  the  date  of  the  first  decision  was  a
       subsisting one, albeit not  a  genuine  one,  helps  him/her  decide
       whether the marriage was a marriage of convenience at the  point  of
       inception.

    iv.    If the appellant and the sponsor did enter into a valid marriage
       but the marriage was a marriage  of  convenience  at  the  point  of
       inception, whether the appellant was in a durable relationship as at
       the date of the first decision (24 September 2015).

DIRECTIONS

      Any documents that the appellant wishes to rely upon on the  issue  of
    the validity of the proxy marriage, together with a translation of  the
    marriage certificate, to be served at least 21 days before the  hearing
    date.

Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew involved the  making
of errors on points of law such that the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
under the EEA Regulations is set aside. Her decision to dismiss  the  appeal
on human rights grounds stands.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  re-
make the decision on the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations  by  a
judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew.



[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 28 April 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill



