
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01427/2018
                                                               EA/01428/2018
                                                               EA/01430/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 January 2019                             |On 17 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               HARVINDER KAUR
                              KARANPREET SINGH
                                KARAMJOT KAUR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADe)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Ilahi of Counsel, instructed by Abbot
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chapman promulgated on 6 July 2018, in which the appeals
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  admission  to  the
    United Kingdom as  family  members  of  a  British  citizen  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the   EEA
    Regulations") were allowed under regulation 11 of the same.  For ease I
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  with  the  three  individuals  as  the  Appellants  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellants are all nationals of India and rely on their  respective
    relationships with the Sponsor, a  naturalised  British  citizen.   The
    First Appellant is the mother of the Second and Third Appellants,  born
    in 1999 and 2003.  The First Appellant is the spouse of the Sponsor and
    the Second and Third Appellants are the Sponsor's children.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's admission to the United  Kingdom
    under regulation 9 of  the  EEA  Regulations  on  the  basis  that  the
    family's residence in Bulgaria was for  the  purpose  of  circumventing
    immigration laws to which the Appellants would otherwise be subject  as
    non-EU nationals.  The facts relied upon were that the Sponsor had only
    spent seven months in Bulgaria, the Appellants were there for only  two
    weeks; the Sponsor rented a room in a  shared  house  in  Bulgaria  and
    continued to pay for rented accommodation in the United  Kingdom  where
    he kept his belongings and where he intended to live on return; none of
    the family spoke Bulgarian; and the Appellants did not work or enrol in
    education in Bulgaria.

 4. Judge  Chapman  essentially  upheld  the  Respondent's  decision  under
    regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations, on the basis that  the  Appellants
    intended to come to the United Kingdom on a permanent  basis  with  the
    Sponsor but that they had not "resided" with the  Sponsor  in  Bulgaria
    because of the shortness of their stay and  the  failure  to  take  any
    steps to demonstrate that they lived there all intended to  live  there
    for any  further  period  of  time.   It  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellants' residence with the British citizen Sponsor was genuine, nor
    was there the creation of or fortification of family  life  during  the
    Appellants' short stay  in  Bulgaria.   In  addition,  the  Appellants'
    intentions were to circumvent the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    which would otherwise apply to them, but which  they  did  not  satisfy
    when  making  an  application  on  that  basis   in   2014.    In   the
    circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal found that the Sponsor  and  the
    Appellants had  artificially  created  the  conditions  laid  down  for
    acquiring the status of the  Appellants  to  be  considered  as  family
    members of the Sponsor and were not therefore assisted  by  EU  law  by
    reference to the case of Akrich  C-109/01.   The  Appellants  have  not
    sought permission to appeal the findings in this part of the  decision,
    which therefore stand.

 5. Judge Chapman however allowed the appeals under regulation  11  of  the
    EEA Regulations on the basis that the appeals concerned not  the  right
    of residence but the  right  of  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellants possessed  Bulgarian  residence  cards  and  passports,  the
    validity  of  which  had  not  been  challenged  by   the   Respondent.
    Regulation 11 was set out in the decision and it  was  noted  that  the
    Appellant satisfied regulation 23(4) as the  Sponsor  was  accompanying
    them on arrival.  The reasoning for the appeals being allowed continued
    as follows:

         "51. In interpreting Regulation 11, I derive  assistance  from  the
         case of McCarthy and others, to which I was referred by  Mr  Ilahi.
         Paragraph 58 of the judgement in that  case,  which  I  have  cited
         above is unequivocal.  Admission cannot be denied by Member  States
         to family members who hold a valid residence card issued by another
         Member State.

         52.  Accordingly, since I find that the Appellant did possess valid
         residence cards issued by the Bulgarian authorities, I  find  that,
         in accordance with Regulation 11, they were entitled to be admitted
         to the United Kingdom under EU law."

 6. The Appellants appeals  were  allowed  on  this  basis  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

The appeal

 7. The Respondent appeals on the basis  that  regulation  11  of  the  EEA
    Regulations could not benefit the Appellants because it applies only to
    family members of EEA nationals, as defined in regulation 2 of the  EEA
    Regulations as expressly excluding those who hold British  citizenship.
    Further, the decision in McCarthy was  based  on  a  different  factual
    scenario with no reliance on Surinder Singh rights and could not assist
    the Appellants in these appeals.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Nightingale on 20 September 2018 on all grounds.

 9. At the oral hearing, Mr Tufan relied on the written grounds  of  appeal
    and submitted that regulation 11 of the EEA Regulations simply  had  no
    application in this case and the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in
    failing to consider the definition of an EEA national in  regulation  2
    of the same.  The Sponsor could only have come within  this  definition
    for the Appellants to be family members under the  EEA  Regulations  if
    they could meet the requirements of Regulation 9,  the  Surinder  Singh
    provision.  It was submitted  that  the  Appellants'  reliance  on  the
    decision  in  McCarthy  was  misplaced  given  the  different   factual
    background, the sponsor in that case being a dual national who had been
    exercising treaty rights in Spain and whose spouse was accepted to have
    a right of entry to the United Kingdom without any reliance on Surinder
    Singh principles.

10. In response, on behalf of the Appellants, Mr Ilahi submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was entitled to allow  the  Appellants'  appeal  is
    under regulation 11  of  the  EEA  Regulations  on  the  basis  of  the
    reasoning in paragraph 41 of McCarthy by reference to Article  5(2)  of
    Directive 24/38/EC. To the extent necessary for the  purposes  of  this
    appeal, he submitted  that  there  had  been  a  failure  to  correctly
    transpose this part of the Directive in the EEA Regulations.

Findings and reasons

 1. To determine whether there was an error of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, it is necessary to set out more fully the domestic
    legal provisions, relevant provisions of  Directive  24/38/EC  and  the
    decision in McCarthy and others C-202/13 and assess the analysis of the
    First-tier Tribunal in accordance with those.

 2. In regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations, "EEA national" means a national
    of an EEA state who is not also a  British  citizen.   That  definition
    expressly excludes the Sponsor who is a British citizen  and  therefore
    not an EEA national for the purposes of the EEA Regulations.

 3. By virtue of regulation 9(1), the EEA Regulations apply to a person who
    is the family member ("F") of a British citizen ("BC") as  though  they
    were an EEA national if the conditions  in  regulation  9(2)  are  met;
    which provide as follows:

         "(2) The conditions are that -

          a) BC -

               i) is residing in an EEA state  as  a  worker,  self-employed
                  person, self-sufficient person  a  student,  also  resided
                  immediately before returning to the United Kingdom; or

              ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence  in  an  EEA
                  state;

          b) F and BC resided together in the EEA state; and

          c) F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine."

 4. Regulation 9 goes on to set out factors relevant to determining whether
    residence was genuine, circumstances in which this regulation does  not
    apply, provisions as to  a  valid  passport,  permanent  residence  and
    whether BC would be a qualified person.  It is not necessary to set out
    the further detail contained in Regulation  9  given  the  unchallenged
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellants and the Sponsor
    do not meet the conditions set out in regulation 9(2).

 5. Regulation 11 of the EEA Regulations, makes provision for the right  of
    admission to the United Kingdom for an EEA national  and  their  family
    members, subject to certain documentary requirements, including,  inter
    alia, the provision of  a  valid  passport  and  qualifying  EEA  State
    residence card, as well as other administrative conditions.

 6. There is no express consideration by the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    definition of an EEA national for the purposes of  regulation  11,  nor
    any recognition that the Sponsor was expressly excluded from this as  a
    British citizen.  If one was looking only at the EEA Regulations,  this
    would amount to a clear error of law.   However,  the  EEA  Regulations
    must be interpreted in a way which is consistent with the Directive and
    caselaw of the CJEU, upon which the Appellants expressly rely  in  this
    appeal.

 7. The  relevant  provisions  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  are  as  follows.
    Article 3 sets out the beneficiaries to  whom  the  directive  applies,
    which includes, inter-alia all Union citizens (defined in Article 2  as
    any person having the nationality of a Member State)  who  move  to  or
    reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a  national,
    and their family members as defined in Article 2 who accompany or  join
    them.

 8. Article 5 of the Directive provides for a right of entry as follows:

         "1.  Without  prejudice  to  the  provisions  on  travel  documents
         applicable to national border controls, Member States  shall  grant
         Union citizens leave to enter the territory with a  valid  identity
         card or passport  and  shall  grant  family  members  who  are  not
         nationals of a Member State to enter their territory with  a  valid
         passport.

         No entry visa or equivalent  formality  may  be  imposed  on  Union
         citizens.

         2.   Family members who are not nationals of a Member  State  shall
         only  be  required  to  have  an  entry  visa  in  accordance  with
         Regulation (EEC) No 539/21 or,  where  appropriate,  with  national
         law.  For the purposes of this Directive, possession of  the  valid
         residence card referred to in Article 10 shall exempt  such  family
         members from the visa requirement.

         Member States shall grant such persons every facility to obtain the
         necessary visas.  Such visas shall be issued free of charge as soon
         as possible and on the basis of an accelerated procedure. ..."

 9. Chapter III of the Directive goes on to set out the rights of residence
    available to Union citizens in the territory of  another  Member  State
    and available to their family members accompanying or joining the Union
    citizen, together with the appropriate  procedures  and  administrative
    formalities.  These  provisions  are  expressly  as  to  the  right  of
    residence in a host Member State, as opposed to in  an  EEA  national's
    home Member State, which of course they would have the right to  reside
    in as a matter of domestic law.

10. In the context of a reference from the High Court as to whether Article
    35 of Directive 2004/38 and  Article  1  of  Protocol  No  20  must  be
    interpreted as permitting a Member State to require, in pursuit  of  an
    objective of general prevention, family members of  the  Union  citizen
    who are not nationals of a Member State and to hold a  valid  residence
    card issued under Article 10 of Directive 2004/38 by the authorities of
    another Member states to be in possession, pursuant to national law, of
    an entry permit, such as the EEA family permit, in order to be able  to
    enter  its  territory,  the  CJEU  considered  the  interpretation  and
    applicability of Directive 2004/38 in the case of McCarthy and  others.
    The findings on the general  applicability  of  the  Directive  are  as
    follows:

         "31. As is apparent from settled case-law, Directive  2004/38  aims
         to facilitate the exercise of the primary and individual  right  to
         move and reside freely within the territory of  the  Member  States
         that is conferred directly on Union citizens by Article 21(1)  TFEU
         and to strengthen that right (judgement  in  O  and  B.,  C-456/12,
         EU:C:2014:135, paragraph 35 and the case-law cited).

         32.  Having regard to  the  context  and  objectives  of  Directive
         2004/38, the provisions of that  directive  cannot  be  interpreted
         restrictively, and must not in  any  event  be  deprived  of  their
         effectiveness  (judgement   in   Metock   and   Others,   C-127/08,
         EU:C:2008:449, paragraph 84).

         33.  As regards, first, any rights of family  members  of  a  Union
         citizen who are not nationals of a Member State, recital 5  in  the
         preamble to Directive 2004/38 points out  that  the  right  of  all
         Union citizens to move and reside freely within  the  territory  of
         the Member State should, if it is to be exercised  under  objective
         conditions of dignity, he also granted  to  their  family  members,
         irrespective of nationality (judgement in  Metock  and  Others,  C-
         127/08, EU:C:2008:449, paragraph 83).

         34.  Whilst the provisions of Directive 2004/38 do not  confer  any
         autonomous right on family members of a Union citizen who  are  not
         nationals of a Member  State,  any  rights  conferred  on  them  by
         provisions of EU law on Union citizenship rights derived  from  the
         exercise by a Union citizen of his freedom  of  movement  (see,  to
         this effect,  judgement  in  O  and  B.,  C-456/12,  EU:C:2014:135,
         paragraph 36 and the case-law cited).

         35.   Indeed,  Article  3(1)  of  Directive  2004/38   defines   as
         'beneficiaries' of the rights conferred by the directive 'all Union
         citizens whoo move to or reside in a Member State other  than  that
         of which they are a national,  and  ...  Their  family  members  as
         defined in point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them'.

         36.  Thus, the Court has held that not  all  family  members  of  a
         Union citizen who are not  nationals  of  a  Member  States  derive
         rights of entry into and residence in a Member State from Directive
         2004/38, but only those who are family members, within the  meaning
         of point 2 of Article 2 of that directive, of a Union  citizen  who
         has  exercised  his  right  to  freedom  of  movement  by  becoming
         established in the Member State other  than  the  Member  State  of
         which he is a national (judgements in Metock and Others,  C-127/08,
         EU:C:2008:449,  paragraph  73;   Dereci   and   Others,   C-256-11,
         EU:C:2011:734,  paragraph   56;   Iida,   C-40/11,   EU:C:2012:691,
         paragraph 51; and O and B., C-456/12, EU:C:2014:135, paragraph 39).

         37.  In the case in point, it is common ground that Mr McCarthy has
         exercised his right to freedom of movement by becoming  established
         in Spain.  Furthermore, it is likewise common ground that his wife,
         Ms McCarthy Rodriguez, resides in that Member State  with  him  and
         the child born of their union and that she is in  possession  of  a
         valid residence  card  issued  by  the  Spanish  authorities  under
         Article 10 of Directive 2004/38 that permits her to reside lawfully
         in Spanish territory.

         38.  It follows that Mr McCarthy  and  Ms  McCarthy  Rodriguez  are
         'beneficiaries' of that directive, within the  meaning  of  Article
         3(1) thereof.

         39.  So far as concerns, second, the issue of whether  Ms  McCarthy
         Rodriguez derives a right of entry into  the  United  Kingdom  from
         Directive 2004/38 when she is coming from another Member State,  it
         is to be noted the Article 5 of that directive governs the right of
         entry and conditions for entry into the  territory  of  the  Member
         States.  As set out in Article 5(1),  'Member  States  shall  grant
         Union citizens leave to enter the territory  ...  and  shall  grant
         family members who are not nationals of a  Member  State  leave  to
         enter the territory with a valid passport'.

         40.  In  addition,  the  first  subparagraph  of  Article  5(2)  of
         Directive  2004/38  provides  that  '[f]or  the  purposes  of  this
         Directive, possession of the valid residence card  referred  to  in
         Article  10  shall  exempt  such  family  members  from  the   visa
         requirement'.  As is apparent from recital 8 in the preamble to the
         directive, that  exemption  is  intended  to  facilitate  the  free
         movement of third-country nationals who are  family  members  of  a
         Union citizen.

         41.  Article 5 of Directive 2004/38 refers to 'Member  States'  and
         does not draw a distinction on the basis of  the  Member  State  of
         entry, in particular in so far as it provides that possession of  a
         valid residence card as referred to in Article 10 of the  directive
         is to exempt  family  members  of  a  Union  citizen  who  are  not
         nationals of a Member State from the requirement to obtain an entry
         visa.  Thus, there is nothing at all in Article 5  indicating  that
         the right of entry of family members of the Union citizen  who  are
         not nationals of a Member State is limited to  Member  State  other
         than the Member State of origin of the Union citizen.

         42.  Accordingly, it must be held that, pursuant to  Article  5  of
         Directive 2004/38, a person who is  a  family  member  of  a  Union
         citizen and is in a situation such as that of Ms McCarthy Rodriguez
         is not subject to the requirement to obtain a Visa or an equivalent
         requirement in order to be able to  enter  the  territory  of  that
         Union citizens Member State of origin."

11. The CJEU went on to find that neither Article 35 of  Directive  2004/30
    80 Article 1 of Protocol No 20 permitted a Member State  to  require  a
    family member of a Union citizen who is not  a  national  of  a  Member
    State and who holds a valid residence card issued under Article  10  of
    that directive to be in possession, pursuant to  national  law,  of  an
    entry permit in order to be able to enter its territory.  That was  the
    answer to the specific question referred to the CJEU.

12. It is important to note that the McCarthy decision does  not  expressly
    deal with Surinder Singh rights nor any substantive rights of entry  or
    residence in a Member State and  is  essentially  addressing  only  the
    question of the documentary requirements for the right of entry of non-
    EEA national family members.  The findings as  to  the  application  of
    Directive 2004/38 must also be  read  in  the  context  of  the  agreed
    position of Mr  McCarthy  and  Ms  McCarthy  Rodriguez,  to  which  the
    decision is directed and applicable only to persons in a situation such
    as  those  individuals.   The  common  ground  in  relation  to   those
    individuals included, that Ms McCarthy Rodriguez  lawfully  resided  in
    another Member State, with  the  child  of  her  marriage  to  the  EEA
    national, a dual British and Irish citizen.  There was no dispute  that
    as McCarthy Rodriguez had a right of admission to  the  United  Kingdom
    and has exercised it on a number of times previously with  the  benefit
    of an EEA family permit arranged in advance.

13. Although at first glance the facts may appear similar to those  of  the
    Appellants in the present appeal, in fact they are materially different
    in an important respect.  That is  the  unchallenged  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the Appellants did not in any  sense  'reside'
    with the sponsor in Bulgaria (paragraph 40) and further therefore  that
    the requirements of regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations did  not  apply
    to the Appellants such that the EEA Regulations could not apply to them
    as if the Sponsor were an EEA national as defined.

14. Although the Court in McCarthy sets out unequivocally that Article 5 of
    Directive 2004/38 applies without  distinction  on  the  basis  of  the
    Member State of entry,  that  is  in  the  context  of  those  who  are
    beneficiaries of that Directive, such as those in the same position  as
    Mr McCarthy and Ms McCarthy Rodriguez, the former who had exercised his
    right to freedom of movement by becoming established in Spain  and  the
    latter residing in Spain with him in possession of  a  valid  residence
    card issued  by  the  Spanish  authorities  under  Article  10  of  the
    Directive.  The decision in McCarthy goes no wider than that  nor  does
    it establish any general right of admission to a person on  arrival  to
    the United Kingdom in possession of a valid passport and residence card
    who is accompanied by a person who has a right to reside in the  United
    Kingdom.

15. On the facts of the present appeal,  neither  Article  5  of  Directive
    2004/30 nor the decision in McCarthy is of any benefit or relevance  to
    the Appellants and cannot be used as a way of  interpreting  regulation
    11 of the EEA Regulations, contrary to the express definition of an EEA
    national in regulation 2 of the same, as was  done  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the decision under challenge  before  me.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to consider or apply its  own  findings  that  the  EEA
    regulations did not apply to the  Appellants  because  they  could  not
    satisfy regulation 9 of the same and failed to apply the definition  of
    an EEA national  in  regulation  to,  when  considering  the  right  of
    admission under regulation 11.

16. The First-tier Tribunal therefore materially erred in law  in  allowing
    the appeal under regulation 11 of the EEA Regulations when the  Sponsor
    was not an EEA national as defined.  The Appellants could  not  benefit
    directly from Article 5 of Directive 2004/38 nor by using  this  as  an
    aid to interpretation of the EEA Regulations.  No detailed  submissions
    were made on behalf of the Appellants that the EEA Regulations did  not
    correctly transpose Article 5 of Directive 2004/38 but in any event  it
    is not necessary to decide the point as on  the  facts  the  Appellants
    cannot possibly derive any benefit or right of admission from Article 5
    for the reasons already given.

17. For all of these reasons, I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of a material error of law and as such  it
    is necessary to set aside the decision.  As agreed by  the  parties  at
    the oral hearing, I go on  to  remake  the  decision  under  appeal  in
    accordance with the error of law findings which  are  determinative  of
    the Appellants  circumstances  and  appeals.   As  above,  they  cannot
    satisfy the requirements in regulation 11 of the EEA Regulations for  a
    right of admission to the United Kingdom because the Sponsor is not  an
    EEA national as defined in regulation 2 and the  application  of  those
    regulations to the facts of this case are  not  inconsistent  with  the
    Directive of the decision of  the  CJEU  in  McCarthy.   I  remake  the
    decision on the appeal is to dismiss them under the EEA Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake the  decision
as follows:

The appeals are dismissed under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]         Date         4th January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

