
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01734/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 15 July 2019                      |On 13 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 YULIIA [Z]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                   DECISION AND REASONS (given ex tempore)

      1. The respondent is a citizen of Ukraine who made an application  for
         an EEA family permit in order to enter the United  Kingdom  as  the
         wife of Mr [D], a Bulgarian citizen.  Mr [D]  ('the  sponsor')  has
         been exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom since at  least
         September 2013 having been employed as a butcher.

      2. In a decision dated 15 January  2018,  the  appellant  ('the  ECO')
         refused to grant Ms [Z] an EEA family  permit.   Although  the  ECO
         accepted that the marriage had taken place on 15 December 2017,  he
         was concerned that there was limited communication between  husband
         and wife when they were in a relationship  prior  to  2017  and  it
         would have been  more  usual  to  see  evidence  of  communications
         regarding the relationship said to have started back in 2007.   The
         ECO then said this:

                . In light of all of the above this leads me to  doubt  that
                  your relationship with your sponsor is as stated.

                . In view of your failure to provide satisfactory evidence I
                  am not satisfied that you are the family member of an  EEA
                  national  in  accordance  with   Regulation   7   of   the
                  Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

                . I therefore refuse  your  EEA  family  permit  application
                  because I am not satisfied you meet all  the  requirements
                  of Regulation 12.

      3. This was considered by an Entry Clearance  Manager  ('ECM')  on  23
         November 2018.  The ECM noted the concerns in the  initial  refusal
         letter and re-emphasised that there  was  insufficient  documentary
         evidence to be satisfied that the parties were  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship or that they intended  to  reside  together
         permanently in the United Kingdom.

Appeal proceedings

      4.  Ms  [Z]  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FtT'),   which
         considered her appeal on the papers and without  a  hearing  on  24
         October 2018.   The  papers  available  to  the  FtT  included  the
         marriage certificate which confirms that  a  marriage  between  the
         parties took place and was registered on 15 December 2017, as  well
         as evidence to support Ms [Z]'s claim that she was pregnant at  the
         time she made her application.

      5. The FtT described the issue in dispute before it as  being  whether
         or  not  the  relationship  between  the  parties  is  genuine  and
         subsisting.  The FtT acknowledged that there were messages  between
         the parties that were not in English and there was  an  absence  of
         photographs, but  nevertheless  found  that  there  was  sufficient
         evidence that the relationship was genuine and  subsisting  because
         it viewed messages between the parties.  The FtT therefore  reached
         the conclusion that the  couple  had  maintained  contact  and  the
         relationship was genuine and subsisting.  For those reasons the FtT
         allowed the appeal.

      6. The ECO appealed against that decision submitting in  summary  that
         the FtT failed to give adequate reasons for its conclusion  bearing
         in mind the fact that the messages were not  translated  and  there
         were large gaps in the evidence regarding the relationship prior to
         the marriage.

      7. In a decision dated 12 December  2018  FtT  Judge  O'Brien  granted
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')  and  the  matter
         now comes before me.



Hearing

      8. At the beginning of the hearing I enquired of Mr Bates whether  the
         issue in dispute was in  fact,  as  the  ECM  tended  to  indicate,
         whether or not the relationship was a genuine and subsisting one or
         whether or not ECO's position was that  the  marriage  was  one  of
         convenience.  Mr Bates invited me to find that  the  only  possible
         reason for the refusal of the EEA family permit must have been  the
         contention that the marriage was one of convenience.  That was  not
         the interpretation that the FtT took of the decisions before it but
         in any event after hearing from the sponsor,  I  indicated  that  I
         accepted the submission that the FtT did not give adequate  reasons
         for its conclusion that the relationship was genuine.

      9. In those circumstances I invited Mr Bates and the sponsor to  agree
         to me re-making the decision myself.  They both agreed.   Mr  Bates
         cross-examined  the  sponsor  briefly.   The  sponsor  provided   a
         translated copy of his and the appellant's child, who was  born  on
         16 April 2018.  He was unable to provide an original.  The  sponsor
         also provided a number of photographs taken of the family  when  he
         visited the appellant and his child in Ukraine in April 2019,  that
         is for the child's 1st birthday.   Having  seen  that  evidence  Mr
         Bates did not seek to persuade me that  the  relationship  and  the
         marriage was anything other than genuine and that he submitted that
         I should determine the appeal accordingly.  Mr  Bates  acknowledged
         that the only issues in dispute is whether the marriage is  one  of
         convenience and he was  unable  to  take  me  to  any  evidence  to
         displace the burden upon the ECO in this respect.

Discussion

     10. For the avoidance of doubt, where it is that an EEA citizen  family
         member applies for entry clearance in order to enter  the  UK,  she
         needs to establish first of all that she is  a  family  member  and
         second, that her EEA national  spouse  has  been  residing  in  the
         United Kingdom in accordance with treaty rights - see Regulation 12
         of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regulations').
          In order to be a family member a person qualifies if  they  are  a
         spouse - see Regulation 7.  A spouse does not include a party to  a
         marriage of convenience - see Regulation 2.  The  2016  Regulations
         do not define a marriage of convenience.  That, however, is set out
         within  the  overarching  Article  1  of  EC   Council   Resolution
         97/C382/01 of 4 December 1997.  That Article defines a marriage  of
         convenience as follows:

             "A marriage concluded between a national of a member state  or
             third country national legally resident in a member state  and
             a third country national with the sole  aim  of  circumventing
             the Rules on entry and residence of  third  country  nationals
             and obtaining for  the  third  country  national  a  residence
             permit or authority to reside in the member state".

     11. It is well-known that the burden of proof of  establishing  that  a
         marriage is one of convenience rests on the Secretary of State, see
         Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.  At [24] of Rosa Richards  LJ  said
         that in his judgment the legal burden  lies  on  the  Secretary  of
         State to prove that an otherwise valid marriage is  a  marriage  of
         convenience so as to justify the refusal of an  application  for  a
         residence card under the EEA Regulations.  Pausing there,  we  know
         that if the Secretary of  State  displaces  the  legal  burden  the
         evidential burden then rests on the person who is alleging that the
         marriage is not one of convenience.

     12. At [41] of Rosa Richards LJ also said this:

             "It may be useful to contrast a marriage of convenience with a
             genuine marriage, indeed Underhill LJ treated them as antonyms
             at paragraph 6 of his judgment  in  Agho,  but  the  focus  in
             relation to  a  marriage  of  convenience  should  be  on  the
             intention of the parties at the time the marriage was  entered
             into, whereas the question whether a  marriage  is  subsisting
             looks to whether the  marital  relationship  is  a  continuing
             one".

         In short, a marriage of convenience may exist despite the fact that
         there is a genuine relationship.

     13. On the evidence that I have heard and that is available in the file
         of papers before me, I am satisfied that the ECO has not been  able
         to displace the burden of establishing that  the  sole  reason  for
         entering the marriage was in order to circumvent the relevant Rules
         on entry and residence.  Indeed, in this case I am  satisfied  from
         the clear and consistent evidence provided by the sponsor, that the
         marriage was entered into in good faith and was not a  marriage  of
         convenience.  Mr Bates did not argue otherwise.  For the  avoidance
         of doubt I am also satisfied from the evidence available  that  the
         marriage is genuine and subsisting.  That is evidenced by the  fact
         that Ms [Z] was pregnant when she  made  her  application  and  has
         given birth to the sponsor's child in April 2018 and he has visited
         them in April 2019.

Decision

     14. I set aside the decision of the FtT and I re-make the  decision  by
         allowing Ms [Z]'s appeal.


Signed                              Date

UTJ Plimmer                             6 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
