
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01567/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 January 2017                 |On 3 February 2017                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                              PHUONG THI NGUYEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Mac of Mac & Co,
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijawala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Rourke promulgated on 10 October 2016, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 8 November 1984 and is a national  of  Vietnam.
Her child was born on 6 November 2014 and is a British Citizen.

4. On 6  October  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for a derivative residence card  under  regulation  15A  of  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge O'Rourke ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  4  January  2017  First-tier  Judge
Parker granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      I have carefully read the decision. At paragraph 12(iii)-(v) the Judge
      noted evidence which tended to undermine the  appellant's  credibility
      and, at paragraph7(iv), recorded that friends  look  after  her  child
      when she works. However, the Judge  has  failed  to  provide  adequate
      reasons for finding that care of the child is shared equally  with  an
      exempt person.  The  decision  contains  an  arguable  error  of  law.
      Permission to appeal is granted.

The Hearing

7. (a) For the appellant, Ms Mac moved the grounds of appeal.  She  told  me
that there was ample evidence before the First-tier that the  appellant  and
her daughter lived together in Slough. She took me to the birth  certificate
reproduced  in  the  respondent's  bundle  and  told  me  that   the   birth
certificate confirmed that the appellant's child was  born  in  Slough,  and
her birth was registered in Slough. She told  me  that  the  child's  father
lives in a different county, so that  the  birth  certificate  was  evidence
that the child's father played no role in her life. She then took me to  the
letter from Estate  agents  (reproduced  at  annex  D  of  the  respondent's
bundle) and told me that there was clear evidence  that  the  appellant  and
her child live together in Slough.

(b) Ms Mac referred me to the letter from British Gas  providing  an  annual
gas  consumption  statement  addressed  to   the   appellant's   father   in
Hertfordshire, and told me that that was further  evidence  which  indicated
that separate households were maintained  &  that  the  appellant's  child's
father played no part in the child's life. She reminded me that there  is  a
letter from the child's father to confirm that he has  nothing  to  do  with
either the appellant or the child. She told me that  all  of  that  evidence
was before the First-tier, but the First-tier had taken  inadequate  account
of the evidence. She urged me to set the decision aside  and  substitute  my
own decision allowing the appeal

8. For the respondent, Ms Fijiwala  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors  of  law,  material  or  otherwise.  She  told  me  that  the
submissions  made  for  the  appellant  amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a
rehearsal of the submissions that were  made  to  the  First-tier  tribunal,
none of which identify an error of law in the decision. She told me that  at
[7] the Judge adequately summarises  the  appellant's  claim  and  then,  at
[12], makes findings of  fact  drawn  from  the  evidence  presented  before
reaching conclusions at [13]. Ms Fijiwala told me  that  the  Judge  reached
conclusions which were well  within  the  range  of  reasonable  conclusions
available to him. She told me that the Judge took correct guidance  in  law.
She drew my attention to the record of proceedings and asked me to  consider
the answers that the appellant gave to questions in cross  examination.  She
urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand

Analysis

9. The appellant's child was born on 6 November 2014. It is  beyond  dispute
that the appellant's child  is  a  British  citizen.  In  cross-examination,
(before the First-tier) the appellant appears to accept that she lived  with
the father of the child until May 2015, despite separately saying that  they
separated the day after the child was born. The confusion appears  to  occur
when the appellant is  asked  to  consider  the  child's  birth  certificate
against the British Gas statement intended to show that the  father  of  the
child lives in a separate county. The appellant  also  relies  on  a  letter
from Estate agents saying that she moved with her daughter into  an  address
in Slough on 1 January 2015.

10. When I consider the documentary evidence and the record  of  proceedings
it seems to me that the evidence before the  First-tier  was  confusing.  In
the decision, the First-tier Judge  makes  findings  of  fact  at  [12].  He
commences [12(iii]) by saying

      The appellant has provided little evidence to show that  she  and  the
      child live alone, without the father.

11. A fair reading of the  decision  indicates  that  the  Judge  found  the
appellant was neither a credible nor  a  reliable  witness.  At  [12(v)]  he
finds the appellant to have been evasive in her oral evidence.

12. The central point in the respondent's decision is  that  the  respondent
does not accept that the appellant is  the  primary  carer  for  her  child.
Instead the respondent believes that the appellant shares the care with  the
father of the child, who is an exempt person

13. To succeed the appellant would have to produce  reliable  evidence  that
she is the child's primary carer, as defined in regulation 15  of  the  2006
regulations. It is clear that the evidence laid before  the  First-tier  was
intended to demonstrate that the  child's  father  has  dissociated  himself
entirely from both the appellant and the child.

14. At [12] of the decision the Judge gives his  reasons  for  finding  that
the evidence led by the appellant is not reliable.  The  Judge  gives  clear
reasons for finding the appellant was evasive and is neither a credible  nor
a reliable witness. Having made those findings, it is  not  surprising  that
the Judge commences his conclusions at [13] by finding  that  the  appellant
is not the primary carer for the child.

15. The submissions made on behalf of the  appellant  amounted  to  no  more
than a rehearsal of the submissions made to the  First-tier.  In  effect,  I
was asked to consider the evidence of new and reach a different  conclusion.
I have to consider whether or not the decision  promulgated  on  10  October
2016 contains a material error of law. In submissions for the  appellant  no
error of law was identified.

16. The findings of fact made by the Judge at [12] are findings  which  were
open to the Judge on the evidence placed before him.  The  decision  of  the
Judge discloses that he considered the evidence and, for the  reasons  given
in the various subparagraphs of [12], found that the evidence placed  before
him was not reliable. It was for the appellant to produce reliable  evidence
that she is the primary carer of her child. The finding  that  the  evidence
produced is not reliable is a finding well within the  range  of  reasonable
conclusions open to the First-tier Judge.

17. It is because the Judge found that the evidence  of  the  appellant  was
not reliable and because the Judge found that the documentary  evidence  did
not resolve  contradictions  that  the  judge  reached  his  conclusion,  at
[13(i)], that the appellant is not the primary  carer  for  the  child.  The
Judge then went further to find that care is shared with the father  of  the
child. Because of the contradictory nature of the documentary evidence  that
is a conclusion which was reasonably open to the Judge.

18. Although criticism is the Judge's fact-finding  exercise  I  find  those
criticisms have  neither  substance  nor  merit.  The  difficulty  that  the
appellant cannot get around is  the  fact  that  the  Judge  gives  adequate
reasons for finding the evidence led to support her  appeal  to  the  First-
tier to be unreliable. When faced  with  unreliable  evidence,  the  correct
conclusion for the First-tier to  reach  is  that  the  appellant  does  not
discharge the burden of proof. That is the conclusion  that  the  First-tier
Judge reached. There is no criticism of the guidance that the Judge took  in
law. The decision was manifestly within the range of reasonable decision  is
available to the Judge.

19. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

20. There is nothing wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he found  them  to  be.  The
appellant might not like the conclusion that the  Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal  equation.
There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact finding exercise.  The  correct
test in law has been applied. The  decision  does  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

21.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

22.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

23.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.



Signed                                                              Date 2
February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


