
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01250/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2021                  | On 8th October 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WILDING


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MS BETZAIDA HERNANDEZ SIVERIO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr T Nawaz, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Ms Siverio is a national of Spain  born  on  30  November  1980.  In  a
    decision dated 18 February 2021  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shand  QC
    allowed her appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    her entry under the EEA regulations.

 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the  judge's  decision.
    The Secretary of State was the respondent in  the  first-tier  Tribunal
    the respondent before us was the appellant in the  first-tier  Tribunal
    and for ease of reading we refer to the two parties as they were before
    the first-tier Tribunal.

    Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 14  January  2020  on  a
    flight from Tenerife.  She  presented  her  Spanish  passport  and  her
    Spanish national identity card and sought admission to the UK as an  EU
    citizen exercising her rights under the EU Treaties.  Following  checks
    made by border  control  for  pre-settled  status,  the  appellant  had
    declared an overseas conviction for attempted murder in 1999, for which
    she received a 5-year custodial sentence. The appellant explained  that
    she was 17 or 18 years old at the time of the incident, that the victim
    was her mother's boyfriend, and that she had stabbed him when he  tried
    to take advantage of her sexually. She served less  than  half  of  her
    sentence before being released. Home Office records further showed that
    the appellant had been convicted of other more recent offences, notably
    the destruction of or damage to property with a value of �5000 or less,
    for which she was convicted at North Essex Magistrates Court on 25 July
    2012, and assault of a constable on the same date and  common  assault,
    for which she was cautioned on 5 June 2018.

 4. Following an interview with officials at the  airport  a  decision  was
    made to refuse admission to the United Kingdom under  regulation  27(5)
    of the EEA regulations 2016.

 5. The reasons given were stated as being that due to her criminality, the
    respondent  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated   a
    propensity  to  reoffend  and  an  ongoing  tendency  towards   violent
    behaviour.  Due  to  that,  the  respondent  was  satisfied  that   the
    appellant's conduct represented  a  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to more than one fundamental interests of society. The appellant
    appealed against this decision.

 6. The appeal came before Judge Shand on 6 January 2021. She was  provided
    with a bundle of documents from the appellant and a bundle of documents
    from the respondent. The case progressed by way of submissions only. In
    her decision Judge Shand came  to  the  following  conclusions,  having
    considered  the  relevant  convictions  as  well  as  the   appellant's
    explanation:

    "35. I find that the fact that  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  the
    offence of which  she  was  convicted  in  1999,  2012,  and  2018  was
    insufficient to establish that as at  14  January  2020  the  appellant
    presented a genuine present threat to the public in terms of regulation
    27 (five) of the EEA regulations. Refusal to admit an EEA  national  on
    regulation 27 grounds is not to be based on past conduct but on  future
    risk. It is provided in regulation 27 (five) (B) of the EEA regulations
    that the decision to refuse entry must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
    personal conduct of the person concerned, and it is provider (five) (E)
    that a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
    justify the decision. The conviction of  the  appellant  for  attempted
    murder had occurred over 20 years prior to  the  respondent's  decision
    under appeal. The later convictions occurring in the course of what was
    essentially one incident in 2012 occurred in the context of a  domestic
    argument with the appellant's partner at the  time.  In  the  scale  of
    criminal offending  these  2012  offences  were  minor.  Likewise,  the
    offence occurring on 5 June 2018 occurred in the course of  a  domestic
    argument with her partner and in the scale of  criminal  offending  was
    minor. The history of offences are not sufficient to engage the  lowest
    threshold for removal/refusal of entry on grounds of public policy. The
    further three domestic incidents occurring between the appellant and Mr
    Vogler in respect of which no charges were brought are  not  sufficient
    even when  taken  together  with  the  early  offences  to  engage  the
    threshold for removal/refusal of entry on grounds of public policy.

    36. No evidence was led  to  show  that  as  at  14  January  2020  the
    respondent  was  justified  in  taking  the  view  that  the  appellant
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  the
    public. Not only was the appellant's conviction  for  attempted  murder
    over  20  years  old,  but  the  respondent  led  no  evidence  of  the
    circumstances relating to the event which gave rise to that  conviction
    for attempted murder. The appellant has proffered an explanation in her
    witness  statement  which  indicates   that   there   were   mitigating
    circumstances  and  which  would  not  indicate  that   the   appellant
    represented a serious threat to the public. Although the appellant  did
    not give oral evidence in support  of  that  explanation  the  sentence
    which she received in respect of the 1999 conviction is consistent with
    her explanation that there were mitigating  circumstances  relating  to
    the offence stop in any event the onus is on  the  respondent  to  show
    that the lowest threshold for removal is met. The respondent has failed
    to do that.

    37. In these circumstances I find that it is not  established  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the public  to  justify  the
    respondent's decision of that date to refuse entry to the UK."

 7. Judge Shand went on to find in the alternative that if she was wrong on
    the  above  then,  taking  into  account  all  the  circumstances,  the
    respondent's  decision  did  not   comply   with   the   principle   of
    proportionality.




    The Secretary of State's challenge

 8. The respondent appealed against this decision. Permission  was  refused
    by the first-tier Tribunal,  but  subsequently  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 4 May 2021.

 9. The respondent's grounds of appeal challenge both the finding that  the
    appellant did  not  constitute  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the public  and  the  alternative  finding  that  the
    decision was not proportionate. Both limbs of  her  challenge  must  be
    made out in order to successfully overturn Judge Shand's decision.




    The hearing

10. Mr Lindsay relied on the grounds of appeal and expanded upon  them.  He
    accepted that in relation to the first part of the grounds  of  appeal,
    he could not advance the argument that Judge Shand did not examine  the
    personal conduct of the appellant. He refined the respondent's case  as
    being one challenging the approach to  the  assessment  under  the  EEA
    regulations and a failure to apply the relevant test at all.

11. Mr Lindsay said that if we were with him as to the approach that  Judge
    Shand took being erroneous, then such an approach was so material  that
    it infected the findings in relation to proportionality.  He  submitted
    that the judge failed to take into account the severity of the offences
    and also failed to appreciate the overall pattern  of  offending.  This
    included a pattern of offending that demonstrated a pattern of  violent
    assaults.

12. Mr Lindsay submitted that the appellant was very likely  to  offend  or
    equally that if she did  offend  again,  it  would  involve  a  violent
    assault. The judge had failed to adequately consider  past  conduct  in
    the context of future risk.

13. He invited us to find an error of law, set aside the  decision  of  the
    first-tier Tribunal, and remake the decision for  ourselves  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal.

14. Mr Nawaz has in response relied on his skeleton  argument,  a  copy  of
    which was provided as a rule 24 response, dated 17 June 2021. Mr  Nawaz
    had little to add to that document save that the appellant  was  not  a
    foreign criminal as defined because the offence  for  attempted  murder
    was in 1999 and further that the offence itself was no  longer  on  her
    criminal record and therefore has ceased to  exist.  Taking  everything
    into account,  as  the  judge  did,  demonstrated  not  only  that  the
    appellant did not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat, but that Judge Shand was entirely correct in finding as such.

15. Mr Nawaz went on to say that no evidence  was  submitted  by  the  Home
    Office at  any  stage  to  demonstrate  the  background  facts  to  the
    offending and that she  had  solely  relied  on  an  interview  at  the
    airport. Mr Nawaz concluded that the  appellant  had  been  coming  and
    going for a number of years, his submission was more than 20 times, and
    that if she represented such a threat  the  respondent  perhaps  should
    have made such a refusal to admit decision earlier.



    The applicable law

    EEA Regulations 2016

    Right of admission to the United Kingdom

    11.-(1) An EEA national must be  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  on
    arrival if the EEA national produces a valid national identity card  or
    passport issued by an EEA State.

    ...

    (8) But this regulation is subject to regulations 23(1), (2),  (3)  and
    (4) and 31.




    Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

    23.-(1) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom
    by virtue of regulation 11  if  a  refusal  to  admit  that  person  is
    justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health
    in accordance with regulation 27.

    (2) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom  by
    virtue of regulation 11 if that person is subject to a  deportation  or
    exclusion order,  except  where  the  person  is  temporarily  admitted
    pursuant to regulation 41.

    (3) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom  by
    virtue of regulation 11 if the Secretary of State considers there to be
    reasonable grounds to suspect that the person's admission would lead to
    the misuse of a right to reside under regulation 26(1).

    (4) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom  as
    the family member of an EEA national under regulation 11(2) unless,  at
    the time of arrival-

         (a)that person is accompanying the EEA national or joining the  EEA
         national in the United Kingdom; and

         (b)the EEA national has a right to reside.




    Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public security and public
    health

    27.-(1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
    taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health.

    (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

    (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with  a
    right of permanent residence under  regulation  15  except  on  serious
    grounds of public policy and public security.

    (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative  grounds
    of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

    (a)has a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 and  who  has
    resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at  least  ten
    years prior to the relevant decision; or

    (b)is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in the  best
    interests of the person concerned, as provided for in the Convention on
    the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly of  the  United
    Nations on 20th November 1989(1).

    (5) The public policy and public security requirements  of  the  United
    Kingdom  include  restricting  rights  otherwise  conferred  by   these
    Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of  society,
    and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or
    public security it must also be taken in accordance with the  following
    principles-

         (a)the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c)the personal conduct of the person  must  represent  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct
         of the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent;

         (d)matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;

         (e)a person's previous criminal convictions do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision;

         (f)the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even  in  the
         absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the grounds are
         specific to the person.

    (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of  public  policy
    and public security in relation to a person ("P") who  is  resident  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must   take   account   of
    considerations such as the age, state of health,  family  and  economic
    situation of P, P's length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  P's
    social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent
    of P's links with P's country of origin.

    (7) In the case of a relevant  decision  taken  on  grounds  of  public
    health-

         (a)a disease that does not have epidemic potential  as  defined  by
         the relevant instruments of the World Health Organisation or is not
         a  disease  listed  in  Schedule  1  to   the   Health   Protection
         (Notification) Regulations 2010(2); or

         (b)if the person concerned is in the United  Kingdom,  any  disease
         occurring after the three month period beginning  on  the  date  on
         which the person arrived in the United Kingdom,

    does not constitute grounds for the decision.

    (8) A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements  of  this
    regulation  are  met  must  (in  particular)   have   regard   to   the
    considerations  contained  in  Schedule  1  (considerations  of  public
    policy, public security and the fundamental interests of society etc.).




    Person refused admission

    30.-(1) This regulation applies to  a  person  who  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has been refused admission to the United Kingdom-

         (a)because that person does not meet the requirements of regulation
         11 (including where that person does not  meet  those  requirements
         because that person's EEA family permit, residence card, derivative
         residence card or permanent residence card has been revoked  by  an
         immigration officer in accordance with regulation 24); or

         (b)in accordance with regulation 23(1), (2), (3) or (4).

    (2) A person to whom this regulation applies, is to be  treated  as  if
    the person were a person refused leave to enter under the 1971 Act  for
    the purpose of paragraphs 8, 10, 10A, 11, and 16 to 19 of Schedule 2 to
    the 1971 Act (and the provisions of Schedule 10 to the 2016  Act  apply
    accordingly)(1), except  that  the  reference  in  paragraph  19  to  a
    certificate of entitlement, entry clearance or work  permit  is  to  be
    read as a reference to an EEA family permit, residence card, derivative
    residence card, a qualifying EEA State residence card, or  a  permanent
    residence card.

    Findings and reasons

16. It was common ground that the relevant provision in play in this appeal
    is that found in Regulation 27. As can be seen, a decision-maker has to
    take into account the following:

    (5) The public policy and public security requirements  of  the  United
    Kingdom  include  restricting  rights  otherwise  conferred  by   these
    Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of  society,
    and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or
    public security it must also be taken in accordance with the  following
    principles-

    (a)the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

    (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct  of
    the person concerned;

    (c)the personal conduct of the person must represent a genuine, present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society, taking into account past conduct  of  the  person
    and that the threat does not need to be imminent;

    (d)matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which relate to
    considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision;

    (e)a person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
    justify the decision;

    (f)the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,  even  in  the
    absence of a previous criminal conviction,  provided  the  grounds  are
    specific to the person.

    (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of  public  policy
    and public security in relation to a person ("P") who  is  resident  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must   take   account   of
    considerations such as the age, state of health,  family  and  economic
    situation of P, P's length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  P's
    social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent
    of P's links with P's country of origin.

17. Of particular importance in this  appeal  is  regulation  27(5)(c).  In
    making a decision on public policy grounds the decision-maker must take
    into account the personal conduct of the person and that that  personal
    conduct must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat. Whilst the regulation goes on  to  note  that  in  taking  into
    account the past conduct of a person the threat does  not  need  to  be
    imminent, it is important to read that in conjunction  with  regulation
    27(5)(e) which reinforces the principle that past conduct in of  itself
    will not be enough to justify the decision.

18. Taking the above into account, it is plain that the central feature  of
    the respondent's case advanced before us necessarily required us to  do
    two things:

      i) Find that the previous convictions and associated behaviour, in and
         of themselves, demonstrated a propensity to re-offend,  or  at  the
         very least demonstrated an ongoing risk, and  that  the  judge  was
         wrong to have concluded otherwise; and

     ii) Conclude that Judge Shand was  not  entitled  to  conclude  on  the
         evidence before her that the appellant did not represent a genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious risk.

19. In so far as the first proposition is concerned, we find that the judge
    was fully entitled to conclude that the offending did not,  in  and  of
    itself, disclose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious risk.  The
    respondent bore the burden of proof, and that necessarily required  her
    to demonstrate such an ongoing risk. In our judgment, Judge  Shand  was
    entitled to conclude that the offending in of itself, even if one takes
    into account the "pattern" of violence,  was  not  sufficient  for  the
    respondent to have made out her case.

20. In relation to  the  second  proposition,  we  have  no  hesitation  in
    concluding that Judge Shand did not fall into an error of  law  in  her
    assessment. Mr Lindsay was unable to identify any legal basis  to  show
    that the judge failed to  take  into  account  any  of  the  background
    circumstances, or, as he submitted, that the judge  had  erred  in  her
    approach to the assessment under regulation 27 of the EEA regulations.

21. It is plain that paragraphs 35, 36, and 37 draw together her assessment
    of the evidence and state her conclusions. She set out in  considerable
    detail from paragraphs 26 to 33 the  background  circumstances  to  the
    appellant's  offences.  The  respondent  can  point  to  nothing  which
    discloses any error of law as regards the judge's consideration of  the
    evidence, the reasons provided, and her approach to the relevant  legal
    framework.

22. The EEA regulations are absolutely clear that a  decision-maker  cannot
    rely exclusively on the previous convictions of a person. Yet  in  this
    case that is, in effect, precisely what the respondent  has  sought  to
    do. It was therefore impossible for the Judge Shand to go  any  further
    than to identify the convictions and then to consider  the  appellant's
    own evidence as to the circumstances pertaining thereto. This  is  what
    she did. Her overall conclusion was plainly open to her.

23. As regards the respondent's assertion that  the  judge  precluded  from
    taking any "mitigating" circumstances relating to the  1999  conviction
    into account, we reject it.  On  the  contrary,  the  judge  was  fully
    entitled  to  take  all  relevant  circumstances  into   account   when
    conducting her assessment under regulation 27. To  do  otherwise  would
    probably have amounted to an error of law.

24. There was no obligation on the judge to expressly state a conclusion on
    the likelihood of re-offending, or, if a further offence the  level  of
    harm that this might cause. The only obligation imposed  on  the  judge
    was to consider and apply the relevant provisions under regulation  27.
    The judge did just that. Certain aspects of  Mr  Lindsay's  submissions
    were in reality asking for reasons for reasons. Similarly,  we  see  no
    merit  in  the  submission  that  other  conclusions  might  have  been
    consistent with the evidence. The task of the judge was to assess  that
    evidence and reach her own conclusions in a sustainable fashion. Again,
    this is what she did.

25. In respect of the respondent's  reliance  on  schedule  1  to  the  EEA
    regulations, we respectfully refer to and rely on the  observations  of
    Judge Shaerf when originally refusing permission  to  appeal  (see  the
    third paragraph of his decision dated 14 April 2021). There is no error
    here.

26. Finally, the respondent has  failed  to  identify  any  errors  in  the
    judge's decision as regards the alternative proportionality assessment.
    The judge took relevant evidence  into  account  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant's personal circumstances, together with all
    other factors, rendered the  decision  under  appeal  disproportionate.
    There is no merit to Mr Lindsay's suggestion that the judge  failed  to
    take account of any risk posed by the appellant to her current partner.

27. There is no material error of law in her determination.  As  a  result,
    the respondent's appeal must be dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the first-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed: T.S. Wilding

Judge Wilding

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal           Dated: 31 August 2021
