
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01544/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 12th February 2018               |On 1 March 2018                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                  ms o.b.b.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIon made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bokhari (Slough Immigration Aid Unit)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made. I deem it appropriate on the basis that
elements of the evidence refer to minor children.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Nigeria,  born  [  ]  1980,  appeals  with
    permission against the decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  R
    Hussain) dismissing her appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  of
    21st January 2016 revoking her residence card as the spouse of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights.



Background

 2. The following factors are relevant to the appeal before me:

      i. The Appellant, a citizen of Nigeria (d.o.b. [ ] 1980), entered  the
         United Kingdom on a date unknown.

     ii. On [ ] 2008 she gave birth to a child B.B.S.  B.B.S.'s father is Mr
         A.O.H.B. who is also a Nigerian citizen.

    iii. On 14th August 2010 she married Mr N.E. ("the Sponsor"),  a  French
         national.

     iv. On 1st January 2011 the Appellant gave birth  to  S.A.B.   S.A.B.'s
         birth certificate was subsequently amended to show Mr N.E.  as  his
         father.

      v. On 25th August 2011 she applied for an EEA residence  card  as  the
         spouse of Mr N.E.  This application was rejected on 16th  September
         2011.

     vi. On 29th September 2011 she again applied for an EEA residence card.
          This application was refused on 23rd January 2012 with a right  of
         appeal.  The refusal was made on the  basis  that  the  Appellant's
         marriage was deemed to be one of convenience.

    vii. On 8th June 2012 a third application was made for an EEA  residence
         card and this application was rejected on 19th July 2012.

   viii. On 11th October 2012 a further application  was  made  for  an  EEA
         residence card. This was again refused  on  the  grounds  that  the
         marriage was believed to be one of convenience.  On 13th  May  2013
         the Appellant lodged an appeal against that decision.

     ix. On 19th December 2013 she made  an  application  for  a  derivative
         residence card.

      x. On 21st February 2014 an appeal against the refusal of 11th October
         2012 was allowed and an EEA residence card was issued on 24th April
         2014.

     xi. On 7th August 2014 the Appellant's third child S.O.E.B.  was  born.
         The father is named as Mr A.O.H.B.

    xii. On 29th July 2015 the Appellant applied for  a  residence  card  on
         behalf of her daughter S.O.E.B.

   xiii. On 10th  November  2015  the  Appellant  made  an  application  for
         permanent residence.  This application remains outstanding.

    xiv. On 21st January 2016 the Respondent made a decision to  revoke  the
         Appellant's residence card.  The Appellant exercised her  right  of
         appeal against the revocation decision.

     xv. The appeal against revocation was heard by the First-tier  Tribunal
         on  10th  May  2017.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  by  a  decision
         promulgated on 27.6.2017.  The Appellant  sought  and  was  granted
         permission to appeal the FtTJ's decision.



FtT Hearing

 3. The revocation appeal which forms the basis of the instant appeal  came
    before FtTJ Hussain.   There  were  two  strands  to  the  Respondent's
    decision to revoke.

       . The  first  strand  revolved  around  the  evidence  of  the  birth
         certificate submitted on behalf of S.O.E.B., the Appellant's  third
         child.  S.O.E.B. is not the child of  the  Appellant's  Sponsor  Mr
         N.E. but is the child of Mr A.O.H.B.   This  resulted  in  a  query
         being raised once more  that  the  Appellant  had  entered  into  a
         marriage of convenience with Mr N.E.  This was on  the  basis  that
         the Appellant's first child born in 2008 was also  declared  to  be
         the child of Mr A.O.H.B.  The Sponsor's second child is said to  be
         the child of Mr N.E.

       . The second strand causing the Respondent to  revoke  the  residence
         card was on the basis that she could  not  be  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant's Sponsor Mr N.E. was still employed or was  otherwise  a
         qualified person within the EEA Regulations.

 4. The FtTJ in his decision promulgated on 27th June 2017 decided:

       .  The  Appellant's  marriage  with  the  Sponsor  was  not  one   of
         convenience. It is correct to say at this point that  no  challenge
         has been raised by the Respondent either by way of cross appeal  or
         otherwise to that finding and therefore it remains.

       . The documentary evidence produced by the Appellant did not  satisfy
         him that the Appellant's Sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

 5. In coming to the above conclusions, the FtTJ declined to make  findings
    on whether the Appellant's Sponsor Mr N.E. had permanent  residence  in
    the United Kingdom.  If it was the case  that  he  did  have  permanent
    residence in the UK then as the spouse of a person with permanent right
    of residence, the Appellant would be entitled to residence.

 6. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal  the  FtTJ's
    decision.  The relevant parts  of  the  grant  of  permission  read  as
    follows:

         "2.  The Secretary of State revoked the card on the basis that  she
             believed  the  Appellant  to  have  entered  a   marriage   of
             convenience.  That point was decided in the Appellant's favour
             by the Judge as it had been in a previous appeal.

         3.   The Secretary of State also asserted that the EEA national was
             not exercising Treaty rights.

         4.   The Judge looked at the evidence adduced and found he was  not
             satisfied that the EEA national was exercising  Treaty  rights
             and dismissed the appeal.  He declined to decide  whether  the
             EEA national had permanent residence as the issue  before  him
             was the revocation.  In so doing he arguably erred as, if  the
             EEA national had permanent residence there was no  requirement
             that he be a Qualified person and as the spouse  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence  the  Appellant  would  be
             entitled to reside and the Secretary of State not entitled  to
             revoke her residence card."

    Thus the matter  comes  before  me  to  decide  initially  whether  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of law such that
    the decision must be set aside and remade.



Error of Law Hearing

 7.  Ms  Bokhari  appeared  for  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Everett  for  the
    Respondent.  Ms  Bokhari  relied  on  the  grounds  seeking  permission
    together with the grant of permission itself.

 8. Ms Everett did not seek to address me at length other than to say  that
    she accepted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  declined  to  make
    findings on the Regulation 15(1)(b) issue, and acknowledged  that  this
    was an error.  She said that proper findings need to be  made  on  that
    issue.  She accepted that if I was in agreement  with  this,  then  the
    proper course would be to remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in order that a  fresh  hearing  could  take  place  and  that  primary
    findings of fact could be made.  She said  that  this  will  require  a
    proper evaluation of  the  documentary  evidence  which  has  been  put
    forward.  She did not seek to make any submissions concerning the point
    raised initially by  the  Respondent  that  the  marriage  between  the
    Appellant and Mr N.E. was one of convenience.

 9. I agree with the submissions made by Ms Everett.  I find that this is a
    matter where it is essential that clear findings be made, as  any  such
    findings will go to the core  of  the  question  of  revocation.   This
    requires  an  evaluation  of  the  relevant  evidence  on  whether  the
    Appellant's EEA Sponsor had permanent residence in the UK.  The  answer
    to that issue will then reflect on the validity  or  otherwise  of  the
    Respondent's decision to revoke the Appellant's residence card.

10. It is right that this matter be determined initially in the  First-tier
    Tribunal, since that is the Tribunal tasked with primary fact  finding.
    I therefore set aside the decision of the FtT in its entirety, with the
    exception that the decision that the marriage between the Appellant and
    Mr N.E. was not one of convenience is to be regarded as settled.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and the decision is hereby set aside.  The matter will be remitted  to  that
Tribunal (not Judge R Hussain) for a fresh hearing  and  fresh  findings  of
fact.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     27 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
