
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/01446/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided on the papers                 |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 2 June 2017                        |         On 6 June 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                           MR MUHAMMAD TALHA USMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a national of  the  Pakistan  who  applied  for  a
    residence card as the  extended  family  member  of  his  EEA  national
    (Swiss) sponsor who is said to be his  paternal  uncle.  The  Appellant
    appeals against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  25  September  2015
    refusing to issue him with a residence card.  His appeal was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton in a decision  promulgated  on  12
    September 2016 ("the Decision").  The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the
    hearing and instructed his (then) representatives  that  he  wished  to
    have the appeal determined on the papers.

 2. The Judge did not accept that the  Appellant  was  an  extended  family
    member on the basis that she did not accept that the sponsor was an EEA
    national at all relevant times and that the  Appellant  had  not  shown
    dependency/membership of the same household before coming to the UK and
    since.

 3. The Appellant seeks permission to appeal the Decision on the same basis
    as his case was presented to the Judge.  He says in conclusion that the
    Judge and the Respondent have not taken into account "the importance of
    living together as family member of a EEA  national,  by  ignoring  the
    fact that I am dependent and being supported by my uncle/sponsor  since
    childhood  and  provided  evidences."   The  grounds   are   merely   a
    disagreement with the Judge's findings on the evidence.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman
    by a decision sent on 15 December 2016.  The terms of  the  refusal  so
    far as relevant are as follows:-

         "[3] Since  the  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Kempton, the case of Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT
         00411(IAC) has been promulgated.  That case decides that the First-
         tier Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear appeals against  refusals
         to  issue  residence  cards  for  extended  family  members   under
         regulation 8.  This was an appeal about a refusal under  regulation
         8, and as a result the Judge should have found  (as  we  now  know)
         that there was no valid appeal.  As a result, permission cannot  be
         granted to appeal this decision to the Upper Tribunal.  In my  view
         the decision discloses no arguable error of law that could make any
         difference to the outcome of the appeal."

 5. On application to this Tribunal, I granted permission on the basis that
    the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision and this amounts  to
    an arguable error of law.  If a Judge  lacks  jurisdiction  to  make  a
    decision, then the decision is wrong in law and should not  be  allowed
    to stand.  Judge Easterman was correct to observe that the case of Sala
    means that there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal but
    wrong to conclude that as a result the Decision discloses  no  arguable
    error of law.  There is an arguable error of law precisely because  the
    Judge made  the  Decision  which  she  had  no  jurisdiction  to  make.
    Accordingly, I granted permission by decision dated 28 February 2017 in
    the following terms (so far as relevant):-

         "[2] This is an appeal which is  affected  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
         decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC).
         In that case, the Upper Tribunal decided that there is no right  of
         appeal in extended family member cases  such  as  this.   As  such,
         there is an arguable error of law disclosed by the Decision because
         the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear and  decide  this  appeal.
         The Judge does not refer to Sala which had been  promulgated  prior
         to the Decision.  The refusal of permission to appeal on the  basis
         that if the First-tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to decide
         the appeal then the First-tier does not have  jurisdiction  to  set
         aside the Decision  is  wrong  in  law.   Although  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (and indeed the Upper Tribunal) did not have  jurisdiction
         to substantively decide the  appeal,  it  retains  jurisdiction  to
         decide whether the appeal is a valid one..."

    I then gave directions as follows:-

         "Unless either party files and serves objections in writing  to  be
         received within 14 days from the date when this decision is sent, I
         propose to find an error of law in the Decision on the  basis  that
         the Judge lacked jurisdiction to make it.  I then  propose  to  set
         aside  the  Decision  and  re-make  it  dismissing  the  appeal  as
         invalid."

 6. By letter dated 7 March 2017 I received the following response from the
    Respondent (again so far as relevant):-

         "[2] As outlined in the grant of permission to appeal, the case  of
         Sala is applicable to this appeal and should have  been  considered
         by the First-Tier judge, with the result that  there  had  been  no
         right of appeal (contrary to  what  is  stated  in  the  First-Tier
         refusal  of  permission  to  appeal,  the  decision  in  Sala   was
         promulgated in advance of Judge Kempton's decision relating to this
         appellant).  Therefore, the only decision to be  made  was  whether
         there was jurisdiction to decide the appeal.  There is  a  material
         error of law in the failure of the judge to address this point.  It
         being clear that there was no valid appeal, had she  done  so,  she
         would have found that she lacked jurisdiction to decide the appeal.

         [3]  In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Smith
         proposes to find an error of law on the Sala  point,  and  to  then
         proceed to  set  aside  Judge  Kempton's  decision  and  remake  it
         dismissing the  appeal.   The  respondent  wishes  to  confirm  her
         accordance with this approach and does not intend to avail  herself
         of the invitation provided in the directions to serve objections."

 7. There has been no response  from  the  Appellant  to  my  decision  and
    directions. Contrary to my directions, the Tribunal listed  the  appeal
    for an error of law hearing on 25 May 2017 in Bradford.   That  hearing
    was vacated as neither party had requested the hearing.

 8. As indicated in my grant of permission, the  Judge  made  the  Decision
    after the decision in Sala was promulgated.     The  decision  in  that
    case was promulgated on 19 August 2016.  I do not need to go  into  the
    substance of that decision in detail because neither  party  challenges
    the decision on the basis that it was wrongly decided.  In  short,  the
    Upper  Tribunal  (Mr  CMG  Ockelton,  Vice  President  and  UTJ  Grubb)
    concluded that in a case such as this involving the refusal to issue  a
    first residence permit to an extended family member there is  no  right
    of appeal against that refusal.  In that case, the Tribunal  found  for
    that reason that there was an error of law because there was  no  right
    of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The  Tribunal  therefore  set
    aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  substituted  its  own
    decision finding that there was no valid appeal.

 9. As I indicate, neither party challenges the correctness of the decision
    in Sala in this appeal.  For the same reasons as given in Sala, I  find
    that the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision.   I  therefore
    set aside the Decision for that reason.  Since there  is  no  right  of
    appeal to the Tribunal, I have no jurisdiction to decide the appeal.  I
    therefore substitute my own decision finding that there was and  is  no
    valid appeal.

Decision
The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton discloses an error of  law
because she made the decision when she had no jurisdiction to  consider  the
appeal as the appeal was not valid.  I therefore set aside the  decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton dated 12 September 2016 and  substitute  a
decision that there was and is no valid appeal in this case.
Signed
[pic]                           Dated:  2 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
