
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01855/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2018                             |On 28th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                          QUINTIN RONALD STRUCKMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Catherine Taroni of Richard Chambers LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of South Africa  born  on  26th  August
    1977.  The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  and  was  subsequently
    issued  with  a  registration  certificate  on  26th   November   2006.
    Following his marriage to an EEA citizen, the Appellant was issued with
    a residence card on 31st  October  2011.   Although  his  marriage  had
    broken down, on 28th July 2015  the  appellant  applied  for  permanent
    residence.  After revoking the  Appellant's  registration  certificate,
    the application for permanent residence was  refused  on  29th  January
    2016 for the reasons given in a Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  of  that
    date.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manyarara (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 5th May
    2017.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his
    Decision dated 23rd May 2017.  The Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal
    that decision and on 8th January 2018 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. An issue  in  the  appeal  was  whether  the  Appellant  satisfied  the
    provisions of Regulation 15(1)(a) of the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 by residing in the UK in accordance  with  those
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years, which in  this  case
    meant whether the Appellant  had  been  in  employment  throughout  the
    required period of residence.  The Judge proceeded to hear  the  appeal
    and dismissed it partly because he found that  the  Appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof by producing documentary evidence of his
    employment.

 4. At the hearing before me, Ms Taroni referred to her  Skeleton  Argument
    and argued that the Judge had erred in law by refusing  an  application
    by her for an adjournment so that a Direction could be  issued  by  the
    Tribunal under the provisions of Section 40 of the UK Borders Act  2007
    to obtain information from HMRC as to the appellant's employment.   She
    confirmed that such an application had been made at the hearing  before
    the Judge and had been refused by him.

 5. In response, Ms Ahmed submitted that there had been no  such  error  of
    law.  She confirmed that according to the Record of Proceedings of  her
    colleague who represented the Respondent  at  the  hearing  before  the
    Judge, the Appellant did make such an application which was refused  by
    the Judge.  The Judge gave a verbal explanation for his  refusal  being
    that there had been an inordinate delay in the Appellant's  failure  to
    obtain the necessary evidence or to seek such a Direction.   The  Judge
    referred to the decision in Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 552.  The Judge
    had gone on to correctly dismiss the appeal on the evidence before him.

 6. I find a procedural error of law in the decision of the Judge to refuse
    the application for an adjournment.  There is no reference  at  all  in
    the decision as to the application to  adjourn  and  therefore  of  the
    Judge's decision to refuse it.  In  the  file  there  is  a  manuscript
    Record of Proceedings from the Judge which again makes no reference  to
    the application to adjourn nor his reasons for refusing it.   With  all
    respect to Ms Ahmed and her colleague who  represented  the  Respondent
    before the Judge, I cannot rely upon Ms Ahmed's hearsay comments as  to
    the reasons for refusal given by the Judge.  Therefore, I have  no  way
    of  knowing  if  the  Judge  decided  the  application  to  adjourn  in
    accordance with the  overriding  objective  given  in  Rule  2  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  There is nothing to show that the  Judge  decided
    the  application  to  adjourn  in  accordance  with   that   overriding
    objective.  I am therefore driven to the conclusion that the Judge made
    a material error of law in deciding the application to adjourn  without
    applying the overriding objective given in the Rules.

 7. I did not proceed to remake the decision in the appeal.  That  decision
    will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  paragraph
    7.2(b) of the Practice Statements as there is  further  judicial  fact-
    finding to be made.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date  26th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
