
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01280/2019
                                                               EA/01281/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2020                      |On 23 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                   Yaw [M]
                                 Lauryn [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms H Gore, instructed by R Spio & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are brother and sister and are citizens of Ghana.   They
    appealed to a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's
    decision of  15  January  2019  refusing  their  applications  for  EEA
    residence cards to confirm retained rights under the EEA Regulations as
    the children of a spouse of an EEA  national.   The  claim  relates  to
    their mother who is Ghanaian and her husband, an EEA national.

2.   The respondent refused the applications because  the  marriage  between
    the appellants' mother and the sponsor was dissolved as of 30  November
    2016.  The respondent noted that the appellants both entered the United
    Kingdom on 16 August 2018 and therefore it was clear  that  they  could
    not have been living with the EEA sponsor at  the  termination  of  the
    marriage as they had not yet been granted leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom  at  that  point.   Also  they  had  failed  to   provide   any
    documentation to show that they were resident  in  the  United  Kingdom
    prior to the dissolution of the marriage.  It was concluded  that  they
    had therefore failed  to  show  that  they  had  retained  a  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom.

3.   The judge noted that the couple had married on 4 June 2011 and, as  set
    out above, the marriage was dissolved on 30 November 2016.   The  judge
    thereafter noted that in  May  2016  an  application  was  made  for  a
    residence card for the appellants.  This was refused,  the  appellants'
    mother appealed and her appeal was allowed by an immigration judge (the
    first judge).  The Upper Tribunal remade the decision and  allowed  the
    appeal on 20 February 2018.  It was accepted that she was the mother of
    the appellants and that they were family members of her husband for the
    purposes of Regulation  7  of  the  2006  Regulations  because  at  the
    relevant time the couple were married.  On 24 July 2018 the  appellants
    had been issued with residence permits by the Home Office and travelled
    to the United Kingdom on 16 August  of  that  year  and  have  remained
    living with their mother subsequently.

4.   In his conclusions the judge stated that at the time of the refusal  in
    2016 the appellants were, for the purposes of Regulation  7,  dependent
    direct relatives of their mother's EEA spouse  and  that  was  why  the
    appeal had been allowed.  However, he remarked, the situation  now  was
    different in that the marriage has ended and as a matter  of  fact  and
    law the  appellants  were  not  dependent  direct  relatives  on  their
    mother's EEA spouse since the dissolution of  the  marriage  had  taken
    place on 30 November 2016.

5.   The judge noted that Ms Gore, who also appeared below,  did  not  argue
    that the appellants retained  rights  under  the  EEA  Regulations  but
    argued that they were still the family  members  of  the  sponsor  even
    after the divorce because he remained their stepfather.  The judge  did
    not accept  this  argument  and  as  a  consequence,  noting  that  the
    appellants were not required to leave the United Kingdom as a result of
    the decision, concluded that there was no interference with any Article
    8 right and dismissed the appeals against the EEA decision.

6.   The appellants sought and were granted  permission  to  appeal  against
    this decision on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in finding  that  the  family  relationship  ended  on
    divorce, for the reasons given at paragraph 18 in  the  grounds.   This
    paragraph  contained  a  reference  to  Article  13(2)   of   Directive
    2004/38/EC.

7.   In her submissions Ms Gore relied on the grounds and  argued  that  the
    judge's decision was wrong.  As had been argued  in  the  grounds,  the
    respondent  should  have  applied  Regulation  18  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 to  the  case.   Instead  the
    respondent had focused on Regulation 10(5).  The  grounds  set  out  an
    explanation as to the grant of the family permit  in  Ghana  which  had
    been granted after the divorce.  The decision of the Upper Tribunal had
    been after 30 November 2016 so the judge was aware of the fact  of  the
    divorce.  The appeal had been allowed and the Secretary  of  State  had
    not appealed it further.  It was significant that a family  permit  had
    been granted to the appellants pursuant to Regulation 12(1) of the  EEA
    Regulations.  The respondent accepted at  that  point  that  they  were
    family members.  The appellants  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    should not have been admitted unless they were family members of an EEA
    national or family members who had retained a right of residence.  That
    had happened in this case.  They had not  been  refused  entry  on  the
    basis of not being family members but had been admitted as they had the
    right to admission under Regulation 11.  The matter  should  then  have
    been considered under Regulation 18 when the residence card application
    was made.  When the  appellants  applied  for  a  residence  card  they
    provided proof of family membership with the family member's  entry  in
    the passport  and  should  have  been  granted  residence  cards  under
    Regulation 18.

8.   With regard to the judge's decision,  he  had  noted  the  reasons  for
    refusal and with regard to paragraph 10 setting  out  the  history  the
    court had misunderstood and they had not applied for a  residence  card
    but had applied for a family permit in 2016.  That mistake was repeated
    in paragraph 12.  There was a reference at paragraph 17 to  the  change
    of circumstances, but at the time when the matter was under appeal  the
    Upper Tribunal was aware that the divorce had happened.  Nothing turned
    on that as the Secretary of State and the Upper  Tribunal  were  aware.
    As a consequence the wrong test had been applied  and  it  should  have
    been Regulation 18.

9.   If the Tribunal disagreed then the issue was whether the  children  had
    ceased to be family members and it had not been  referred  to  on  that
    basis so Regulation 10(5)(a) did not  apply.   That,  if  Ms  Gore  was
    correct, referred to the mother.  For Regulation 10(5) to  apply  there
    had to be a cessation of being a family member and not being refused on
    the basis of the mother of the appellants ceasing to be a family member
    but with regard to residence in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 18 of
    the grounds it could be seen that it was clear that  residence  permits
    had  been  granted  because  the  Directive   referred   to   marriage.
    Regulation 10(5) did  not  apply.   The  application  had  been  for  a
    residence card.

10.  Mr Lindsay put in a bundle, which Ms  Gore  had  seen,  concerning  the
    previous appeal proceedings.  There was first of all the refusal of  an
    EEA family permit, on 2 March 2017.  There had been an earlier decision
    of 20 September 2016 refusing the appellants an EEA family  permit  and
    an appeal against that decision was heard and allowed by a Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal on 9 November 2017.  The judge noted  at  paragraph
    10 of his decision the refusal of 2 March 2017 in which it was observed
    that the appellants'  mother  had  subsequently  submitted  a  Ghanaian
    divorce certificate issued on 5 December 2016  annulling  her  marriage
    and as a consequence the respondent had questioned the  credibility  of
    the appellants' claims to be family  members  of  EEA  nationals.   The
    judge was not satisfied that he had jurisdiction to  engage  with  that
    decision as apparently it had not been served on  the  appellants.   He
    could therefore not engage with the issue  of  the  appellants'  mother
    allegedly being divorced from the sponsor.

11.   Permission  to  appeal  against  that  decision  was  sought  by   the
    respondent and granted, and there was a  subsequent  hearing  before  a
    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal at  which  among  other  things  the
    respondent's argument was noted that the sponsor was now divorced  from
    the EEA national and as such her children could not  benefit  from  the
    provisions of Regulation 7(1)(b)(i) at the point of divorce,  namely  3
    November 2016.  The judge found that the claimants  had  shown  on  the
    balance of probabilities that  they  were  direct  descendants  of  the
    spouse of an EEA national and were family members for the  purposes  of
    the 2006 Regulations, and that the respondent was obliged to issue them
    with EEA family permits as family members of an EEA national.

12.  The final document in that bundle is a Specialist Appeals  Team  minute
    in which it is noted that there had been an intention to challenge  the
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge's decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  after
    refusal of permission by the Upper Tribunal but they ran  out  of  time
    and as a consequence it was concluded that it should be signed off  and
    the Entry Clearance Officer notified  that  family  permits  should  be
    issued, although the respondent had strong doubts that  the  appellants
    enjoyed a right to reside following their mother's divorce from the EEA
    national stepfather.

13.  Mr Lindsay argued that the appellants were not at  all  material  times
    entitled to say they had a right of residence to entry  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  More broadly it was relevant to note they did not rely on
    retained rights so they needed to show that at the date of the  hearing
    they were family members of an EEA national and that could not be  done
    as their mother had been divorced from their  stepfather  in  2016  and
    therefore  in  2019  there  was  no  family  relationship   under   the
    Regulations.

14.  The earlier appeal could not be dipositive.   The  Devaseelan  guidance
    related to an authoritative  statement  of  the  facts  in  a  previous
    decision but did not bind the subsequent Tribunal with  regard  to  the
    law.   The  law  had  not  been  properly  applied  in   the   previous
    proceedings.  The first judge had failed to consider that  it  was  not
    disputed that in 2016 the appellants' mother was divorced from her  EEA
    spouse so there was no family relationship in EEA law terms.  It should
    be noted that there had been no Presenting Officer  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on that occasion.  The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge in the
    appeal had failed to consider all the evidence as at the  date  of  the
    hearing.  It was relevant to note his reference  at  paragraph  27  and
    again at paragraph 29 that the claimants "were" direct  descendants  of
    the spouse of an EEA national.  That could not be  right.   The  matter
    had to be considered as at the date of decision.

15.  I questioned whether there might not be  a  point  for  legal  argument
    here about issue estoppel/cause of action  estoppel  in  light  of  the
    decision of the Judge of the Upper Tribunal in February 2018.   Neither
    representative  wished  to  apply  for  an  adjournment   for   further
    consideration or further submissions to be  made.   Mr  Lindsay  argued
    that as  to  whether  issue  estoppel  or  legitimate  expectation  was
    relevant to Article 8, this was a pure EEA appeal  and  the  judge  had
    noted at paragraph 21 that there would be no effect on Article 8 as the
    appellants were not required to leave the United Kingdom and there  was
    no challenge to that so it was just a question of  whether  the  First-
    tier  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  there  was  no  EEA  family
    relationship at the date of  the  hearing.   If  there  were  a  future
    decision requiring the appellants to leave then Article 8 issues  could
    be raised then but it was not in issue for today.

16.  Ms Gore referred to paragraph  14  of  her  grounds.   Mr  Lindsay  had
    confirmed that the Secretary of State was aware of the point now  being
    made and was trying to appeal the Upper Tribunal decision  through  the
    back door.  She had not appreciated that there had been an unsuccessful
    attempt to appeal that decision to the Court of Appeal.  Extra time was
    not being sought for an application out of time.

17.  Ms Gore had not seen this as an issue.  The  respondent  had  not  made
    the arguments now being made in the refusal decision.  The decision had
    not been withdrawn and there were issues of natural  justice  and  they
    were not the issues before the  First-tier  Judge  and  there  was  the
    question of whether Regulation 18 was  the  correct  Regulation  to  be
    applied.  The points were irrelevant and the judge could not deal  with
    them.  The Secretary of State could not change the case without notice.
     The issue was that about the family permit and the respondent's  point
    had been argued on appeal.

18.  Mr Lindsay thereafter argued that  the  judge  was  not  bound  by  the
    earlier Upper Tribunal decision and it was necessary to have  a  simple
    binary assessment  as  at  the  date  of  hearing  as  to  whether  the
    appellants were family members of an EEA national or  not.   After  the
    divorce there was no family relationship.  The family permit should not
    have  been  issued.   It  had  been  done  because  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision but in any event circumstances changed and that was
    among other things why the burden was on appellants to show  that  they
    were entitled to the rights that they claimed to enjoy.  They needed to
    show they were family members of an EEA national and could not  do  so.
    There was no surprise  and  no  change  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position.  It was clear from the refusal decision  in  the  penultimate
    paragraph that they had not been family members of an EEA  national  at
    all material times, and hence  it  was  dealt  with  as  it  had  been.
    Retained rights had not been argued.  They had not been family  members
    since 2016 upon the divorce.

19.  Ms Gore further argued that with regard to  the  judge's  paragraph  17
    the situation was not in fact different.  The Upper Tribunal  had  been
    aware of the fact that the  sponsor  was  now  divorced  from  the  EEA
    national.  She accepted that there were two different applications, the
    application from Ghana for a family permit  being  different  from  the
    United Kingdom application for a residence permit,  but  otherwise  the
    issues were the same and  the  issue  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    whether the children were family members of the sponsor.  That had also
    been in issue before the First-tier Judge so the issues were the  same.
    Despite the Tribunal's invitation  to  consider  whether  it  would  be
    appropriate to seek an adjournment for an argument to be put in on  any
    legal issues arising, her instructions were to continue and she did not
    seek an adjournment.  She had stated the distinction which she saw  and
    the Upper Tribunal had been aware in its decision in February 2018 that
    the divorce was in place and it was very important to look at what  the
    judge there had said.  The  decision  was  made  on  the  issues.   The
    Secretary of State had raised an issue as to the name of the children's
    father and the decision was in their favour and also as to whether they
    were actually the children of their mother was positive in their favour
    so on that basis it was found they were the sponsor's  family  members.
    If the Tribunal did not agree that the judge was  bound  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Ms Gore would say that it was a different  situation  in  the
    sense that the Upper Tribunal was deciding what was  in  place  at  the
    date of application in 2016 and at which time there had been no divorce
    so the Upper Tribunal was correct to  find  the  children  were  family
    members at the date of the application.  It could be one of those cases
    where the Secretary of State had stopped deciding cases  and  that  was
    relevant to the timing under consideration.

20.  The children were in the United Kingdom now  and  living  here,  having
    been admitted with family permits and made an application for residence
    permits and under  Regulation  18  they  had  the  right  to  make  the
    application.  If the Tribunal disagreed there was paragraph 18  in  the
    grounds and a distinction that the judge had not made and issues  about
    the marriage subsisting and they  had  clearly  been  found  as  family
    members  and  continued  to  have  rights  of  residence.   In  summary
    therefore the points made by Mr Lindsay had no bearing and there was no
    issue estoppel.  The judge  had  been  aware  that  the  situation  was
    different and clearly saw it as different from what he had to do and at
    paragraph 17 it had been argued that the situation was different.

21.  I reserved my determination.

22.   It  can  be  seen  from  the  above  that  there  are   some   factual
    complications in this case.  The appellants applied for family  permits
    to join their mother and their stepfather, a French  national,  in  the
    United Kingdom.  I have not seen the refusal letter which was appealed,
    but only the subsequent letter which made  reference  to  the  divorce,
    dated 2 March 2017, which the first judge,  who  heard  the  appeal  in
    October 2017 declined to take into consideration as it  apparently  had
    not been served on the appellants and could not engage with  the  issue
    of the fact of the mother now being divorced from the  sponsor  as  was
    said to be the case.

23.  Thereafter it is clear from the decision of the Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge who heard the appeal against the first judge's decision that,  as
    can be seen from paragraph 15 of his decision, he was aware of the fact
    that the sponsor had now been divorced from the EEA  national  and  the
    argument being made on behalf of the  respondent  that  the  appellants
    could not benefit from the provisions of Regulation 7 from the point of
    divorce, i.e. 30 November 2016.

24.  When the judge came to the point  in  his  decision  of  assessing  the
    claim, it appears that he was taking  into  account  the  fact  of  the
    marriage at the date of application on 15 August 2016  (paragraph  21),
    which perhaps links with his reference to  the  claims  showing  as  he
    noted  at  paragraphs  27  and  29  that  the  claimants  were   direct
    descendants of the spouse of an EEA national.  As can be seen from  the
    above analysis, the Secretary of State was  unsuccessful  in  appealing
    that decision to the Court of Appeal since permission was  not  granted
    by the Upper Tribunal and the Secretary of State was thereafter out  of
    time to bring a renewed application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.

25.  The judge in the appeal with which we are now concerned  was  aware  of
    the earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal but as he noted at paragraph
    17 the situation now was different in  that  the  appellants  were  not
    dependent direct relatives of an EEA spouse because  the  marriage  had
    come to an end on 30 November 2016.  That is clearly right as a  matter
    of law.  Ms Gore argued  that  the  decision  should  have  been  under
    Regulation 18, but that is concerned  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
    obligation to issue a residence card to a person who  was  not  an  EEA
    national and is the family member of a qualified person or  of  an  EEA
    national.  That is inapplicable because the appellants were  no  longer
    family members of a qualified person or of an EEA national in light  of
    the divorce in November 2016.   Accordingly  the  matter  clearly  came
    under Regulation 10(5) and the refusal was a  proper  refusal  on  that
    basis.  It is relevant in this regard also to note that  there  was  no
    reliance  before  the  judge  on  retained  rights.   As  regards   the
    application  of  Article  13(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC,   that   is
    predicated upon the  persons  in  question  being  family  members  and
    involves retention of rights of residence.  It is clear  that  retained
    rights were not relied on  before  the  judge  and  in  any  event  the
    appellant ceased to be family members of the EEA  national  upon  their
    mother's divorce.

26.  As regards the status of the Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge's  decision,
    that in no sense bound the First-tier  Judge  who  was  considering  an
    appeal against a different decision.  The fact that  the  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal albeit being aware of the fact of the
    divorce in November 2016 in no sense precluded the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge from taking the fact of the divorce into account in deciding  the
    matter in the way he did in particular as observed at paragraph  17  of
    his decision.  There is no point of issue estoppel or cause  of  action
    estoppel here.  The fact that the Secretary of State  was  unsuccessful
    in appealing the earlier decision in no sense precluded the refusal  in
    respect of the subsequent application made by the appellants  any  more
    than it precluded the dismissing of the appeal by the First-tier  Judge
    of the challenge to that decision.   Accordingly  I  conclude  that  no
    error of law in the  judge's  decision  has  been  identified  and  his
    decision dismissing these appeals stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 16 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
