
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01351/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 September 2017                      |On 22 September 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                               md abul hasnat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date of  birth  is  16
    July  1985.   The  Appellant  made  an  application  for  a  derivative
    residence card pursuant to the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  That application was refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in a decision of 17 September 2015  and  the  Appellant  appealed
    against that decision.  His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Coll, in a decision  promulgated  on  23  December  2016,
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 13  December  2016.   Permission
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 10 July 2017.  At  the
    hearing before me the Appellant did not attend and JKR Solicitors wrote
    to the Tribunal on 15 September 2017 stating that they were  no  longer
    representing him.   The Appellant emailed the Tribunal at 10:21  am  on
    the morning of the hearing before me indicating that he  is  unable  to
    pay his solicitor and therefore he would  not  be  represented  at  the
    hearing and that he is feeling "uncomfortable and unable  to  represent
    himself at the hearing".

2.   The grounds of appeal are twofold.  The first ground is that the  judge
    erred in refusing  to  adjourn  the  hearing  at  the  request  of  the
    Appellant which denied him a fair  hearing.   It  is  asserted  in  the
    grounds that he was suffering from  "severe  medical  issues".   It  is
    asserted that he had an appointment to see  a  physiotherapist  on  the
    same day as the hearing.

3.   The second ground challenges the substantive decision of the judge  and
    asserts that the judge did not take into account that  the  Appellant's
    grandfather, Mr Miah "is not only reliant for his day to day  life  but
    also significantly reliant on the Appellant for emotional supports  due
    to separation from his  family".   It  is  further  asserted  that  the
    judge's assessment of the evidence relating to Mr Miah is flawed.

4.   The judge considered the request for an adjournment. Before  the  judge
    there was a letter from JKR Solicitors of 30 November 2016 which  reads
    as follows:

          "We have instruction to inform the  Tribunal  that  Mr  Hasnat  is
         having a severe a medical issue that makes him unable to move well.
          Due to this, he was referred by his GP to attend  a  physiotherapy
         appointment at Barts Health NHS Trust.  He is awaiting to  see  the
         physiotherapist soon at Barts Health  NHS  Trust  and  whereas  his
         physical condition would be reviewed.  Please refer to the enclosed
         letter dated 24 November 2016 in this regard.

         Because of severity or his medical condition, our client is  having
         to see his GP constantly and the quickest available appointment  is
         found and  booked  with  Dr  Zare-Azirani  Mitra  on  Tuesday  13th
         December 2016 at Harford Health Centre, London.  Hence,  Mr  Hasnat
         finds it very difficult to attend the hearing that is scheduled  on
         13th December 2016 and he has instructed us accordingly to  request
         for an adjournment."

5.   There was a letter before  the  judge  from  Barts  Health  NHS  of  24
    November 2016 confirming that they had  received  a  referral  for  the
    Appellant to attend a physiotherapy appointment.  There was a  document
    which is an appointment confirmation indicating that the Appellant  had
    an appointment with his GP, Dr Mitra Zare-Azirani, on 13 December  2016
    at 10:30am. There was a copy of a prescription which indicates that  on
    12 November 2016 the Appellant was prescribed co-codamol.  The judge in
    respect of the documentation  and  the  application  made  findings  at
    paragraphs 9 and 10:

         "9.  I considered the request.  The Appellant's case  was  that  he
             had developed a physical problem such that he could not  move.
             He had attended his GP and been referred for physiotherapy  at
             Bart's Hospital.  He had only been able to  obtain  a  further
             appointment with his GP on the date of the  hearing  and  must
             attend that instead of the hearing.

         10.  Having considered the overriding objective in Rule 2 and  Rule
             28   of   the   Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, I decided not  to
             adjourn the hearing.  I have been  provided  with  no  medical
             evidence of the Appellant's condition and that he is unfit  to
             attend.  I would have expected to be given a  discharge  sheet
             from A & E or a GP letter or GP record.  I do not accept  that
             a letter from Bart's Hospital asking the Appellant to  make  a
             physiotherapy appointment and the fact of his appointment with
             his GP on 13 December 2016 are sufficient."

6.   Before the judge was a referral for physiotherapy,  evidence  that  the
    Appellant takes painkillers and that he had made  an  appointment  with
    his GP on the day of the hearing.  There was  no  evidence  before  the
    judge that this Appellant was unfit to attend the hearing or that there
    was any necessity to see his GP on the day of the hearing, rather  than
    on another occasion.

7.     The evidence was properly considered by the judge who was  manifestly
    entitled to conclude that, in the absence of medical evidence that  the
    Appellant was unfit to attend the hearing, the matter should proceed in
    his absence.  It is asserted that the Appellant has  a  severe  medical
    issue but there was simply no evidence of this before  the  judge.  The
    grounds  are  undermined  by  the  assertion  the  Appellant   had   an
    appointment for physiotherapy on the day of  his  hearing  whereas  the
    application before the judge was on the basis that he had been referred
    for physiotherapy and he had an appointment with his GP on the date  of
    the hearing.  In any event, the  grounds  do  not  establish  that  the
    Appellant had a serious health condition rendering him unfit to  attend
    the  hearing.  They  do  not  establish  that  has  been  a  procedural
    irregularity or  unfairness  caused  to  the  Appellant  following  the
    judge's decision to proceed in his absence. I have  further  considered
    the fairness issue in respect of ground 2. I have considered whether or
    not his attendance would have made any difference to the outcome.

8.   The second ground of appeal is  similarly  lacking  in  substance.  The
    judge made the following  findings  in  respect  of  the  grandfather's
    health;

          "27.    Turning to the grandfather I  find  that  he  has  type  2
             Diabetes for which he is prescribed Metformin (500 mg. one per
             day) and Pigolitazone (30 mg. one per day) (see GP  record  at
             RB H1).  The Appellant has not provided any  letters  from  or
             referrals to specialists.  Using my expertise as  a  judge  in
             the Social Entitlement Chamber, I find that he is on  standard
             medication to control his diabetes and he is cared for by  his
             GP.  As a result, I find that there is no evidence to  justify
             that the grandfather would need any help  from  the  Appellant
             with his mobility or care.

         28.  With regard to the grandfather's osteoarthritis, there are  no
             x-rays or MRI scans in the papers.  Furthermore, there are  no
             letters from or referrals to specialists such  as  orthopaedic
             surgeons or Pain Management.  Furthermore, the grandfather  is
             on first line (standard, low level)  painkillers  (paracetamol
             500 mg. one or two tablets four times a  day).   I  find  that
             there  is  therefore  no  medical  evidence  to  support   the
             grandfather's  osteoarthritis  is  severe  and  that  he   has
             mobility and care needs as a result.

         29.   The  grandfather  had  bilateral  cataract  extractions   and
             implants in 2008.  There are no letters  from  specialists  to
             suggest that these operations were not successful or that  the
             grandfather has visual impairments such  that  he  would  need
             assistance from the Appellant.

         30.  The grandfather has problems with constipation  for  which  he
             takes lactulose and docusate.  There is  no  medical  evidence
             (in the form of a GP letter, or a specialist letter or report)
             to indicate that the grandfather has problems with (faecal  or
             other) incontinence.  There is no medical evidence  concerning
             any urinary problems  as  claimed  by  the  Appellant  and  no
             reference to this in the GP records.  I therefore find that he
             does not need assistance from the Appellant with managing  his
             toilet needs.

         31.  The grandfather  has  obesity.   Again  there  is  no  medical
             evidence to establish that this would justify  any  assistance
             in mobilising or care from the Appellant.

         32.  The Appellant refers to hypertension.  There is  no  reference
             to any medication for this in the GP records  and  no  medical
             evidence concerning it.

         33.  I have considered all the medication listed in the GP  records
             above  save  for  Tadalafil,  which   had   been   on   repeat
             prescription since 30 December 2014.  I find that  information
             in the public  domain  shows  that  this  is  a  medicine  for
             erectile dysfunction.  I note that the date when this  started
             being on repeat prescription is after the date  on  which  the
             Appellant claims that the second wife left  the  grandfather's
             home.  I  find  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
             grandfather would not have sought a prescription at that  date
             for erectile dysfunction unless the second wife had still been
             living with him.  I therefore do not accept  that  the  second
             wife left home (abandoning the grandfather to the  Appellant's
             care).

         34.  I also note that I have  not  been  provided  with  any  other
             evidence supporting the grandfather's alleged needs.  There is
             for instance no care plan from Social Services, no evidence of
             his  being  in  receipt  of  Disability  Living  Allowance  or
             Personal Independence  Payment  and  no  Occupational  Therapy
             assessment.

         35.  In any event, I find that  the  grandfather  was  and  is  not
             totally or even partially dependent on the Appellant for  help
             and support (in respect of either mobilising or the activities
             of daily living).

         36.  Consequently, I find that the grandfather has  no  care  needs
             (in terms of daily living or mobility) and that the  Appellant
             is not his Primary carer or indeed his carer.

9.   The judge had before  him  the  medical  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's grandfather and the Appellant's witness statement.   Having
    considered the medical evidence, the judge made extensive findings.  He
    did not accept  the  Appellant's  grandfather's  medical  condition  as
    asserted  by  the  Appellant  and  there  is  no  properly  articulated
    challenge to this.  Significantly he did not accept that the  Appellant
    was his grandfather's carer. He concluded, on the basis of the  medical
    evidence, that the grandfather did not need a carer.  The  findings  of
    the judge are grounded in the evidence and adequately reasoned.

10.  Had the Appellant attended the hearing, the grounds do not explain  how
    he could have improved upon the medical evidence. They do not establish
    that his attendance would have had any impact on  the  outcome  of  the
    case.   The  Appellant's  appeal  could   not   succeed   without   him
    establishing that his grandfather's medical condition was such that  he
    needed a carer and the judge was entitled to conclude that the evidence
    before him did not establish this.

Notice of Decision

11.  There is no substance in the grounds of appeal.  The  decision  of  the
    judge was one that was open to him on the evidence and  is  lawful  and
    sustainable.   The  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                        Date 21 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

