
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01658/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2018                         |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                            EMIL JANUSZ KORNECKI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Did not appear and was not legally represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of Poland. It is his case that he  entered
    the United Kingdom in 2015 and then resided and worked here. He asserts
    that in 2017 his sister and her husband accused him  of  committing  an
    offence in Belgium.

2.   It is said that in October 2017 he was extradited to Poland because  he
    had committed offences of the possession, production and trafficking of
    drugs. He then went to Belgium where he  was  detained  on  27  October
    2017. It would appear that he was  accused  of  theft  and  an  offence
    relating to the misuse of drugs.

3.   It would also appear from another document that, on 15  December  2017,
    the First Instance Court Chamber for Limburg, a division  of  Tongeren,
    did not extend his pre-trial detention.

4.   The Respondent sought admission to the United Kingdom under  regulation
    11 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  ("the
    2016 Regulations") but he was  refused  admission  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy on 7 January 2018. The Respondent appealed on 3  February
    2018 and requested a hearing on the papers.  His appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer and allowed in a decision  promulgated
    on 22 August  2018.    The  Respondent  then  appealed  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan granted him permission to appeal.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   In reply to question from myself, the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    stated that the Respondent had no record of  the  Respondent  making  a
    further attempt to gain entry to the United Kingdom. In  addition,  the
    Upper Tribunal had not received any response from the Respondent to the
    grant of permission for the Appellant to appeal against the decision on
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer.

6.   I noted that notice of today's hearing was sent to  the  Respondent  on
    16 November 2018 at the address given for him in Poland.  Therefore,  I
    am satisfied, for the purposes of rule 38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, that reasonable steps were taken to inform
    the Respondent of today's hearing and that he could have  made  written
    submissions, even if he was not able to gain admission  to  the  United
    Kingdom. Therefore, I found that it was in the interests of justice  to
    proceed to hear the Appellant's appeal.

7.   The Home Office Presenting Officer had not been able to obtain  a  full
    copy of the initial Respondent's Bundle but confirmed that the existing
    documents, the Tribunal decisions and an explanatory statement were now
    on the MOVEit portal, which was accessible to HMCTS and the Tribunal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

8.   Regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 states that:

     "(1) An EEA national must be admitted to the United Kingdom on  arrival
    if the EEA national produces a valid national identity card or passport
    issued by an EEA State".

9.   However, Regulation 23 of the 2016 Regulations also states that:

     "(1) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the United  Kingdom  by
    virtue of regulation 11 if a refusal to admit that person is  justified
    on the grounds of public policy, public security or  public  health  in
    accordance with regulation 27".

10.  Regulation 27 states that:

     "(5) The public policy and public security requirements of  the  United
    Kingdom  include  restricting  rights  otherwise  conferred  by   these
    Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of  society,
    and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or
    public security it must also be taken in accordance with the  following
    principles-
     (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
     (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
    the person concerned;
    (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  must  represent  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct
         of the person and that the threat need not be imminent;
    (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case of which  relate
         to consideration of general prevention do not justify the decision;
    (e)  a person's criminal convictions do not of themselves  justify  the
         decision;
    (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even  in  the
         absence of a previous criminal conviction, provides the grounds are
         specific to the person".

11.  When considering the legality of the Appellant's  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mailer  failed  to  take  into  account  the  principles
    contained in regulation 27. In paragraph 12 of his decision,  he  noted
    that the Respondent had been ordered to leave Belgium  on  the  grounds
    that his conduct posed real,  factual  and  sufficient  threat  to  the
    fundamental interests of society.  But he failed  to  consider  whether
    this indicated that  he  posed  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of  society  in  the
    United Kingdom.

12.  I have also taken into account  the  fact  that  the  original  of  the
    "Order to leave the territory of a state" was not before  the  Tribunal
    and that there was no date on the order. There was also no  explanation
    of why the original had been in Dutch when this is not one of  the  two
    usual languages spoken in Belgium.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  also  needed  to  consider  whether  the
    decision reached by the Appellant had been  based  exclusively  on  the
    Respondent's personal conduct.  However,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    ability to take this factor into account or to  reach  a  proportionate
    decision depended on a finding about the Respondent's criminality.  The
    other document relied upon by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  merely
    stated that the Respondent was not remanded into custody in furtherance
    of the pre-trial detention which had  commenced  on  27  October  2017.
    There is nothing to suggest that the charges brought  against  him  had
    been withdrawn or that he was no longer required to attend a  trial  in
    the future.

14.  As stated by the Appellant in the grounds of appeal, the  fact  that  a
    person is not remanded in custody in relation to charges levied against
    them does not automatically lead to the  conclusion  that  all  charges
    have been dropped.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also failed  to  take  into  account  the
    fact that it would have been lawful to refuse the Respondent  admission
    on preventative grounds. This was particularly important in  the  light
    of paragraph 7 of Schedule 1 to  the  2016  Regulations,  which  states
    that:

     "For the purposes of these Regulations, the  fundamental  interests  of
    society in the United Kingdom include-
    (f)  excluding an EEA  national  with  a  conviction...and  maintaining
         public confidence in the ability of  the  relevant  authorities  to
         take such action.
    (g)  tackling offences  likely  to  cause  harm  to  society  where  an
         immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify  but  where
         there is wider societal harm  (such  as  offences  related  to  the
         misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border dimension)".

16.  In these circumstances, the interests of  justice  suggested  that  the
    hearing should have been adjourned in order for a  full  bundle  to  be
    available from the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and  for
    the Respondent to file further evidence, which confirmed the status  of
    the criminal proceedings initiated in Belgium and his removal from that
    country. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer should also  have  considered
    whether this was an appeal that was best resolved at an oral hearing.

17.  For these reasons the decision reached  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mailer contained errors of law and must be set aside.

Decision

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  de
    novo before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mailer or First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan.




Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 10 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


