
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01252/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 December 2019                  |On 13 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            Muhammad Naveed Tariq
                       [Anonymity direction not made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     No attendance and no representation
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Herwald  promulgated  5.8.19,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 25.2.19 to refuse
    his  application  made  on  8.1.19  for  an  EEA  Residence   Card   as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the UK as the family member of  an
    EEA National exercising Treaty rights in the UK, namely Ms E Molnar,  a
    Hungarian national.

 2. The application had been refused by  the  respondent  because  previous
    applications had been refused  the  marriage  on  the  basis  that  the
    marriage with Ms Molnar was one of convenience and no further  evidence
    had been adduced. Each refused application had  been  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the appeals dismissed, in  2016  (Judge  Malik)
    and 2018 (Judge Alis), all on the same basis, that the marriage was one
    of convenience.  Likewise, Judge Herwald  dismissed  the  appeal,  also
    concluding that it was one of convenience.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    28.10.19.

 4. There was no attendance by or on behalf of the appellant at  the  Upper
    Tribunal appeal hearing before me on 20.12.19.  I  was  satisfied  that
    notice of the hearing had been  sent  to  the  appellant  at  the  only
    address held on file for him by first-class post on 15.11.19. There has
    been no subsequent correspondence and no explanation for  his  absence.
    Noting that the appellant also failed to attend the First-tier Tribunal
    appeal hearing, I was satisfied that it would be in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed with the appeal hearing in  his  absence,  and  that
    this would be consistent with the overriding objective of the  Tribunal
    to deal with cases fairly and justly.

Error of Law

 5. I heard the submissions of Mr Bates  and  then  reserved  my  decision,
    which I now give.

 6. For the reasons set out below, I found no material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The handwritten grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred
    in refusing to grant an adjournment and that the decision was based  on
    the previous decision of the tribunal, most of which  had  been  copied
    and pasted into Judge Herwald's decision.

 8. Further typed grounds are attached  to  the  Notice  of  Appeal.  These
    accept that as this was a subsequent appeal the matter  should  not  be
    relitigated unless there  was  new  evidence  that  could  lead  to  an
    alternative conclusion. It is submitted that there was new evidence  in
    the form of the witness Mr Amir, which had been accepted. However,  the
    grounds confuse the impugned decision with that of the previous  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, Judge Alis in 2018. It  was  Judge  Alis  and  not
    Judge Herwald who heard evidence from Mr Amir, said to be a new witness
    in comparison to the first appeal heard by Judge Malik. No witness gave
    evidence before Judge Alis. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not  an
    opportunity to challenge the decision of Judge Alis, which, pursuant to
    Devalseelan must be considered as determinative of  the  facts  on  the
    evidence before that tribunal and was  the  starting  point  for  Judge
    Herwald's consideration of the latest appeal. What has to be considered
    is whether Judge Herwald made an error of law  in  the  making  of  his
    decision.

 9. The typed grounds also  suggest  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  when
    attaching no weight to the findings made by him, including in  relation
    to Mr Amir and the sponsoring wife, together with photographs  produced
    in evidence. However, once again these grounds confuse the decision  of
    Judge Herwald with that of Judge Alis. The same point must be  made  in
    relation to the remaining typed grounds.  It  may  be  that  the  typed
    grounds were drafted in relation to the decision  of  Judge  Alis  from
    2018 and these have been redeployed unaltered in the appellant's appeal
    against the decision of Judge Herwald.

The Absence of the Appellant/Sponsor and the Adjournment Decision

10. At the outset of the  appeal  before  Judge  Herwald,  the  appellant's
    representative, Mr Khan, explained that the  sponsor  was  not  feeling
    well, and he might have to apply for an adjournment.  The  sponsor  may
    have been at the Tribunal, but it was agreed that she should  attend  a
    NHS Walk-in Centre and the appeal hearing was stood down to  await  her
    return. At noon, the Tribunal was informed that the sponsor  was  still
    at the Walk-in Centre. This was still the position at 13:40 and Mr Khan
    confirmed that she still did not feel well and, therefore,  he  applied
    for an adjournment. This was opposed by the Home Office representative,
    who suggested that, given the previous findings of  the  Tribunal  that
    the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience,  and  reliance  was  made  on
    Devaseelan, the matter could be decided on submissions.

11. Before ruling on the adjournment application, Judge Herwald noted  that
    that there had been a  previous  adjournment  at  the  request  of  the
    appellant, again because the sponsor was  said  not  to  be  available.
    Judge Herwald referred Mr Malik to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031, which  held
    that the relationship giving rise to any rights under EU  law  and  the
    Regulations "is the marriage, formerly valid, and  entered  into  at  a
    specific time and place. It is the ceremony and the act which,  in  the
    circumstances that give rise to it, amount to or do  not  amount  to  a
    'marriage of convenience'." The Tribunal rejected the concept that  the
    development of a real relationship after the marriage was entered  into
    could convert what was a marriage of convenience into one that was not.
    The judge also referred to VK (Kenya) [2004] UKAIT 00305, in which  the
    Upper Tribunal held that the correct test to  identify  a  marriage  of
    convenience was not cohabitation or even intention to cohabit. The test
    was whether, in all the  circumstances,  the  marriage  had  substance.
    Marriage of convenience is a phrase which describes the  state  of  the
    marriage at its inception. A marriage which  began  as  a  marriage  of
    substance could not, save in highly unusual  circumstances,  degenerate
    into a marriage of convenience. Further, the correct date for assessing
    the marriage was the date of the Secretary of State's decision. In Rose
    [2016] EWCA Civ, also cited by Judge Herwald,  it  was  held  that  the
    focus in relation to a marriage of  convenience  ought  to  be  on  the
    intention of the parties at the time the  marriage  was  entered  into,
    whereas the question of whether a marriage  was  subsisting  looked  at
    whether the marital relationship was a continuing one.

12. It was in the light of those authorities that Judge Herwald  considered
    at [9] of the decision that, whilst it would  normally  be  unusual  to
    refuse an adjournment request made because the appellant or  a  witness
    has fallen ill, the issue in the appeal was narrow and  could  only  be
    whether the marriage was at its  inception  one  of  convenience.  That
    issue had twice been determined against the appellant, in  relation  to
    which the previous Tribunal findings formed the starting point for  any
    further consideration of that same issue. It  is  not  clear  that  the
    appellant appreciated that fact. It follows that any  further  evidence
    on behalf of the appellant that bore on the continuing  subsistence  of
    the alleged relationship could only  be  of  limited  relevance  as  to
    whether or not the marriage when entered into was one  of  convenience.
    It is clear that the evidence relied on by the respondent  set  out  in
    the refusal decision and including the previous marriage interview from
    2014, was sufficient to raise a suspicion that the marriage was one  of
    convenience,  so  that  the  evidential  burden  transferred   to   the
    appellant. In  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to  the  contrary,  the
    respondent would succeed in discharging the legal burden of proof. As I
    observed above, the refusal  decision  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    adduced no further evidence when making this third application  for  an
    EEA Residence Card.

Assessment of the Impugned Decision in the Light of the Grounds

13. As Mr Bates pointed out in his submissions, Judge  Herwald  was  tasked
    with deciding the appeal  in  the  light  of  two  previous  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal decisions, in respect of both of which,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal  had  been  refused.  Each  of  those  two
    decisions found as a fact that at the point the  marriage  was  entered
    into it was a marriage of convenience. That was the starting point  for
    Judge Herwald. On the authorities cited by the judge, summarised above,
    no matter whether  the  relationship  was  now  genuine  or  durable  a
    marriage of convenience can never  become  a  marriage  qualifying  the
    appellant to an EEA Residence Card. Mr Bates also observed that  at  no
    time has the appellant ever applied for a Residence Card on  the  basis
    of a durable relationship and  that  issue  was  never  raised  by  his
    representative at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing.

14. Judge Herwald noted at [16] of the decision that he had new  statements
    from the appellant and  his  wife  (although  both  were  unsigned  and
    undated). The Judge noted that the focus of the appellant's  assertions
    was the denial that his marriage was  a  'sham  marriage'.  Whilst  the
    statements raise a few criticisms about the marriage interview, neither
    he nor his  wife  addressed  the  findings  in  the  previous  Tribunal
    decisions that the marriage was from its inception one of  convenience.
    I note that both statements are rather short in both length in  detail,
    mainly comprising assertions and I agree that they do not  address  the
    crucial issue. At [20] of the decision Judge Herwald also took  account
    of the up to date documentation in the appellant's  bundle,  which  had
    not been before Judge Malik or Judge Alis, which  supported  the  claim
    that the couple live  together,  together  with  two  brief  supporting
    statements of witnesses who were not called to give evidence, Mr  Tariq
    and Mr Amir. Little of this documentary evidence addressed the  crucial
    issue of the appeal, whether or not the marriage when entered into  was
    one of convenience.

15. After reciting a large part of Judge Alis' decision, including all  the
    findings, Judge Herwald concluded that on  the  available  and  limited
    evidence the appeal must be dismissed.

16. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Simpson considered it  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  proceeding  to  determine  the
    appeal in the absence of both the appellant and the  sponsor,  refusing
    the representative's application for an adjournment on the  basis  that
    the sponsor had been taken ill and had attended a NHS walk-in centre on
    the morning of the appeal hearing. Judge Simpson considered it arguable
    that the appellant had been unjustly deprived of the opportunity of the
    case being freshly heard and determined  beyond  the  strictures  of  a
    decision relying in most part in its reasoning on the previous  judges'
    reasoning," and that, "the decision disclosed overall an inadequacy  of
    reasoning."

17. In relation to the adequacy of reasoning,  Judge  Herwald  adopted  the
    findings and reasoning of Judge Alis, which he was obliged to  take  as
    his  starting  point.  Given  the  limited  nature  and  focus  of  the
    documentary evidence that was before Judge Herwald, it follows that the
    dismissal of the appeal was inevitable. I am satisfied that  there  was
    no cogent evidence before the Tribunal that on any  view  could  either
    displace those findings or  discharge  the  evidential  burden  on  the
    appellant. In any event, the grant of permission failed to comply  with
    the guidance of the Upper Tribunal in Durueke (PTA: AZ applied,  proper
    approach) [2019] UKUT 00197 (IAC),  promulgated  before  the  grant  of
    permission. In that decision, the Upper Tribunal held that  "particular
    care should be taken before granting permission on the ground that  the
    judge who  decided  the  appeal  did  not  "sufficiently  consider"  or
    "sufficiently analyse" certain evidence or certain aspects of a case...
    Permission should usually only be granted on  such  grounds  if  it  is
    possible to state precisely how the assessment of the judge who decided
    the appeal is arguably lacking and why this is arguably  material."  It
    follows that not only is there no arguable merit  in  this  ground  but
    that permission should not have been granted on this basis.

18. However, I turn to the consideration  as  to  whether  the  documentary
    evidence together with the absent oral evidence could have persuaded  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that the marriage when entered into  was  not
    one of convenience. That in turn requires consideration as  to  whether
    the decision to proceed in the absence of the appellant and the sponsor
    amounted to procedural unfairness so that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside to be remade.

19. I note that on 4.6.19, when the substantive appeal hearing  was  listed
    for 13.6.19, the appellant's representatives requested an  adjournment.
    The  supporting  evidence  supplied  with  the   request   included   a
    handwritten letter alleged to be from the sponsor stating that she  was
    returning to Hungary because her mother had fallen ill and was awaiting
    kidney surgery on 12.6.19. It was said that there was no  one  to  look
    after her following the surgery  so  the  sponsor  urgently  needed  to
    return  to  Hungary  "for  a  couple  of  weeks."   There  was  also  a
    handwritten note from the appellant supporting the adjournment  request
    and attaching the sponsor's flight booking from Liverpool  to  Budapest
    on 11.6.19, with a return on 20.6.19. His request was for  a  two  week
    adjournment.  This  was  granted  and  the  appeal  relisted  for   the
    substantive hearing on 23.7.19, notice of which was  sent  out  to  all
    parties on 20.6.19.

20. As set out above, it was asserted at the hearing on  23.7.19  that  the
    sponsor was unwell. The Record of Proceedings records  that  the  judge
    was told she felt sick and  had  a  headache,  was  not  able  to  give
    evidence, and wanted to see a doctor. The judge put the matter back  to
    enable her to seek medical treatment. By early afternoon,  the  sponsor
    had not returned from the Walk-in  Centre  and  was,  allegedly,  still
    feeling unwell. The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  objected  to  the
    adjournment request, observing that there was no evidence that she  was
    unable to attend and although the appellant could attend, he had chosen
    not to return to the Tribunal. No  information  appears  to  have  been
    provided as to what in particular was wrong  with  the  sponsor.  Other
    than as set out above, there is no reference to any condition, symptom,
    diagnosis, treatment, or medication. It was not clear why  the  sponsor
    was, allegedly, still at the Walk-in Centre if she went  there  shortly
    after 10am. Nor was it clear why the appellant had not returned to  the
    Tribunal.

21. I have the  Tribunal's  case  file  before  me  and  observe  that  the
    appellant has adduced no further evidence to support the claim that the
    sponsor was unwell and thereby unable  to  attend  the  appeal  hearing
    before  Judge  Herwald.  Nor  has  there   ever   been   provided   any
    justification for the appellant's absence. Having considered the matter
    carefully, I am satisfied that it would have been  reasonably  open  to
    the appellant to obtain and adduce evidence to confirm that the sponsor
    was actually so unwell that she  was  unable  to  attend  the  hearing.
    Neither is there, even now, any explanation as  to  why  the  appellant
    himself, who was not ill, was unable to attend the appeal hearing  even
    if the sponsor was not. It does  not  appear  that  any  other  witness
    referred to in the grounds attended in support of the appeal; certainly
    Mr Malik did not call any such witness. At [9] of the  decision,  Judge
    Herwald noted that "there was no suggestion by Mr Khan that  he  would,
    in the event of proceeding, wish to call  the  appellant,  but  he  has
    taken  the  matter  proceeded  by   way   of   submissions."   In   the
    circumstances, I am not satisfied that absence of the appellant and the
    sponsor  was  justified  or  reasonable.  Consequently,  I  cannot   be
    satisfied that the decision to proceed with the appeal in  the  absence
    of the appellant and the sponsor caused any procedural  unfairness,  as
    alleged in the grounds.

22. I am satisfied that given  the  paucity  and  poverty  of  the  further
    evidence adduced by and on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the  appeal
    hearing, and given its  limited  relevance  to  the  central  issue  of
    marriage of convenience, the inevitable outcome was a dismissal of  the
    appeal. I cannot be satisfied on the basis of the arguments  raised  in
    the grounds that even had either or  both  of  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor given oral evidence before Judge Herwald that the outcome could
    or would have been any different.

23. In the circumstances,  and  given  the  appellant's  absence  from  the
    hearing before me, I find no material error  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal sufficient to set it aside. I am satisfied that the
    decision to proceed without the appellant and the sponsor was one which
    was justified and which, in all the  circumstances,  gave  rise  to  no
    procedural unfairness. I cannot see that the  so-called  new  evidence,
    being little more than assertions by the appellant and the sponsor that
    their relationship is genuine, could have been on any basis  sufficient
    to discharge the evidential burden to show that the  marriage  was  not
    one of convenience. In the circumstances, and in particular in light of
    the findings of the two previously First-tier Tribunal  decisions,  the
    inevitable outcome of the appeal was a dismissal, on the basis that the
    marriage was one of convenience.

Decision

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.

     Signed






         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 20 December 2019




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated: 20 December 2019
