
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01230/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 22nd February 2019               |On: 21st March 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                  EDGAR [A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms D.  Dhaliwal, Counsel instructed by direct access
For the Respondent:    Mrs H. Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION and REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria  born  on  the  15th  November
       1798. He appeals with  permission  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  (Judge  Young-Harry)  to  dismiss  his  appeal  under   the
       Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006[1].

    2. It was the Appellant's case before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  he
       qualified for a resident's permit pursuant to Regulation 15:

           15. - (1)   The following persons shall  acquire  the  right  to
                reside in the United Kingdom permanently-

                    (a)      an EEA national who has resided in  the  United
                    Kingdom in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
                    continuous period of five years;

                    (b)      a family member of an EEA national who  is  not
                    himself an EEA national  but  who  has  resided  in  the
                    United Kingdom with the EEA national in accordance  with
                    these Regulations for a continuous period of five years;

                    (c)      a worker or self-employed person who has ceased
                    activity;

                    (d)      the family member of a worker or  self-employed
                    person who has ceased activity;

                    (e)      a person who was the family member of a  worker
                    or self-employed person where-

                        (i) the worker or self-employed person has died;

                        (ii)       the  family  member  resided  with   him
                        immediately before his death; and

                        (iii)     the worker or  self-employed  person  had
                        resided continuously in the United Kingdom  for  at
                        least the two years immediately before his death or
                        the death was the result of an accident at work  or
                        an occupational disease;

                    (f)      a person who-

                        (i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance
                        with these Regulations for a continuous  period  of
                        five years; and

                        (ii)      was, at the end of that period, a  family
                        member who has retained the right of residence.

                (2)    Once acquired, the right of permanent residence under
                this regulation shall be lost only through absence from  the
                United Kingdom for a period exceeding two consecutive years.



                (3)     But  this  regulation  is  subject   to   regulation
                19(3)(b).

    3. Before the Tribunal the Appellant provided the  following  chronology
       in respect of his wife VA:

|31st December 2007 |The couple entered the United Kingdom from EIRE   |
|                   |and VA commenced looking for employment           |
|14th January 2008  |VA is employed by Kelly Services, this being      |
|                   |accepted by the Respondent at the time who had    |
|                   |issued VA a Registration Certificate[2] as a      |
|                   |result                                            |
|1st August 2008    |VA starts work for Birmingham City Council        |
|12th September 2009|The Appellant and VA are married                  |
|27th September 2011|Couple's son born                                 |
|March 2012         |VA ceases working for Birmingham City Council     |
|April 2012         |VA engaged in working for the Appellant's business|
|                   |(book-keeping and office management)              |
|17th January 2013  |VA claims jobseekers allowance                    |
|22nd July 2015     |Couple's daughter born                            |
|June 2017          |The relationship came to an end                   |
|12th July 2017     |The divorce petition was filed                    |
|10th December 2017 |The decree absolute was granted                   |


    4. The determination begins by identifying the matter in  issue  between
       the parties.  The  Respondent  had  refused  to  recognise  that  the
       Appellant had any retained right of residence on the grounds that  it
       had not been shown that VA was employed between 2013  and  2014.   If
       she was not then a qualifying person, the Appellant  could  not  meet
       the requirement of Regulation 15 (1)(b) that his EEA spouse had  been
       residing  "in  accordance  with  the  Regulations".   The  First-tier
       Tribunal accepted this analysis, finding as fact that  the  Appellant
       had failed to demonstrate  that  his  wife  had  been  in  continuous
       employment for a five-year period. If the five-year  period  was,  as
       identified at the hearing, from 2008 to 2013, it could not  be  shown
       that she had been  in  employment  after  she  left  Birmingham  City
       Council  in  March  2012.   The  Tribunal   further   found   several
       inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence and as a result  rejected
       his evidence that during 2012-13 his wife had  been  working  in  the
       family business as a book-keeper/ accountant.  The appeal was thereby
       dismissed.

    5. Permission was granted in limited terms by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Dineen on the 5th April 2018. Judge  Dineen  considered  it  arguable
       that the inconsistencies identified by Judge Young-Harry  were  based
       on a misunderstanding of the evidence. Upon renewed application Upper
       Tribunal Judge Kekic granted permission to appeal in respect  of  the
       remaining grounds on the 16th August 2018: she considered it arguable
       that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  failing  to  precisely
       identify the start and end point of the five-year period.  Permission
       was also granted on a legal interpretation  point  arising  from  the
       operation of transitional provisions, to which I return below.

    6. The grounds contend that the Appellant could rely on two  alternative
       periods of 'five years continual residence' to make  good  his  claim
       under the Regulations.

    7. The first was the 14th January 2008 to the  14th  January  2013.  The
       grounds complain that the  determination  failed  to  identify  those
       specific dates, and so its assessment of the facts  must  be  flawed.
       Before me Ms Dhaliwal conceded that this period could not in fact  be
       relied upon, since the Appellant and his wife were not married  until
       the 12th September 2009. There was no evidence before the Tribunal to
       indicate that prior to that date he  had  been  granted  a  residence
       permit as an "extended family member". The Secretary of State had not
       therefore exercised his discretion to treat him as a 'family  member'
       during that period and so it could not be counted  towards  the  five
       years required by Regulation 15(1)(b): Macastena v Secretary of State
       for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1558.  Ground 1 was therefore
       abandoned on that basis.

    8. The alternative five-year period ran from the date  of  marriage,  on
       the 12th September 2009, to the 12th September 2014.  The evidence in
       respect of this period demonstrated that VA  was  employed  from  the
       outset by Birmingham City Council. She left that job in  March  2012.
       In January 2013 she started  claiming  Job  Seekers  Allowance;  this
       ended in July 2013.  It will be observed that this  five-year  period
       contains two significant gaps: from March 2012 to January  2013,  and
       from July 2013 to September 2014.

    9. Ms Dhaliwal had, before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  made  a  specific
       submission about the relevance of those gaps, which the determination
       neither acknowledges or resolves. Before me she  accepted  that  this
       omission would only amount to an error of law if her  submission  was
       correct.

   10. The provision relied upon by Ms Dhaliwal is to be found in Schedule 3
       to the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  (Amendment)  (No  2)
       Regulations 2013/3032. It is important, she submits, because it  goes
       some way to meeting the Respondent's concern that VA  was  unemployed
       for more than 6 months during  the  qualifying  period.  Ms  Dhaliwal
       submits that the effect of  the  provision  is  that  any  period  of
       unemployment  prior  to  the  commencement  date  identified  in  the
       Amendment Regulations - the 7th April 2014 - is to be disregarded for
       the purpose of calculating whether her five years continual residence
       was "in accordance with the Regulations".  Paragraph 1 of Schedule  3
       reads:

           '1.   For the purposes of paragraph 3(b) to (e) of Schedule 1-

                (a)    any period of employment in the United Kingdom before
                the coming into force of these Regulations is to be  treated
                as a period of employment under regulation  6  of  the  2006
                Regulations as amended by these Regulations; and

                (b)    any period-

                    (i)      of duly recorded involuntary unemployment; or

                    (ii)     during which a person was a jobseeker  for  the
                    purposes of regulation 6(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations,

                    before the coming into force of these Regulations is  to
                    be disregarded. '

   11. Paragraph 3 of schedule 1 reads:

           '3.   In regulation 6-

                (a)    in paragraph (2), for "regulation 7A(4)" substitute "
                regulations 7A(4) and 7B(4)";

                (b)    for paragraph (2)(b), substitute-

                    "(b)     he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment
                    after having been employed in the United Kingdom for  at
                    least one year, provided that he-

                     i) has registered as a  jobseeker  with  the  relevant
                        employment office; and

                        (ii)      satisfies conditions A and B;";

                (c)    after paragraph (2)(b), insert-

                    "(ba)    he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment
                    after having been employed in  the  United  Kingdom  for
                    less than one year, provided that he-

                      i) has registered as a jobseeker  with  the  relevant
                         employment office; and

                         (ii)     satisfies conditions A and B;";

                (d)    after paragraph (2), insert-

                    "(2A)    A person to whom paragraph (2)(ba) applies  may
                    only retain worker status for a maximum of six months.";



                (e)    for paragraph (4), substitute-

                    "(4)      For  the  purpose  of  paragraph   (1)(a),   a
                    "jobseeker" is a person who satisfies conditions  A  and
                    B.

                    (5)      Condition A is that the person-

                        (a) entered the United Kingdom  in  order  to  seek
                        employment; or

                        (b)  is  present  in  the  United  Kingdom  seeking
                        employment, immediately after enjoying a  right  to
                        reside  pursuant  to  paragraph   (1)(b)   to   (e)
                        (disregarding any period during which worker status
                        was retained pursuant to paragraph (2)(b) or (ba)).

                    (6)      Condition B is  that  the  person  can  provide
                    evidence that he is seeking employment and has a genuine
                    chance of being engaged.

                    (7)      A person may not retain the status of a  worker
                    pursuant to paragraph (2)(b), or jobseeker  pursuant  to
                    paragraph (1)(a), for longer than six months  unless  he
                    can provide compelling evidence that he is continuing to
                    seek employment  and  has  a  genuine  chance  of  being
                    engaged.".'

   12. I am unable to accept that these provisions offer any  assistance  to
       the Appellant in establishing that his wife was  a  qualified  person
       throughout the relevant period. That is because there was no evidence
       produced to demonstrate that in either of the gaps identified  (March
       2012-January 2013 and July 2013  to  September  2014)  VA  was  "duly
       recorded"  as  having  been  involuntarily  unemployed.   There   was
       therefore no material error in the Tribunal failing to  address  this
       submission.

   13. That leaves the argument about whether VA was a qualified  person  by
       virtue of the work she did in the family business. The  determination
       records at paragraph 12:

           "The appellant on one hand argues in his witness statement  that
           although  the  sponsor  was  unemployed  after  March  2012  and
           claiming job seeker's allowance, she did not lose her status  as
           a worker, thus she  remained  a  qualified  person.  However  in
           contrast, during the hearing the appellant claimed that his wife
           began working for him  as  his  bookkeeper  in  a  self-employed
           capacity in March 2012"

   14. Ms Dhaliwal submits that there was  in  fact  no  "contrast"  in  the
       evidence. The Appellant's witness statement[3] explains that he is  a
       qualified gas safety engineer and  that  he  has  his  own  business,
       called 'Evgas Services', established as a limited  company  in  2010.
       He writes "My wife plays  an  important  role  in  the  business  and
       permits me to concentrate exclusively on  my  building  projects....I
       have worked throughout  our  marriage  and  my  bank  statements  and
       returns confirm that my business is developing with the  help  of  my
       wife undertaking the administrative side".   I accept that VA's  work
       in the family business  is  in  fact  mentioned  in  the  Appellant's
       witness  statement,  and  as  Judge  Dineen  identified  in  granting
       permission on this point, the Tribunal's adverse conclusions  to  the
       contrary do not appear to be justified.    I  would  also  note  that
       regardless  of  whether  and  where   the   evidence   appeared   the
       contradictions identified in the passage cited  are  not  necessarily
       contradictions at all: it would be perfectly possible for VA to  have
       been doing bookkeeping work for the family  business  whilst  at  the
       same time looking for other employment.

   15. Mrs Aboni submits that the error is immaterial. She points  out  that
       VA was never formally paid for her work, and did  not  therefore  pay
       National Insurance contributions or tax. Her submissions reflect  the
       Secretary  of  State  published  policy   'European   Economic   Area
       nationals: qualified persons', the material part of which reads:

           "While there is no minimum amount of hours which an EEA national
           must be employed for in  order  to  qualify  as  a  worker,  the
           employment must be genuine and effective  and  not  marginal  or
           supplementary. Effective work may have no  formal  contract  but
           should have:

           .     something that is recognisably a labour contract

           .     an employer

           .     agreement between employer and employee  that  the  worker
           will perform certain tasks

           .     confirmation the employer will pay or offer services (such
           as free accommodation) or goods for the tasks performed Marginal
           means the work involves so little time  and  money  that  it  is
           unrelated to the lifestyle of the worker.  It  is  supplementary
           because the worker is clearly spending most  of  their  time  on
           something else, not work".

   16. Mrs Aboni submits that since there was no discernible labour contract
       the work undertaken by VA in the running of the family  business  was
       not capable of qualifying her as  living  "in  accordance  with"  the
       Regulations.

   17. In Steymann v Staatssecretetaris van Justitie  (Case  196/87)  [1988]
       ECR 6159 the Court  of  Justice  considered  the  case  of  a  German
       national who moved to Holland to live in a commune  as  part  of  the
       'Bhagwan Rajneeshi' cult.   He  was  a  trained  plumber  and  whilst
       living in the commune he undertook plumbing and maintenance  work  in
       the buildings used by the members. He was not formally employed,  had
       no contract for labour, and  received  no  direct  remuneration,  but
       argued that he received 'payment in kind' for his  labour,  including
       shelter, food and 'pocket money'.  The Court directed itself  to  the
       test in Levin v Staatssecretaris van Justitie (Case 53/81) (1982) ECR
       1035 that the work performed must be "genuine and effective", that is
       not to be regarded as marginal or incidental, and held that Article 2
       of the EEA Treaty must be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  activities
       performed  as  part  of  a  community,  as  part  of  the  commercial
       activities of that community, will constitute 'economic activity'  as
       long as  the  individual  concerned  receives  services  or  benefits
       amounting to an "indirect quid pro quo" for his genuine and effective
       work.

   18. The evidence here is that in the periods where she was  not  formally
       employed VA was helping the  Appellant  run  the  business  that  was
       generating the entire family income. She was, from April 2012, acting
       as the Evgas Services book-keeper. The Appellant states:

           "We were financially self-sufficient during this period. My  tax
           returns for the period of 1.1.2011 to 30.11.2012 show that I had
           an annual turnover of �57, 245. The  only  way  I  was  able  to
           generate this level of income was to have my wife  as  my  book-
           keeper. She dealt with all the financial side including  issuing
           invoices"

       Although she did not have a contract, and was not directly paid, this
       was the only money coming into the household. She directly benefitted
       from it, and  as  the  Appellant's  statement  illustrates,  she  was
       directly contributing towards its generation.  I  am  satisfied  that
       this kind of day-to day involvement in the family business could  not
       be characterised as  marginal  or  incidental.  It  was  genuine  and
       effective economic activity. Like the applicant in Steymann,  VA  was
       receiving quid pro quo benefits in kind for her contribution, in  the
       form of housing, food etc.

   19. I am therefore  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
       misrepresenting the evidence in respect of the work undertaken by the
       Appellant's wife. There was no contradiction in his  evidence,  which
       remained consistent between his detailed witness statements  and  his
       oral evidence. I am further satisfied that as a matter  of  law,  the
       activity undertaken by VA was genuine and effective economic activity
       such that she was living in accordance with the Regulations.

   20. It follows that the appeal  must  be  allowed.  VA  arrived  in  this
       country in December 2007 and in the five years that followed, she was
       continually economically active, first as a temp with Kelly Services,
       then as a salaried employee of Birmingham  City  Council,  then  from
       April 2012 on as the book-keeper and office manager  for  the  family
       business.   She acquired a permanent right to reside at  the  end  of
       that five year period in December 2017 and from  that  point  on  was
       residing 'in accordance with the Regulations' regardless  of  whether
       she was economically active or not.  It follows from  this  that  the
       Appellant, as her family member, had also acquired such  a  permanent
       right of residence in accordance with Regulation 15 (1)(b).

       Decision

   21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   22. The appeal is allowed with reference  to  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

   23. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             18th March 2019
                                                     -----------------------
[1] The application was lodged on the 10th April 2015 and it is not
therefore in dispute that these were the applicable Regulations
[2] Accession State Worker Registration Scheme Registration Certificate
issued on the 3rd March 2008
[3] Signed on the 25th February 2017, hence the present tense.

