
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01936/2019 (V)
                                        EA/01938/2019 (V), EA/01940/2019 (V)
                                        EA/01941/2019 (V), EA/01944/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2021                   |On 1 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     U R
                             G R, R R, S R, A R
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                             ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, instructed by JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan.  They  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill promulgated on 11  March
    2020 dismissing their appeals against the refusal of a family permit to
    enter the UK under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

2.   The Appellants are a mother and her dependent children. I  shall  refer
    to the First Appellant as the Appellant in this appeal because she must
    establish dependency on the Sponsor in order for the minor  Appellants'
    appeals to succeed.

3.   The Appellant is married to Chaudhry Irshad [H] who  lives  in  the  UK
    with his cousin Sami Khohkar [the Sponsor]. H was granted  a  residence
    permit as a dependant of  the  Sponsor.  The  Appellant  claims  to  be
    financially dependent the Sponsor who is a Spanish national  exercising
    Treaty rights.

4.   H gave evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  directed
    himself following Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) UKUT  00314  (IAC),  Lim
    (EEA-dependency [2013] UKUT 00437 (IAC) and Dauhoo (EEA  Regulations  -
    reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 00079 (IAC). It was the Appellant's case that she
    could not in the past or at present survive without  financial  support
    from the Sponsor to meet her essential needs. The Respondent relied  on
    the Appellant's visit visa appeal heard in 2011 which referred  to  H's
    employment as an account manager.

5.   The judge did not find H to be a credible witness because he failed  to
    make full and frank disclosure in his witness statement. H  claimed  to
    have become dependent on the Sponsor  when  he  lost  his  job  due  to
    medical reasons, but no medical evidence was produced. The judge  found
    that H's account of why he came to the UK, if  he  was  in  receipt  of
    financial help from the Sponsor, was confusing. He concluded H came  to
    the UK illegally not as a dependant of the Sponsor and H had failed  to
    set this out clearly in his statement. H did not disclose that  he  had
    previously worked in Pakistan when he applied for a residence card.

6.   The documents relied on at  the  appeal  were  not  produced  with  the
    application and the judge found there was no credible  account  of  why
    they had only been recently provided. The claim that the  Sponsor  paid
    school fees was not supported by documentation. The  judge  found  that
    the evidence put forward obfuscated and  omitted  relevant  issues.  He
    concluded that the requirements of Regulations 8 and 12  were  not  met
    and dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

7.   The grounds submit that the judge failed  to  apply  relevant  criteria
    and took into account irrelevant matters, imposing too high a  test  in
    determining the appeal. There was ample evidence to show that,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, H and the Appellant  were  dependant  on  the
    Sponsor.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott-
    Baker on 18 July 2020 on the  grounds  it  was  arguable  the  decision
    failed to disclose adequate reasoning as  to  the  credibility  of  the
    Sponsor and H, and arguably may  have  taken  into  account  irrelevant
    matters which had not been raised by the Respondent.

9.   In the  Rule  24  response,  the  Respondent  submitted  the  Appellant
    accepted the judge had directed himself correctly  as  to  the  law  on
    dependency in EEA appeals. The judge found, as a matter of  fact,  that
    the Appellant was not dependant on the Sponsor to  meet  her  essential
    needs. The  judge  gave  the  following  reasons  for  coming  to  that
    conclusion:

    i)   H's evidence was vague as to when the  dependency  began  and  his
         immigration history in the UK;

    ii)  H had omitted details of his employment history  in  Pakistan  and
         there was  a  lack  of  documentary  evidence  as  to  H's  claimed
         inability to work;

    iii) The Sponsor's evidence suffered from the same frailties and he was
         also not a credible witness;

    iv)  The money transfer receipts were produced for the  first  time  at
         the hearing and were copies which were not signed;

    v)   The documentary evidence did not support the  assertion  that  the
         Sponsor paid the school fees.

10.  It was submitted the judge applied the correct standard of  proof.  The
    Appellant did not submit that the judge failed  to  take  into  account
    material evidence or that the  decision  was  irrational.  The  grounds
    merely disagreed with the judge's findings.



Submissions

11.  Mr Ahmed relied  on  the  grounds  and  referred  me  to  the  relevant
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle.  He  submitted  the  Appellant  had
    addressed the reasons for refusal. The judge had made findings about  H
    in the UK, but  had  failed  to  make  any  clear  findings  about  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor. The Appellant had  provided  money  transfer
    receipts from 2014 to 2019. H was not cross-examined  and  he  was  not
    aware that the matters relied on by the judge  would  be  held  against
    him.

12.  Mr Lindsay relied on the Rule 24 response  and  submitted  it  was  not
    alleged the judge failed to look at the money  transfers.  The  grounds
    were inconsistent with the  acceptance  that  the  judge  had  properly
    directed himself. An error would only occur if the judge had failed  to
    follow his self direction. There was no such error in  this  case.  The
    Respondent did not believe the Appellant was dependant  notwithstanding
    the money transfers. It was clear that credibility was in issue and the
    judge considered the evidence in the round, including  the  documentary
    evidence. The judge did not believe the Appellant and H were  dependant
    on the Sponsor before the Sponsor came to the UK or thereafter.

13.  The judge properly directed himself following  Reyes.  The  issues  set
    out  at  [11]  and  [12]  demonstrated  the  judge  had  followed  that
    direction. The judge found that H had failed to give a full  and  frank
    account and  therefore  his  account  was  not  reliable.  The  judge's
    findings were open to him on  the  evidence  before  him  and  he  gave
    adequate reasons for coming to that conclusion. The judge did not  find
    the evidence of dependency to be credible  and  his  reasons  were  not
    perverse.

14.  In response to a question  from  me,  Mr  Ahmed  accepted  it  was  not
    apparent from the Sponsor's witness statement when the Sponsor came  to
    the UK. The money transfer receipts were dated July  2014  onwards.  Mr
    Ahmed submitted that H was granted a residence permit and therefore the
    Respondent was satisfied he was dependant on the Sponsor. There was  no
    evidence of that application before the judge. Mr Ahmed submitted there
    had been no failure to disclose and the  Appellant  had  addressed  the
    points raised in the refusal notice. H had been accepted  as  a  family
    member. The judge's credibility findings were inadequate and there  was
    no clear finding of when  the  Sponsor  entered  the  UK.  The  judge's
    reasons were inadequate.



Conclusions and Reasons

15.  The judge found that H was not a credible  witness  and  gave  adequate
    reasons  for  coming  to  that  conclusion.  The  visit   visa   appeal
    demonstrated the Appellant was  dependant  on  H  in  2011.  There  was
    insufficient evidence before the judge to show when and  why  H  became
    dependant on the Sponsor. The witness statements were vague and  showed
    that H had failed to make full and frank disclosure.

16.  The  grounds  of  appeal  do  not  challenge  the  judge's  credibility
    findings and accept the judge properly directed himself on the test  of
    dependency. The grounds submit the judge applied too high a standard of
    proof and took into account irrelevant matters. Although  the  decision
    is brief, I am satisfied the judge applied the balance of probabilities
    to the evidence before him and he considered all the  evidence  in  the
    round.

17.  The visa application form stated that the Sponsor arrived in the UK  on
    15 January 2015. The Sponsor's witness  statement  stated  he  came  in
    2014, but did not give a specific date. The refusal notice  in  respect
    of the  Appellant  stated  that  four  money  transfer  receipts  dated
    February 2019, November 2018 and April/June 2015 were  insufficient  to
    demonstrate dependency since the Sponsor came to the UK.

18.  The money transfer receipts produced at the  hearing  were  dated  from
    July 2014 onwards. The judge did not find the explanation for why  they
    had not been produced earlier to be credible.  He  also  doubted  their
    provenance because they were computer printouts  which  were  unsigned.
    The judge gave adequate reasons for why he attached  little  weight  to
    the documents. The documents produced failed to support the Appellant's
    claim that the Sponsor paid school fees.

19.  In order to succeed under Regulation 8 the Appellant had to  show  that
    she was dependant on the Sponsor before he came to the UK and after  he
    came to the UK. It was not the Appellant's case that she had ever  been
    part of the Sponsor's household.  There  was  an  absence  of  evidence
    before the judge explaining the circumstances  upon  which  H  and  the
    Appellant became dependant  on  the  Sponsor.  There  was  insufficient
    evidence before the judge to show the Appellant was  dependent  on  the
    Sponsor prior to the Sponsor's entry to the UK.

20.  I find that the judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant had failed to establish dependency on the Sponsor. The  judge
    found that H was not  a  credible  witness  and  his  account  was  not
    supported by the documentary evidence produced.  The  judge's  findings
    were open to him on the evidence before him.

21.  Accordingly, I find there was no material error of law in the  decision
    of 11 March 2020 and I dismiss the Appellants' appeals.



Notice of Decision

Appeals dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 12 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

     J Frances

Signed   Date: 12 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

