
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01561/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 12th September 2017          |On 9th  October 2017                 |
|Prepared on 15th September 2017       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                          MR OMODAMWEN EHIGIAMUSOE
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 27th of October 1984. He
      appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Obhi
      sitting at Birmingham on 22nd  of  November  2016  who  dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 26th  of
      January 2016. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's  application
      for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right  to  reside  in  the
      United Kingdom. The Appellant's application to the Respondent was made
      on the basis that he had retained a right of residence as  the  former
      spouse of an EEA national, Ms Laura Chevalier a French  national.  The
      couple married on 22nd of September 2010. The Appellant  had  come  to
      the United Kingdom the year before  on  10th  of  September  2009.  He
      applied  for  and  was  granted  a  residence  card  pursuant  to  the
      Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
      Regulations") which was valid until May 2016. The marriage broke  down
      and decree absolute of divorce was declared on 2nd of April 2014.


   2. The Appellant made a further application for a residence card  on  6th
      of May 2014 which was refused on 14th of July  2014.  The  Appellant's
      appeal against that refusal was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Shanahan sitting at Birmingham on 3rd  of  November  2014.  A
      further application for a residence card was made by the Appellant  on
      26th of August 2015. It was the refusal of the August 2015 application
      on 26th of January 2016 which gave rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's case  was  that  his  former  spouse  had  established
      herself as a self-employed hairdresser.  There  was  evidence  in  the
      bundle submitted to the Tribunal at first instance that  Ms  Chevalier
      had paid national insurance contributions. There was no  evidence  she
      had paid tax but  there  was  a  penalty  notice  sent  to  her  which
      demonstrated that she was registered to pay tax. Thus, it was  argued,
      the Appellant could show that Ms Chevalier was a qualified  person  at
      all relevant times pursuant to Regulation 6 of  the  2006  Regulations
      and that he had retained a right of residence under Regulation 10  (5)
      of the 2006 Regulations. His argument was that he had ceased to  be  a
      family member of a qualified person on the termination of the marriage
      but was residing in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  the  2006
      Regulations at the date of  termination.  Prior  to  the  divorce  the
      marriage had lasted for 3 years and the parties had resided in  United
      Kingdom for at least one year during its duration.

The Decision at First Instance

   4. The Judge held at paragraph 20 of her  determination  that  the  issue
      before her was one of proof, whether the Appellant could prove that Ms
      Chevalier was exercising treaty rights at the date of the divorce.  In
      the Judge's view the Appellant had struggled to show  this.  This  was
      not the first appeal on the same point, his  previous  appeal  (before
      Judge Shanahan) had been dismissed because  the  Appellant  could  not
      show that Ms Chevalier carried out any economic activity.  Instead  of
      appealing that decision the Appellant had made a  further  application
      on the same point. In the first appeal, Judge Shanahan  had  not  been
      satisfied that the tax penalty notice demonstrated that  Ms  Chevalier
      was exercising her treaty rights on the date of the  decree  absolute.
      There was no evidence before Judge Shanahan that Ms Chevalier had ever
      pursued her self-employed activity or had received any income from  it
      or that her claimed business was active at the date of the divorce.


   5. Judge Obhi found that the same arguments have been put to her  as  had
      been put to Judge Shanahan namely that the Appellant  only  needed  to
      show that Ms Chevalier had  established  herself  as  a  self-employed
      person but did not need to show any economic activity.  That  argument
      had been rejected by Judge Shanahan and was rejected by Judge Obhi who
      cited Regulation 4 (B) of the  2006  Regulations  in  support  of  her
      decision.


   6. During the course of the hearing Judge Obhi became  concerned  whether
      the Appellant had continued to be in a genuine  relationship  with  Ms
      Chevalier. During the period of the marriage the Appellant had  had  2
      children by another woman. The Appellant appeared to know little about
      his wife's activities and was described as  evasive  when  asked  what
      work Ms Chevalier had done. At paragraph 22 the Judge wrote  that  the
      Appellant:


           "could not answer a simple question about how long  it  took  [Ms
      Chevalier] to do the hair of an average customer. Had he  been  living
      with her and she been working from home as he now claims then he would
      have been acutely aware of what she did and the time she  spent  doing
      it. In order to show  that  his  former  spouse  was  working  he  has
      provided photographs of equipment that he says he had in the room  and
      that they share. He has also  provided  letters  from  people  who  he
      claims used to be her customers. However, there is  no  evidence  that
      they paid her for doing their hair, they have not provided evidence of
      payment. There is no information from HMRC about  her  self-assessment
      tax purposes which suggests that she has not paid tax and that she has
      not undertaken any economic activity."


      As the Judge was not satisfied that it was a genuine  relationship  or
      that Ms Chevalier was exercising treaty rights for the relevant period
      she dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

   7. The Appellant appealed the decision on two grounds. Firstly, the Judge
      was wrong to say the Appellant was evasive  when  answering  questions
      particularly about how long it took Ms Chevalier to do the hair of  an
      average customer. The  Appellant  had  said  it  took  an  average  of
      anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours depending  on  what  the  customer
      required. In any event the Appellant  would  not  sit  and  watch  the
      customer. The 2nd ground was that there was nothing in the evidence to
      suggest that the sponsor was carrying out hairdressing  for  free  and
      therefore it could be assumed that Ms Chevalier was exercising  treaty
      rights.


   8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Gillespie on 23rd of May 2017 who found that the  grounds  of
      appeal were no more than  expressions  of  dissent  with  the  reasons
      advanced by Judge Obhi. The material finding  of  fact  was  that  the
      Appellant had failed to prove that Ms Chevalier received  income  from
      self-employment  or  was  a  qualified  person  at  the  time  of  the
      termination of the marriage. The Appellant renewed his application for
      permission to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  same  grounds  as  before.
      Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 13th of July
      2017. She found it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to
      take into account the evidence that the Appellant separated  from  his
      wife in 2013 but added: "this may not be  material  to  the  issue  in
      dispute [which] was  [whether]  the  ex-wife  [was]  self-employed  as
      claimed?"


   9. The 2nd paragraph of the  grant  of  permission  stated  that  it  was
      arguable that the First-tier had failed to take into account  evidence
      of national  insurance  contributions  and  correspondence  from  HMRC
      regarding  the  ex-wife's  income.  It  was  arguably  speculative  to
      conclude that the Appellant would be acutely aware (as Judge Obhi  had
      put it at paragraph 22 of her  determination)  how  long  it  took  Ms
      Chevalier to do the hair of each client when he  was  working  at  the
      time.


  10. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated 27th
      of July 2017 opposing the appeal. The Respondent argued that the Judge
      had been entitled to find that the evidence submitted by the Appellant
      did not demonstrate that  Ms  Chevalier  was  economically  active.  A
      person  who  had  established  themselves  as  self-employed  did  not
      necessarily demonstrate that they continue to actively work since that
      time. There was nothing to  indicate  what  documentation  established
      that Ms Chevalier was economically active.

The Hearing Before Me

  11. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me to
      determine whether in the first place there was a material error of law
      such that the determination fell to be set aside. If  there  was  not,
      then the decision would stand.


  12.  For the Appellant, Counsel argued that the reasons given by the Judge
      at paragraphs 21 and 22 of the determination were erroneous. The Judge
      had digressed from the issues at hand and looked at  new  issues  that
      had not been raised previously.  The  Respondent  had  not  previously
      raised the genuineness of the marriage between the  Appellant  and  Ms
      Chevalier. There was nothing unusual about the Appellant's  answer  to
      the question of how long it took to cut a customer's hair.


  13. There was some discussion before me as to what was the  basis  of  the
      grant of permission to appeal. For the Appellant, counsel argued  that
      the parties separated in 2013 so the Appellant would not know  exactly
      what his ex-spouse was doing. The focus of the determination at  first
      instance had been on the argument that the Appellant did not know  how
      long it took his wife to cut someone's hair. The Judge had  failed  to
      take note of the evidence about national insurance  contributions  and
      HMRC documents. Ms Chevalier was economically activity as shown by the
      evidence. There was a lack of reasoning in the determination.


  14. For the Respondent reliance was placed on the Rule  24  response.  The
      Judge was dealing with the same matter previously argued before  Judge
      Shanahan and the  Appellant  should  have  appealed  Judge  Shanahan's
      decision if he had not liked it. The Appellant had to show  more  than
      just that his ex-wife had set up as self-employed. There were concerns
      raised by the Judge about the evidence. Was the marriage  existing  at
      the point in time  the  Appellant  said  it  was,  was  it  a  genuine
      relationship? The Judge did not make a finding as such on  that  point
      but was entitled to find that the Appellant did not live with his  ex-
      wife. It was a fair question that was put to the Appellant  about  the
      length of time it took to cut people's hair.  There  was  no  evidence
      from other claimed clients that they had paid Ms Chevalier to do their
      hair.


  15. In this case the Respondent herself had gone back to HMRC to check the
      tax documentation see paragraph  11  of  the  determination  of  Judge
      Shanahan which had produced the evidence that  although  Ms  Chevalier
      was  registered  as  self-employed  she  could  show  no  income  from
      employment or self-employment for the tax year 2013/2014. It had  been
      established that Ms Chevalier was not exercising treaty  rights.  Even
      if the Judge was arguably wrong to attach weight to the issue  of  the
      length of time it took to cut someone's hair that  did  not  flaw  the
      determination. There was no  information  to  show  Ms  Chevalier  was
      working.


  16. In conclusion Counsel for the Appellant  commented  that  the  Judge's
      findings were very brief.  Counsel  also  sought  to  argue  that  the
      genuineness of the  relationship  was  not  an  issue  raised  by  the
      Respondent. I indicated that the Judge's notes of the hearing were  on
      the court file which showed that the  Presenting  Officer  had  argued
      that the Appellant was not in a genuine relationship with Ms Chevalier
      as he was living a double life at the time  having  had  two  children
      outside the marriage. The point had been raised during the hearing  at
      first  instance.  Counsel  continued  that  there  had  been  lots  of
      documents before Judge Obhi but she had not looked at  that  evidence.
      Ms Chevalier was registered as self-employed paying contributions.  It
      could not be said she was not exercising treaty rights. The Judge  had
      digressed when speculating  whether  the  marriage  was  genuine.  The
      appeal should be allowed.

Findings

  17. In order to come within Regulation 10 (5) of the 2006 Regulations  the
      crucial point the Appellant had to  prove  was  that  his  ex-wife  Ms
      Chevalier had been working at the relevant time. Judge Shanahan  found
      that the Appellant could not show this but instead  of  appealing  the
      Appellant used what was in effect the same documentation as  had  been
      before Judge Shanahan,  before  Judge  Obhi.  It  was  not  surprising
      therefore that Judge Obhi should come to the same  conclusion  as  had
      Judge  Shanahan.  The  evidence  of  payment  of  national   insurance
      contributions did not prove economic activity particularly as that was
      unsupported by appropriate HMRC documentation. There  was  no  further
      evidence the Appellant could have provided since a section 40  enquiry
      had been made  by  the  Respondent  before  Judge  Shanahan  and  that
      documentation had been relied on in both appeals. It  was  not  enough
      for the Appellant to show that his ex-wife had been registered as self-
      employed. He had to show that she was economically active but this  he
      could not do for the reasons given in the determinations of both Judge
      Shanahan and Judge Obhi.


  18. The issue in the case was as Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer pointed  out
      whether Ms Chevalier was self-employed  as  claimed.  Both  Judges  in
      their respective first instance appeals had found that she was not and
      I have seen nothing which indicates  that  either  or  both  of  those
      Judges were wrong. It may indeed be arguable that the Appellant  would
      not know how long it took Ms Chevalier  to  cut  someone's  hair.  The
      point however is that Judge Obhi  in  that  paragraph  was  expressing
      rather more than just a comment on the length of time Ms Chevalier may
      have taken  to  cut  someone's  hair.  I  read  paragraph  22  of  the
      determination as being a general point made  by  the  Judge  that  the
      Appellant knew nothing in reality about the claimed work  of  his  ex-
      wife because she had not done any work  and  therefore  he  could  not
      answer the questions put to him. The Judge described the Appellant  as
      evasive.


  19. The grounds of onward appeal claim that the Appellant gave a  detailed
      answer to the question how long it took Ms Chevalier to cut  someone's
      hair. I have to say that there is no reference to any such  answer  in
      the notes of the Judge and there is no statement from the  Appellant's
      solicitor, Mr Khushi, who represented the Appellant at first  instance
      that there was any such detailed  answer  as  the  grounds  of  onward
      appeal now claim. The Judge's note states that the  Appellant's  reply
      to the question was "I don't know she would tell me how long  it  took
      because I would be going to work when they were doing the  hair".  The
      Appellant added that sometimes he was at home.


  20.  Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer  was  quite  correct  in  her  grant  of
      permission to note that the Appellant was out at work at the  relevant
      times but it is not correct as the grounds of onward appeal claim that
      the Appellant was able to give a specific answer to the  question.  It
      was a matter for the Judge what weight  she  placed  on  the  evidence
      before her. She was entitled to form the view that the  Appellant  was
      evasive and this undermined the credibility of the application.  Given
      that the Appellant had only produced the same documentation  that  had
      been before Judge Shanahan there was  no  reason  why,  without  more,
      Judge Obhi should accept the Appellant's word that the  situation  was
      different to that found by Judge Shanahan in the first appeal.


  21.  The Respondent raised the issue of whether the marriage was  genuine.
      Judge Obhi clearly had grave doubts  whether  the  marriage  had  been
      genuine. Since she found that Ms Chevalier was not economically active
      at the relevant time strictly speaking the Judge did not need to go on
      to make a finding about the genuineness of the marriage. However,  the
      doubts expressed by the Judge about the marriage were well-founded and
      certainly did not assist the Appellant's case. The  Judge  gave  sound
      and cogent reasons for her decision based on the  evidence  which  was
      before her. The appeal is in effect no more than an attempt to reargue
      matters which had been dismissed twice before once by  Judge  Shanahan
      and secondly by Judge Obhi. Neither Judge made any arguable  error  of
      law. Further,  it  appears  from  paragraph  14  of  Judge  Shanahan's
      determination that a previous Judge had  found  no  evidence  that  Ms
      Chevalier was economically active.  Three  Judges  at  three  separate
      hearings had come to the same view. I dismiss the  Appellant's  appeal
      against the decision of Judge Obhi.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 22nd day of September 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed this 22nd day of September 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

