
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/01546/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31st August 2017                       | On 1st September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                mr ali irbouh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss promulgated on 22 May 2017, in  which  Mr  Irbouh's
    appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  application  for  an  EEA
    Residence Card dated  2  October  2015  was  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.  For ease, I continue to refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, with Mr Irbouh as the Appellant and the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Turkey, born on 13 July 1979,  who  made
    an application for an EEA Residence Card as the former spouse of an EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 2 October 2015 on  the  basis
    that it had not been established that the Appellant's former spouse was
    a qualifying person (not exercising  treaty  rights)  on  the  date  of
    divorce.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 22 May 2017, Judge Juss dismissed the  EEA
    appeal on the basis that, as accepted by the Appellant,  there  was  no
    evidence of his former spouse exercising treaty  rights  in  2013  when
    they divorced, the latest evidence available being in 2011.  The appeal
    was however allowed on human rights grounds on  the  basis  that  there
    would be a disproportionate interference with his right to respect  for
    family life if required to leave the United Kingdom.  This was  on  the
    basis of his relationship with a child whose mother was in  the  United
    Kingdom as a refugee and following the application of  section  117B(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The appeal

 5. The Respondent appeals on the sole ground that the First-tier  Tribunal
    did not have jurisdiction in an EEA  appeal  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds in the absence of a section 120 notice.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Mailer on the sole ground  of
    appeal.

 7. At the hearing, Mr Tarlow submitted that, as the Court  of  Appeal  had
    confirmed in Amirteymour v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 353, the First-tier Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    consider or allow an EEA appeal on human rights grounds.

 8. Mr Irbouh confirmed that he understood the grounds of appeal and  Court
    of Appeal's jurisdiction and made no oral submissions.

Findings and reasons

 1. Judge Juss, in paragraphs 13 and 14 of the decision, allowed the appeal
    on human rights grounds without any specific consideration  of  whether
    he had jurisdiction to do so in the context  of  an  EEA  appeal  where
    there was no evidence of a section 120  notice  being  served  nor  any
    decision to remove or  removal  directions  having  been  set  for  the
    Appellant.  In these circumstances, for the  reasons  set  out  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Amirteymour, the First-tier Tribunal had no power to
    consider or allow the appeal on human rights  grounds  and  Judge  Juss
    therefore erred in law in so doing.

 2. There is no challenge by either party to the decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    which was unarguably lawful.  As the  Appellant  had  accepted,  he  is
    unable to establish that his former spouse was exercising treaty rights
    at the time of their divorce in 2013 such that  he  can  not  meet  the
    requirements of the regulations for an EEA Residence Card.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  consider  this  appeal  on
human rights grounds and erred in law in doing so, the appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and  substituted  to
dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   [pic]         Date         31st August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

