
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01305/2017
                                                               DA/00159/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2019                      |On 26 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 TAULANT [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Cale, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 26  July  1981  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Albania. By a decision dated 1 March 2017, a deportation order was made
    in respect of the appellant under the provisions of paragraph 27 of the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in the decision  promulgated
    on 2 April 2019 dismissed the appeal. The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Andrew wrote:

         "I am satisfied that there are unarguable errors  of  law  in  this
         decision in that the judge, although saying he took note of all the
         evidence, did not refer to the independent risk assessment of Ms  N
         Newall or the social workers report in  respect  of  the  children.
         Further, the judge not analyse all the evidence available to him in
         respect of the children and the  role  [the  appellant]  played  in
         their lives. Further, it is also arguable the judge  did  not  make
         sustainable findings in relation to whether or  not  the  appellant
         was exercising Treaty Rights."

 3. The appeal had been returned to Judge Kelly of the First-tier  Tribunal
    by an order of Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  dated  15  August  2018.
    However, Judge Kelly had been unable to hear the case  and  had  agreed
    that it be the transferred to Judge Moxon.  Judge  Moxon  recorded  the
    preserved findings of Judge Kelly as follows;

    a.   The Appellant has daily contact with his daughter by  Ms  [P]  and
         plays a significant role in her  upbringing.  Given  her  age,  she
         could probably adapt to his removal with relative ease,  it  is  in
         her long-term interest to remain in the United Kingdom;

    b.   Given the absence of supporting evidence from Mrs [K], Judge Kelly
         was not satisfied that the Appellant continues to have contact with
         his children from that marriage;

    c.   In the absence of a statement from Mrs [K], Judge  Kelly  was  not
         satisfied that the Appellant continues to  manage  or  operate  his
         restaurant business. It is noted that the  business  documents  all
         pre-date the Appellant's separation from his wife; and

    d.   Judge Kelly was unable to assume that the Appellant  continues  to
         pose only a low risk of reoffending and causing significant harm to
         the public at large.

 4. Judge Moxon also recorded Judge Plimmer's summary of the relevant  case
    law and the questions to be addressed by the First-tier  Tribunal  when
    the appeal was returned to it:

         "14. The Appellant's initial appeal was  dismissed  by  Immigration
         Judge Kelly within a  determination  promulgated  on  30th  October
         2017. That decision was overturned by Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer
         who found that there must be a  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
         integrative links in the United Kingdom, and at  paragraph  10  she
         summarised the Attorney General's opinion in Vomero [2016] UKSC  49
         as follows:

             "(i) The acquisition of permanent residence is a  prerequisite
             to qualify for enhanced protection.

             (ii) The 'previous ten years' residents required for  enhanced
             protection must be continuous, subject to reasonable absences.

             (iii)    Imprisonment allows doubt to be cast  on  integrative
             links but should not be excluded from calculation of  the  10-
             year period.

             (iv)  The  expression  'the  previous  ten  years'   must   be
             interpreted as referring to a continuous period, calculated by
             looking back from  the  precise  time  when  the  question  of
             expulsion arises, that includes  any  periods  of  absence  or
             imprisonment, provided that none of those periods  of  absence
             or imprisonment had the effect of breaking  integrative  links
             with the host Member State.

             (v)  The overall assessment of  integrative  links  cannot  be
             confined solely to the criteria of long lasting settlement  in
             the host Member State and the absence of  any  link  with  the
             Member State of origin.  That  assessment  must  instead  take
             account of all the relevant factors of the individual case and
             must take place at the time when the authorities are ruling on
             the expulsion decision."

         15.  At paragraph 11 she detailed:

             "... it is now sufficiently clear that the 10  year  residency
             necessary for the grant  of  enhanced  protection  in  Article
             28(3)(a) must be calculated by counting back from the date  of
             the decision ordering that person's expulsion and imprisonment
             does not break continuity provided that integrative links  are
             not broken..."

         16.  At paragraph 12 she detailed, in relation  to  concessions  by
         the Home Office representative before her:

             "Mrs Patterson accepted that in  this  case  that  would  mean
             counting back from the deportation order dated  1  March  2017
             and that prima facie this appellant had the requisite 10 years
             because  he  arrived  in  the  UK  in  May  2006.   In   these
             circumstances, she accepted that the FTT erred in law  in  not
             addressing imperative grounds and  in  particular  whether  in
             light  of  all  consider  all  the   relevant   circumstances,
             integrity links could be said to be broken by the imprisonment
             in 2016 and 2017".

         17.  At paragraph 13 she details that  the  representatives  agreed
         the matter should be remitted for up-to-date findings to  be  made.
         She details that:

             "Mr Hussain had informed that there was  substantial  updating
             evidence available."

         18.  She  detailed  that  completely  fresh  findings  of  fact  in
         relation to the Appellant's integrative links in the United Kingdom
         are necessary but the findings that  have  already  been  made  may
         require updating in light of further evidence.  She  directed  that
         the appeal be remitted to Judge Kelly."

 5. Judge Moxon made the following findings [54]:

    a.   The Appellant has involvement with  Ms  [P]  and  their  child  as
         accepted by Judge Kelly;

    b.   The Appellant does retain a relationship with the  other  children
         but I do not accept that it is to the extent that he asserts;

    c.   All children would be distressed by  their  father  being  removed
         from the United Kingdom and their best interests  are  for  him  to
         remain;

    d.   The Appellant has had no interest in the restaurant since  he  was
         sentenced to custody, has not been buying and selling cars  and  is
         not employed. He has not been exercising treaty rights since he was
         imprisoned; and

    e.   As accepted by the Appellant, he is estranged from  his  wife  and
         lives alone.

 6. The judge concluded that the integrative links  between  the  appellant
    and the United Kingdom had been broken for the following reasons:

    a.   He was in custody, serving a sentence of 18 months;

    b.   His criminal activity indicates a lack of integration to the  laws
         of the United Kingdom. His efforts to mislead as to his involvement
         in the more recent offences,  including  his  letter  to  the  Home
         Office in response to the Notice of Liability for Deportation, also
         demonstrates a lack  of  honest  engagement  with  authorities  and
         therefore lack of integration into the country;

    c.   He has not exercised treaty rights since imprisonment; and

    d.   Whilst the Appellant retained contact with  his  wife,  girlfriend
         and daughters whilst in prison, he was of course  not  living  with
         them and, save for a short period upon release, has not lived  with
         any of them and instead lives alone.

 7. The judge concluded as follows:

         "58. It is accepted that he has permanent residence.  He  therefore
         benefits from middle-tier protection but not the enhanced level  of
         protection.

         59.  I am satisfied that there is a genuine,  present  and  serious
         threat of the fundamental interests of society, namely  maintaining
         public order, preventing social harm, tackling offences  likely  to
         cause harm to society where an immediate or direct  victim  may  be
         difficult to identify but where there is wider societal harm  (such
         as offences related to the misuse of drugs...) and  protecting  the
         public, as prescribed at paragraph 7 of  Schedule  1  of  the  2016
         Regulations.

         60.   Whilst  I  have  considered  the  documents  adduced  by  the
         Appellant in his support, together with his lack of reoffending,  I
         do not accept that the Appellant is a low risk  of  reoffending  or
         has rehabilitated, given the various adverse  credibility  findings
         outlined above and his attempts to minimise his culpability for his
         offending. Given that I do not find him credible, I do  accept  his
         account that he has stopped contact with his brother.

         61.  I therefore accept that deportation is necessary as there  are
         serious grounds of public policy and public protection."

 8. The grounds of appeal complain that the judge failed  to  consider  all
    the evidence  regarding  appellant's  exercise  of  Treaty  Rights,  in
    particular in relation to  his  self-employment  and  his  business  of
    selling and buying cars. Further, the grounds complain that  the  judge
    ignored a significant amount  of  material  evidence  relating  to  the
    nature of the appellant's daily parental role with  the  children.  The
    appellant claims that the judge ignored evidence and witness statements
    of the appellant and his wife and that no specific findings  were  made
    on the 'corroborative witness statements' of Ms  Kamolli  and  Ms  [P].
    Further, the judge failed to have proper regard to  the  social  worker
    report, making only a 'passing reference to it.'

 9. Mr Mills, who appeared for the Secretary of State, submitted  that  the
    judge had provided a 'considered view' of all the relevant evidence. He
    had  not  rejected  the  claimed  parental  relationship  between   the
    appellant and his daughters although he had found that the relationship
    was not a strong or of such importance to the children as the appellant
    claimed; in particular, the judge had correctly attached weight to  the
    fact that the appellant does not live with his children. As regards the
    appellant's claimed that he runs a business buying and selling cars, it
    was open to the judge [47] to  conclude  that  there  was  no  reliable
    documentary proof to support the  appellant's  claims.  The  judge  had
    recorded that a probation report indicated that the appellant's risk of
    reoffending was low.

10. Mr Mills acknowledged that the judge had not  carried  out  a  detailed
    examination of the social worker report adduced  by  the  appellant  in
    support of his appeal. He submitted, however, that, given the timing of
    that report, it added little, if anything, to the other  evidence.  The
    social worker  report  detailed  conclusions  which  had  been  quickly
    overtaken by events, in particular the  breakdown  of  the  appellant's
    marriage.

11. I find that I agree with Mr Mills as regards the probative value of the
    social worker's report for the reasons which I have summarised at  [10]
    above. I accept that the judge has not assessed  the  contents  of  the
    report in any detail. I do not accept that,  given  the  events  which,
    shortly after the report was prepared, occurred in the relationships of
    the appellant, his partner and the children, the report added  anything
    material to the remaining evidence. As regards  evidence  generally,  I
    find that the judge has had regard to the totality of the  evidence  in
    reaching his decision. As he states at [24]:

         "Whilst I am bound to be selective in  my  references  to  evidence
         within this document I have nevertheless taking  into  account  all
         the evidence in the round when reaching my conclusions."

12. I see no reason to  go  behind  that  statement  by  the  judge.  I  am
    satisfied that he has considered all the relevant evidence in  reaching
    its decision. He was not obliged to provide an  exhaustive  description
    or summary of each item of evidence. I am satisfied that the judge  was
    also entitled to find that the  appellant  was  not  exercising  Treaty
    Rights as he claims. In reaching that conclusion, I am again  satisfied
    that the judge has considered all relevant evidence. He was not obliged
    to find that the  appellant  was  a  truthful  witness  and  has  given
    adequate reasons for finding otherwise.

13.  It follows from what I have said that the judge applied  the  relevant
    law to findings of  fact  which  were  open  to  on  the  evidence  and
    therefore sound. The judge did not err in law by  concluding  that  the
    appellant had failed to prove that he is entitled to the highest  level
    of protection from deportation. The judge's finding  that  there  exist
    serious grounds of public policy and public protection  concerned  with
    the deportation of this appellant is not  flawed  by  legal  error.  It
    follows that the appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

    The appeals are dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

