
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01126/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2018                             |On 31 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                mr issah ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Karim, counsel instructed by Mensons &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of Issah Ali, a national of Ghana born on 29 October
    1978.  He appealed against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  12
    January 2016 refusing to grant him permanent residence on the basis  of
    his marriage to an EEA national, following an application for permanent
    residence on 4 August 2015.  This was based on a marriage conducted  by
    proxy to an EEA national who was exercising treaty rights.   The  basis
    of the refusal was  that  the  Respondent,  having  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's former spouse was a qualified person at the time of divorce
    and had been exercising treaty rights since the divorce and  that  they
    had resided together for the required period, concluded that they  were
    not married within the meaning of Regulation 7 of the  EEA  Regulations
    2006.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Carroll  for
    hearing on 19 April 2017. In a decision dated 8 May  2017,  the  appeal
    was dismissed solely on the basis of a want of jurisdiction in light of
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Sala  (EFMs  Right  of  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC)  in  which  it  was  held  that  there  was  no
    statutory right of appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State not to grant a residence card to  a  person  claiming  to  be  an
    extended family member.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made in time on 9 May 2017,
    on the basis that the judge erred materially in law  in  that  she  did
    have jurisdiction.  Secondly, the issue before the judge did not engage
    the decision in Sala (op cit) given that it was a Regulation 7 case  as
    opposed to a Regulation 8 case i.e. a direct family member  as  opposed
    to an extended family member and  that  in  any  event  Sala  had  been
    wrongly decided.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted to the Upper Tribunal  in  a  decision
    dated 10 November 2017, by First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison  on  the
    basis that:
         "It is arguable that the judge has erred in law  for  although  the
         judge correctly applied the case of Sala (OPCIT)  at  the  time  of
         promulgation  of  her  decision  and  reasons  the  case  has  been
         overturned by Khan v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 which was issued on 9 November 2017."

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Bramble helpfully  accepted
    that the judge had erred  materially  in  law  in  finding  a  want  of
    jurisdiction, firstly in light of the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    in the case of Khan (op cit) and he served a copy of the consent  order
    in that case on the Upper Tribunal and secondly, on the basis  that  it
    would appear that, in any event, this was not a Sala case, in that  the
    application and appeal had been brought on the basis that the Appellant
    is a direct and not an extended family member.

 6. In light of Mr Bramble's helpful concession it was not necessary for me
    to hear from Mr Karim.

Notice of Decision

I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  material
errors of law, in particular, the refusal to entertain the appeal  for  want
of jurisdiction.  The decision is set aside and the appeal is  remitted  for
a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  any  judge
apart from Judge Carroll.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  Rebecca Chapman                         Date: 29 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
