
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/01871/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11th December 2017                      | On 11th January 2018            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                           mr Shadrach Bona Antwi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Offi-Kwatia (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Povey, promulgated on 22nd  May  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Newport on 12th May 2017.  In the determination,  the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matters comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Ghana,  who  was  born  on  20th
    November 1991.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State refusing his application for a  residence  card,  as
    confirmation of his permanent  right  to  remain  in  the  UK,  such  a
    decision  being  dated,  1st  February  2016.   The  essence   of   the
    Appellant's claim is that his father, Lawrence  Anthony,  was  a  Dutch
    national, exercising treaty rights in the  UK.   The  Appellant  was  a
    family member of the Sponsor (as defined by Regulation  7  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006).  He was, accordingly, entitled to a permanent  right
    of residence in the UK pursuant to Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations
    2006.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed how,  following  his  arrival  in  the  UK  on  13th
    December 2009, he was a family member of his sponsoring  father,  until
    his 21st birthday.  The judge observed that  thereafter  the  Appellant
    only continued as a family member if he met the test of dependency (see
    paragraph 23).  He went on to conclude that, "I am also satisfied  that
    the Appellant continues to be dependent upon the Sponsor", because "the
    dependency took the form of providing food,  either  directly  or  with
    financial assistance and assisting in the  arrangement  of  appropriate
    accommodation" (paragraph 23).

 4. However, the judge then went on to state that there was  an  additional
    requirement whereby, the Appellant must have resided with  the  Sponsor
    in the UK and done so for a continuous period of five years", and  that
    in this case "the Appellant and the Sponsor have only resided  together
    continuously for  two  years  (December  2009  to  December  2011)  and
    cumulatively for two years and three months (December 2009 to  December
    2011 and December 2012 to March 2013)", such that he could not show the
    residence requirement (paragraph 25).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    construed the law in the manner that he did, in the light of  the  case
    of PM (EEA - spouse - "residing with") Turkey [2011] UKUT 89, where  it
    was made clear that the phrase "residing with" does not mean living  in
    the same  household.   The  grounds  state  that  the  "residing  with"
    requirement relates to her a presence in the UK.  It does not, however,
    require living in a common  family  home.   The  judge  was  wrong  (at
    paragraph 25) to suggest that the Appellant and the Sponsor should have
    lived together.  Even if the Appellant  had  removed  from  the  family
    home, the fact remained, as recognised by the judge, that the Appellant
    remained dependent on the Sponsor (see paragraph  20).   The  Appellant
    accordingly, acquired a permanent right of residence  under  Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations 2006.

 7. On 3rd July 2017, permission to appeal was granted, on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that the Appellant remained dependent on his sponsoring
    father since he left the family home in December 2011.  He had epilepsy
    and was currently placed in supported housing.

 8. On 19th July 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered to  the  effect  that
    "the  Respondent  does  not  oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to determine  the  appeal
    with fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider whether the Appellant
    satisfies the definition of dependency" as set out in the  case  of  PM
    [2011] UKUT 89.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 11th December 2017, Miss  Offi-Kwatia  drew
    my attention two documents which were in the bundle, dated  7th  August
    2017 and 21st November 2012.  This,  she  submitted,  demonstrated  the
    issues relating to dependency.  She submitted that given the  facts  as
    found by the judge, and given the dependency which was known to  exist,
    the appeal  should  have  been  allowed.   Both  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant had been in the UK for five years.  The  facts  were  not  in
    dispute.  It was a matter of law as to whether the meaning of  "resided
    with" should include the physical living together under one  roof,  and
    in the same household, or whether it means having a  presence  together
    in the UK.  It was the latter.  Given  this  is  what  the  established
    authorities stated, this appeal should be allowed.

10. For his part, Mr Nath submitted that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude as he did.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, under the judgment in MDB and  Others  (Article  1612/68)  Italy
    [2010] UKUT 161 the Appellant had a extended right of  residence  under
    Regulation 14.  The question here  was  the  proper  interpretation  to
    Regulation 15(1)(b) with regards to the meaning of "a family member  of
    an EEA national who is not an EEA national but who has resided  in  the
    United Kingdom with the EEA national ...".  It is plain that even on  a
    literal reading of these words, the reference here is  to  "resided  in
    the United Kingdom", and does not confine the residence to one that  is
    in the same household, or under the same roof.

13. Second, this has been so concluded by the Tribunal in PM (EEA -  spouse
    - "residing with") Turkey [2011] UKUT 89.  Given that both the  Sponsor
    and the Appellant have resided in the UK continuously for  five  years,
    and the judge has accepted (at paragraph 23)  that  he  was  "satisfied
    that the Appellant continues to be  dependent  upon  the  Sponsor",  to
    require that the Appellant additionally also shows that  he  is  living
    with the Sponsor, was unwarranted.  It amounted to an error of law.



Remaking the Decision

14. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

16. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 9th January 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have decided to make no fee award of any fee which has been  paid  or  may
be payable.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 9th January 2018

