
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/01857/2016

                                                 EA/01858/2016

                                                 EA/01859/2016

                                                 EA/01860/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21st December 2017                    |   On 3rd May 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                            Mr. NAIMAT ELAHI RANA
                              MRS SHAMA NAIMAT
                                MR AQEEL RANA
                              MR SHARJEEL RANA
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M Ilahi, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Naimat Rana is the husband  of  Mrs  Shama  Rana.   Aqeel  Rana  and
    Sharjeel Rana are their two sons, now aged 17 and 15.  They applied for
    an EEA family permit to join Angela Cojacariu in the  UK  as  dependant
    family members. It is said that Angela Cojocariu is  married  to  Adeel
    Rana, the son of Mr Naimat Rana and Mrs Shama Rana.  Their applications
    were refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 13th January 2016.


 2.  They appealed the decision to refuse entry clearance to the First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").  On 19th September 2016, the Upper Tribunal published
    its decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC).
    The Upper Tribunal held that there is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a Residence
    Card, to a person claiming to be an Extended Family Member.   In  light
    of that decision, on 18th March 2017,  the  Resident  Judge  at  Taylor
    House, Mr D G Zucker issued directions to  the  appellant's  and  their
    representatives.  Those directions provided the appellant  with  notice
    that the Tribunal was minded to place the appeal before a Judge of  the
    FtT, with a view to determining the matter on the papers, for  want  of
    jurisdiction. The appellants were given 5 working days after  the  date
    of the directions, to set out their reasons why the Tribunal should not
    proceed as proposed.


 3. The matter came before FtT Judge Mitchell on 5th May 2017.  The appeals
    were dismissed for want of jurisdiction for the reasons set out in  his
    decision promulgated on  12th  May  2017.   At  paragraph  [6]  of  his
    decision, the FtT Judge records that there has been  no  response  from
    the appellants or their representatives to the directions issued by the
    Tribunal on 18th March 2017.   The  appeal  before  me,  is  an  appeal
    against the decision of FtT Judge  Mitchell  promulgated  on  12th  May
    2017.


 4.  In the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellants  acknowledge  that  they
    received the directions dated 18th of March 2017. They  claim  that  on
    22nd March 2017, a response was  sent  to  the  Tribunal  as  directed,
    inviting the Tribunal to stay the consideration of the appeal pending a
    decision from the Court of Appeal in which  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    considering whether Sala was correctly decided.


 5. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge  Lever  on  8th  November
    2017.


 6. Before me, Mr Jarvis submitted  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Khan,
    directed a stay of its decision that the decision of the Upper Tribunal
    that there was no valid appeal is set aside, pending the  determination
    of a renewed application for permission to appeal to the Supreme Court.
     He submits that a renewed application for  permission  is  before  the
    Supreme Court.  Mr Jarvis submits that as there remains an issue as  to
    whether  the  decision  in  Sala  was  correctly  decided,   the   most
    appropriate course for me to adopt is that I should adjourn or stay the
    hearing of the appeal before me, pending any decision  of  the  Supreme
    Court.


 7. Mr Ilahi opposes the application for a stay and submits that the law as
    it stands is that set out in the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Khan.  He submits that the underlying decision of the  respondent  that
    is the subject of this appeal already dates back to January  2016,  and
    that the appellants cannot be expected to  wait  indefinitely  for  the
    matter to be determined.


 8. I refuse the application by the respondent  for  an  adjournment  or  a
    stay.  Permission to appeal to the Supreme Court  was  refused  by  the
    Court of Appeal.  Although the Court of Appeal in Khan, directed a stay
    of its decision, pending the determination of a renewed application for
    permission to appeal to the Supreme Court, the appeal before me  cannot
    be permitted to drift on indefinitely.


 9. It is to be noted that the Court of Appeal in Khan v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1755, has  found  that  Sala  was  wrongly  decided  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Plainly the Judge of the FtT could not have  been  aware  of
    the decision in Khan, and applied the law as it was thought  to  be  at
    the time he considered the matter, and dismissed the appeal for want of
    jurisdiction.


10. However, in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Khan, I  am
    satisfied that the FtT erred in law in concluding that the FtT  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider the appeal.  The decision of the FtT Judge  is
    therefore set aside.


11. As to the disposal of the appeal,  it  is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    appeal back to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having  taken  into  account
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th
    September 2012.  The effect of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellants of  an  opportunity  for  their  case  to  be  put  to,  and
    considered by the FtT.


Notice of Decision


12. The decision of the FtT involved the making of an  error  of  law  such
    that it is set aside.


13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing.


14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          21st December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal,  there  was  no  fee
award. I have remitted the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.   No  fee
award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This is to be considered by the First-
tier Tribunal.

Signed                                  Date          21st December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
