
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01754/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 3 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               Hamayun Raqeeb
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Mazelli instructed by Legal Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent on 30 January 2018 to refuse him an EEA  residence  card  as
    the spouse of  the  sponsor,  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016.    The  appellant  is  a  Pakistani
    citizen.  The  sponsor  is  a  Polish  citizen  and  therefore  an  EEA
    national.

 2. The respondent considers that the marriage  entered  into  between  the
    parties was a marriage of  convenience  when  contracted:  if  that  is
    correct then the appellant is not the sponsor's spouse for the purposes
    of the EEA Regulations and is not entitled to a residence card on  that
    basis.

Background

 3. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in February 2010 as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student, with a student visa valid  until  28  October  2013.
    The sponsor came to the United Kingdom on 8 January 2013 on a visit  to
    two Polish friends.   She met the appellant almost immediately.

 4. In March 2013 the appellant proposed marriage, and  in  July  2013  the
    parties began to live together.  On 5 October 2013 the parties  married
    at Gretna Green accompanied by a group of friends.

 5. On 28 October 2013, the last day of his Tier  4  (General)  leave,  the
    appellant applied for a residence card as the spouse of an EEA national
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  That  application  was
    refused on 2 April 2014 and he appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The appeal was heard and dismissed by First-tier  Judge  O'Brien  on  1
    April 2015.

The 2015 decision

 7. In the 2015 decision dismissing the appellant's previous appeal,  Judge
    O'Brien set out  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  sponsor
    followed by consideration of the provisions of Regulation 14(1), 14(2),
    6(1)(b) and (c) and 7(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations and  crucially  for
    this application the definition of "spouse" at Regulation  2(1),  which
    does not include a party to a marriage of convenience.

 8. The First-tier Judge considered  the  evidence,  both  documentary  and
    oral, and concluded  that  the  evidence  before  him  was  lacking  in
    credibility and that the marriage was a marriage of convenience.

 9. The appellant did not appeal immediately.  He appealed six  months  out
    of time. No explanation for the delay was provided and  there  were  no
    special circumstances.   The application was not admitted.   First-tier
    Judge Frankish,  when  refusing  permission,  said  that  even  if  the
    application  had  been  timely,  there  was  nothing  in  the   grounds
    identifying any properly arguable reason to  challenge  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings of fact and credibility,  and  in  particular,  the
    finding that he had entered into a marriage of convenience.

10. Permission to appeal was refused on 20 April 2015.  That was the end of
    the 2014 application.

The 2017 application

11. In 2017 the applicant made another application for a residence card  as
    the sponsor's spouse.

12. The respondent's letter of refusal set out the reasons why the  initial
    refusal had been  given,  but  also  considered  new  evidence  of  the
    relationship  including  photographs,  bank  statements,  credit   card
    statements, phone bills,  dental  cards,  voting  registration  and  so
    forth.  After considering all the evidence the respondent  reached  the
    following conclusion:-

         "The Capital One credit card statements, Lloyds bank statements, EE
         mobile phone bill, Geek Squad, Smile dental  card  letter,  marbles
         statement, Tesco clubcard credit card statement, Redoute statement,
         NHS European Health Insurance card letter, registration letter  and
         the undated Barclays letter are all in single  names  and  show  no
         joint financial commitments.  Again given that you  claim  to  have
         been in a relationship since 2012 this department would  expect  to
         see a joint council tax bill,  joint  bank  statements  or  savings
         accounts and joint utility bills covering several years.

         At best the evidence supplied shows cohabiting.

         Based on the information detailed in the marriage interview and the
         evidence supplied  in  this  and  previous  applications,  we  have
         reasonable grounds to suspect that the marriage  undertaken  on  05
         October 2013 to Agnieszka Magdalena Jurek is one of convenience for
         the  sole  purpose  of  you  obtaining  an  immigration  advantage.
         Therefore your application for a residence card to confirm you  are
         a family member  of  an  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  or  Swiss
         national exercising Treaty rights in the UK has been refused."

The 2018 First-tier Tribunal decision

13. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Judge took the 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  decision  as  her  Devaseelan
    starting point as she was entitled, and indeed required to do.

14. At [30]-[31] the Judge found that the respondent had  shown  reasonable
    grounds for suspecting that the marriage was one  of  convenience.   At
    [32], she recognised that "The burden therefore shifts to the appellant
    to prove on the balance of probabilities that his  marriage  is  not  a
    sham".

15. The bundle of documents produced for the First-tier  Tribunal  was  not
    complete.  It did not include a copy of  the  2014  decision  of  Judge
    O'Brien nor of the refusal of permission to appeal.   The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer provided a copy of the decision  to  the  First-tier
    Judge at the hearing. Counsel for the  appellant  apparently  told  the
    Judge that it was the fault of the appellant's previous legal  advisers
    that no appeal had been attempted in 2015, but in  fact,  the  position
    was as already set out, that an application was  made,  but  permission
    was refused.

16. The Judge considered the oral and documentary evidence before her,  and
    concluded as follows:-

         "45. For the reasons I stated I do not consider the appellant to be
             a  credible  witness.   His  evidence  was   vague,   he   was
             inconsistent   in   his   own   evidence   and   there    were
             inconsistencies of the evidence of  Miss  Yurek  on  the  same
             issues.  Given my rejection of the evidence of  the  appellant
             and Ms Yurek but having carefully reviewed the entirety of the
             evidence  before  me  I  do  not  accept  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities that the appellant has ... established that  his
             marriage to Miss Yurek was not one of  convenience.   On  this
             basis, I find that the appellant is not  a  family  member  of
             Miss Yurek and accordingly he is not entitled to  a  residence
             card as the family member of an EEA national exercising  their
             Treaty rights in the UK.

         46.  Mr Shrestha conceded at commencement that if his claim  failed
             on this basis in the  Article  8  claim  would  fail  likewise
             (sic).  I accept that the article 8 claim fails."

    The  appeal  was  dismissed.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

17. The appellant in his grounds of appeal argued that it was not  open  to
    the First-tier Judge to find that the marriage was one of  convenience;
    that the finding that the appellant  and  sponsor  now  lived  together
    meant that the marriage could not be one of convenience; that the First-
    tier Judge had erred in dismissing the appeal under  Regulation  8  and
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and the 2016 Regulations  2016;
    that the appeal should have been allowed  under  Article  8  ECHR;  and
    finally:-

         "The learned Judge refers to the case of  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
         00702.  However, that case is only a starting point, which  is  not
         binding on the second Tribunal.  The  second  Tribunal  can  depart
         from the previous decision, where the circumstances surrounding the
         first appeal were such that  it  would  be  right  for  the  second
         Tribunal to look at the matter as if the  first  determination  had
         never been made.  It is submitted that the learned judge has failed
         to do just that."

Submissions

18. I heard oral submissions from Ms Victor-Mazelli for the appellant,  who
    asserted (incorrectly as it turned out)  that  the  appellant  had  not
    appealed  the  2014  decision  by  First-tier   Judge   O'Brien.    She
    nevertheless sought to persuade me that the First-tier  Judge  in  2018
    erred in proceeding  directly  to  the  consideration  of  whether  the
    appellant and sponsor had proved that this  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting without making a sustainable decision  that  the  respondent
    had shown reasonable grounds to suspect that the marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

19. Ms Victor-Mazelli relied on  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Sadovska and another v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Scotland) [2017] UKSC 54.  Ms Victor-Mazelli asserted  that  the  2014
    decision was no more than the Devaseelan starting point and that  there
    was new evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  the  2018  decision
    which could have justified going behind the 2014 decision and making  a
    finding that the  marriage  when  contracted  in  2013  was  a  genuine
    marriage and not a marriage of convenience.

20. I did not find it necessary to call on Mr Walker  for  submissions  for
    the respondent.

Analysis

21. The difficulty which the appellant has in this appeal is  that  of  the
    Devaseelan starting point in 2015, which  found  as  a  fact  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience and that the appellant and sponsor  are
    not credible witnesses.  It is striking that the appellant chose not to
    include that decision in the bundle for the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor,
    having changed representatives, does it appear that  he  made  his  new
    solicitors aware of the contents of that decision.  If  that  were  not
    the case, their instructions to  Counsel  that  the  decision  was  not
    appealed would be nonsensical.

22. The second judge, applying the Devaseelan guidance, may not  relitigate
    the question whether this is a marriage of convenience unless there  is
    new evidence relating to the basis  on  which  the  2013  marriage  was
    contracted at Gretna Green, on 5 October 2013.

23. The new evidence which is produced does not relate to the date  of  the
    marriage in 2013 but to the cohabitation  which  the  parties  say  has
    taken place since then.  Evidence  of  subsequent  cohabitation  and/or
    devotion cannot assist the appellant since the question of  a  marriage
    of convenience is decided on the basis of the parties' intentions  when
    the  marriage  was  contracted.   The  First-tier  Judge  in  2018  was
    entitled, therefore, to take that point quite shortly and did so.

24. Ms Victor-Mazelli referred me to many paragraphs in Sadovska,  but  not
    to [29]-[30], which contain the ratio decidendi.   In  her  opinion  at
    [29]-[30], Lady Hale, the  Supreme  Court  President,  with  whom  Lord
    Neuberger, Lord Kerr, Lord Clarke and Lord Reed JSCs agreed, said this:-



         "29. For this purpose, 'marriage of convenience' is a term of  art.
             Although  it  is  defined  in  the  Directive  and  the   2009
             Communication as a marriage the sole purpose of  which  is  to
             gain rights of entry to and residence in the  European  Union,
             the 2014 Handbook suggests a more flexible approach, in  which
             this must be the predominant purpose. It is  not  enough  that
             the  marriage  may  bring  incidental  immigration  and  other
             benefits if this is not its predominant purpose.  Furthermore,
             except in cases of deceit by the non-EU national, this must be
             the purpose of them both.  Clearly, a non-EU national  may  be
             guilty of abuse when the  EU  national  is  not,  because  she
             believes that it is a genuine relationship.

         30.  In the case of a person exercising EU law rights, the Tribunal
             must  also  be  satisfied  that  the  removal   would   be   a
             proportionate response to the abuse of rights established.  So
             it would be one thing to find that the proposed  marriage  had
             been shown to be one of convenience, and therefore that it was
             right to prevent it, but quite  another  thing  to  find  that
             expelling Ms Sadovska from the country where she had lived and
             worked for so long and had other family members living  was  a
             proportionate response to that."

25. The First-tier Judge in 2018 took the approach set out in Sadovska; she
    looked first to see whether the respondent  had  a  proper  reason  for
    considering this to be a marriage of convenience which, in  this  case,
    among other things, was the challenged but undisturbed decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in 2015 that it  was  a  marriage  of  convenience,
    coupled with the lack of  any  new  evidence  about  the  circumstances
    surrounding the marriage, or at least any new reliable  evidence.   The
    Judge's finding that the burden of proof had shifted to  the  appellant
    is unarguably sound on that basis.

26. The First-tier Judge in 2018 therefore proceeded  to  consider  whether
    the appellant had proved, on the balance of  probabilities,  that  this
    was not a marriage of convenience when contracted.  The  appellant  and
    sponsor had been found to lack credibility as witnesses  by  First-tier
    Judge O'Brien in 2014, and  also  failed  to  impress  Judge  Solly  as
    credible witnesses.

27. Judge Solly held that the appellant had not  rebutted  the  presumption
    that the marriage was one of convenience.   The  judge  considered  the
    evidence advanced in rebuttal of the marriage of  convenience  finding,
    including further oral evidence from the appellant and sponsor. She was
    not satisfied to the standard of  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant had shown that marriage was not one of convenience.  She  was
    unarguably entitled so to conclude, for the reasons  she  gave  in  the
    decision.

28. I turn therefore to the question of Article 8 ECHR.   The  judgment  in
    the Court of Appeal of Lord  Justice  Sales,  with  whom  Lord  Justice
    Beatson and the Senior  President  of  Tribunals,  Lord  Justice  Ryder
    agreed, in Amirteymour v The Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 353, confirmed that an appeal under Regulation 26(1) of
    the EEA Regulations did not import a right of appeal  under  Article  8
    ECHR with reference to section 82(1) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  If the appellant wishes to pursue  a
    human rights appeal, a separate paid application for leave to remain on
    that basis must be made.

29. There has been no removal decision to date (unless something  else  has
    been omitted from the bundles before the Upper Tribunal): if a  removal
    decision is made, it will be open to the applicant to make an Article 8
    ECHR application for leave to remain  or  such  interim  relief  as  is
    appropriate.  If this marriage, originally contracted as a marriage  of
    convenience, has become  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,  it
    remains open to the appellant make an application under Article  8  for
    leave to remain on family and private life grounds,  but  that  is  not
    this application.

30. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed:        Judith  A  J  C  Gleeson                          Date:    28
November 2018
              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

