
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01735/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Monday 29 January 2018             |On Wednesday 31 January 2018         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                       CHARLES OGHENEVWOGAGA OROGUNCHA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not in attendance nor represented
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal. There is  no
reason in this case to make such a direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



    Background

     1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
        Judge A A  Wilson  promulgated  on  10  May  2017  ("the  Decision")
        dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
        decision dated 29 January 2016 refusing to  issue  the  Appellant  a
        residence card as confirmation of a right of residence under EU  law
        as the former spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in
        the UK.

     2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He came  to  the  UK  as  a
        student in 2007.  He successfully applied for a  residence  card  as
        the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights on 12 January
        2010.  The Appellant was divorced from his EEA  spouse,  the  decree
        absolute being dated 27 March 2015.  He made an  application  on  21
        July 2015 for a residence card on the basis of a retained  right  of
        residence.   That application led to the decision under appeal.

     3. The Respondent  refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
        relationship was a marriage of convenience.  The Judge  agreed  with
        that assessment and dismissed the appeal for that reason.

     4. The Appellant raised six grounds of challenge to the Decision.  I do
        not need to deal with them all in light of what was said  by  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen when granting permission in his decision
        dated 24 November 2017 as follows:-

           "[3]  The grounds on which permission to appeal is  sought  make
           general submissions in paragraphs 1 and 2 which do not  identify
           any arguable error of law.

           [4]   Paragraph 3 is concerned with the Respondent's  contention
           that the Appellant had failed to respond to two  invitations  to
           be interviewed.  It is arguably not clear from  paragraph  7  of
           the Decision what finding the Judge made on this issue or  where
           he considered the burden of proving this contention to lie.

           [5]   Paragraphs 4,5 and 6 appear to  have  no  arguable  merit.
           The reference in paragraph 4 to  paragraph  2  of  the  Decision
           fails to understand that paragraph 2 is merely a  recitation  of
           the Respondent's case.

           [6]   Although the grounds do not raise it, there is an  obvious
           arguable error of law in paragraph 9 of the Decision,  in  which
           the Judge stated that the burden of proving whether the marriage
           was a marriage of convenience lay on  the  Appellant.   This  is
           contrary to Rosa, which the Judge had cited at paragraph 6.

           [7]   The interests of justice require that time for applying be
           extended."

     5. I pause to note, in relation to [7] of Judge Brunnen's decision that
        the application for permission to appeal was made by the Appellant's
        solicitors with a covering letter dated 26 May 2017 but date-stamped
        as filed on 30 May 2017.  The deadline was 24  May  2017.   It  does
        appear from the papers though that the application was sent  by  fax
        on 27 May 2017.  The reason for the extension was that the  Decision
        was not received until 15 May 2017 but no explanation was given  why
        the application  could  not  have  been  made  thereafter  in  time.
        Nothing turns on that though since Judge Brunnen expressly  extended
        time.

     6. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
        material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
        the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

     7. Before turning to my decision, there is one further  factual  matter
        which I need to deal with.  The Respondent has informed the Tribunal
        in her Rule 24 response that the Appellant has voluntarily  departed
        the UK.  Mr Duffy informed me that this was on 14 September 2017 and
        he handed me an electronic record confirming this.  There  has  been
        nothing received from the Appellant's solicitors to this  effect  so
        far as I can see.

     8. Although the Rule 24  response  indicates  that  the  appeal  should
        therefore be deemed to be abandoned, Mr Duffy accepted that, as this
        is an appeal governed by the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
        Regulations 2006, section 92(8) Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
        Act 2002 does not apply.  Accordingly, there is  no  abandonment  by
        operation of statute.

     9. The Appellant has, therefore perhaps  unsurprisingly,  not  attended
        the hearing.  However, he had instructed solicitors in  this  matter
        (Moorehouse solicitors).  His solicitors lodged the application  for
        permission to appeal which led to the hearing before me.  They  have
        not informed the Tribunal (so far as I can see)  that  they  are  no
        longer acting or are without instructions.  However,  they  did  not
        attend the  hearing  and  there  has  been  no  application  for  an
        adjournment or explanation for non-attendance.

    10. In any event, the Appellant has not supplied the Tribunal  with  any
        updated  address  following  his  departure  from  the  UK.   It  is
        therefore likely that he no longer intends to  pursue  this  appeal.
        However, since there  is  no  deemed  abandonment  by  operation  of
        statute, I determined that the appropriate course  was  to  continue
        with the hearing in the Appellant's absence and to determine the two
        grounds which have been found to have arguable merit.

    11. Mr Duffy suggested that, if I find a  material  error  of  law,  the
        appropriate  course  would  be  to  issue  a  notice  requiring  the
        Appellant or Moorehouse solicitors to provide a current address  for
        the Appellant within a fixed period in default of which  the  appeal
        would be struck out.  I bear in mind that this course is open to  me
        if I do find a material error of law.

    Decision and Reasons

    12. The focus of the two grounds in  relation  to  which  permission  is
        granted are paragraphs [7] to [9] of the Decision.   Those  read  as
        follows:-

           "[7]  The respondent made a clear assertion in their bundle  and
           in their decision-making process that two letters had been  sent
           to the appellant which was denied by him.  In evidence he stated
           that all correspondence would have gone to his solicitors and he
           had confidence that they had not received such letters.  Totally
           inappropriately the solicitors dealt with the matter by way of a
           comment in their skeleton argument.  If the solicitors firm wish
           to  give  evidence  in  a  formal  statement  from  the  partner
           exhibiting the record of incoming post would have been required.
            However the appellant disputed the fact that posting  [sic]  in
           his grounds of appeal.  No copy  of  the  actual  letter(s)  was
           included in the respondent's bundle.

           [8]   I also have the appellant's oral  evidence  which  I  have
           summarised above.  After concern raised by the respondent it  is
           surprising that no further evidence of  their  relationship  was
           lodged.  Overall assessing all  the  evidence  before  me  I  am
           satisfied that the respondent has discharged the initial  burden
           requiring the appellant to show that the marriage is not one  of
           convenience.  The appellant's approach of simply denying letters
           were not sent whilst  logically  has  the  attraction  of  being
           impossible to prove  a  negative  has  to  be  coupled  with  an
           assessment  of  all  the  evidence  before  me   including   the
           appellant's oral  evidence.   I  am  satisfied  the  appellant's
           evidence lacks any coherence or  gives  a  wider  picture  of  a
           marriage stated to  have  lasted  6  years  that  gives  me  any
           confidence in the appellant's oral evidence at all.  I find that
           the respondent  has  discharged  the  burden  set  out  in  Rosa
           summarised above.

           [9]   In making this decision as to whether it is a marriage  of
           convenience or not the burden of establishing that a balance  of
           probabilities [sic] lies on the appellant.  I have considered  a
           number of matters firstly the checklist of matters  referred  to
           in Papajorgji. While there is no evidence as  to  the  sponsor's
           ability to speak English although I presume  that  there  was  a
           level of competence, it is more  noteworthy  that  there  is  no
           evidence as to a continuing relationship and the bill  and  bank
           evidence seems to  end  when  the  initial  residence  card  was
           granted.  Given that it is even more strange that pay slips  and
           P60s for a number of years was given by her brother but with  no
           further collateral evidence as to where the brother lived or how
           the appellant could have maintained contact with him.  I am  not
           satisfied that the sponsor left the appellant in  2015  and  all
           the evidence leads me  to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  no
           effective in real [sic] marriage in this matter.   I  find  that
           the marriage was one of convenience."

    13. I deal first with the lack of a finding by the Judge in relation  to
        whether the Appellant was notified of the  Respondent's  requirement
        that he attend an interview.  The Appellant's failure to attend  the
        interview was one of the aspects relied upon by the  Respondent  for
        her contention that the marriage was one of convenience.

    14. I accept that there is no express finding in this regard.   However,
        when paragraphs [7] and [8] are read together, it is clear that  the
        Judge considered the evidence produced on behalf of the Appellant to
        be unsatisfactory.  Although he noted also the absence  of  evidence
        from the Respondent in the form of the letters themselves, he relied
        upon the clear statement in the bundle and the refusal  letter  that
        such letters were sent.  The inference which I  draw  from  what  is
        said at [7] and [8] of the Decision is that the Judge accepted  that
        the letters were sent and  was  not  satisfied  by  the  Appellant's
        evidence that they were not received.

    15. Even if I am wrong about that,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
        absence of a finding could be material.  Although this  was  one  of
        the factors relied upon by the Respondent, there were  others,  such
        as the lack of evidence of a marital relationship continuing for six
        years.  The Judge makes plain at [8] of the Decision that  the  lack
        of coherence in the Appellant's evidence and the lack of evidence of
        a marriage lasting six years led him to conclude that the Respondent
        had discharged the evidential burden on her.  Any failure to make an
        express finding on the  interview  letters  is  immaterial  to  that
        conclusion.

    16. The second ground has slightly more merit.  Before dealing with that
        ground, though, I note that this was not a ground relied upon at all
        by the Appellant.  It is one identified by  Judge  Brunnen.   It  is
        perhaps the case that the  Appellant,  as  I  did,  read  the  first
        sentence of [9] of the Decision as being a  typographical  error  in
        light of what follows.  The Judge has  clearly  had  regard  to  the
        relevant case-law.  True it is that  he  does  not  cite  from  Rosa
        beyond  the  extract  dealing  with  the  initial  burden   on   the
        Respondent.  However,  he  also  cites  Papajorgji  and  I  find  it
        difficult to conceive that, having alluded to both authorities which
        deal with the relevant burdens, he has applied the wrong burden.  It
        may be that the Judge meant  to  say  that  the  burden  is  on  the
        Respondent and that this is a typographical error.

    17. I also considered the possibility that the Judge might have intended
        to consider the evidential burden which, in light of his  conclusion
        in [8] of the Decision, had  shifted  to  the  Appellant.   That  is
        though difficult to square with the reference to the standard  being
        one of "balance of probabilities".

    18. However, even if I am wrong about this being a typographical  error,
        I have concluded in light of  the  evidence,  that  this  is  not  a
        material error.  I refer in this regard to the Judge's recitation of
        the Appellant's evidence at [5] and [6] of the Decision:-

           "[5]  The appellant was called by his  representative  and  gave
           oral evidence.  The appellant's bundle in  fact  contained  very
           little new evidence that had not already been  supplied  to  the
           respondent as part of the appellant's  application.   There  are
           P60s for the sponsor from 2009 through to the  tax  year  ending
           April 2015.  There are also wage slips  ending  again  in  March
           2015 and some bank statements.  The bank statements end  in  May
           2011.  There are BT bills for the sponsor ending in 2010.

           [6]   The appellant's evidence relating to his marriage and  how
           it ended was not detailed.  He seemed uncertain  even  when  the
           sponsor had finally moved out saying it  did  however  occur  in
           2015.  A copy  of  the  appellant's  divorce  petition  and  the
           sponsor's acknowledgement of service stating her address was not
           part of his bundle.  He stated that he was not in  contact  with
           his ex-wife.  As to how various tax and  wage  documents  became
           available he stated that he had obtained that from her  brother.
           However he no longer had any contact with him.  The sponsor is a
           French citizen but he could not remember whereabouts  in  France
           she came from she regularly visited it stated her  brothers  her
           other brothers sisters and  parents  [sic]  that  he  had  never
           accompanied her for a visit nor had the family visited him.  The
           only reason for that being "financially a bit tough", no  family
           member had come to her wedding except her brother who  lived  in
           the United Kingdom."

    19. I have reviewed the  evidence  which  was  before  the  Judge.   The
        Appellant's own statement is  a  collection  of  assertions,  mainly
        directed at the Respondent's refusal letter.  The most that is  said
        about the relationship is this:-

           "[4]  That I met my ex spouse in December  2008  in  a  friend's
           party and we formed relationship which  developed  into  a  more
           committed relationship.

           [5]    That  we  got  married  on  26th  November  2009  and  we
           continually  lived  together  as  a  couple  and  our   marriage
           subsisted until we got divorced on 27th March 2015"

        The latter sentence is in itself an odd assertion given that divorce
        signals an irretrievable breakdown of a marriage.  Further,  as  the
        Judge noted, there is no evidence of the grounds for divorce  which,
        if not based on adultery or unreasonable  behaviour,  would  include
        some period of separation  prior  to  divorce.   The  Appellant  was
        apparently unable to say when in 2015 his spouse had moved out.

    20. The documentary evidence produced does  not  take  matters  further.
        There is one document addressed solely to the Appellant  dated  2013
        at the address which he says he shared with his  wife.   That  is  a
        notice of appointment  from  a  hospital.   I  also  note  that  the
        Appellant's address as given to this Tribunal was (until  after  the
        application for permission to appeal) the address at which  he  says
        he lived with his wife.  The payslips in her name bear that address.
         There are bank statements and bills in her sole  name  but  as  the
        Judge observed most of those documents are dated 2010/2011.

    21. There are no documents evidencing any joint  financial  commitments.
        There are no photographs of  the  couple,  no  evidence  from  their
        friends confirming the relationship, no messages  or  cards  passing
        between them.

    22. In short, even if the evidence is capable of  showing  that  for  at
        least part of the period  2010  to  2015  they  lived  at  the  same
        address, it is insufficient to establish that they did so as man and
        wife.  That  evidence  is  certainly  insufficient  to  satisfy  the
        evidential burden on the Appellant of showing that the marriage  was
        not one of convenience.

    23. For those reasons, even if the Judge did err in his  application  of
        the burden of proof at [9] of the Decision, I  am  quite  unable  to
        accept that this error is material.

    24. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does  not
        contain a material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.







    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  A  Wilson
    promulgated on 10 May 2017 with the consequence  that  the  Appellant's
    appeal stands dismissed


        Signed    [pic]      Dated: 30 January 2018
        Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

