

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
EA/01429/2016

                                     EA/01433/2016

                                     EA/01436/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision  & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th October 2017                     |   On 30th October 2017           |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                          ABIMBOLA OLAMILEKAN IDOWU
                        OLAMIDE OLUWATIMILEHIN IDOWU
                           OLUWATOMISIN MOTUNRAYO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and no legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The appellants, who were born respectively in  1999,  1994,  and  1996
      appealed a decision by the respondent to revoke  their  family  permit
      and refuse them admission to the UK, such  decisions  being  taken  on
      23rd January 2016. Their appeal against that decision was dismissed by
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sangha  for  reasons   set   out   in   a
      determination promulgated on 22nd February 2017  after  a  hearing  on
      27th January 2017 at which the appellant had not appeared.


   2. The appellants did not appear  before  me  and  nor  did  their  legal
      representative; no reasons for their non-appearance was given  to  the
      Tribunal. Notice of the hearing  was  sent  to  the  appellants'  last
      notified address and to their legal representatives.  None  have  been
      returned as undelivered. There were no reasons not to proceed with the
      hearing in their absence.


   3. Permission to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge had
      been granted on the  grounds  that  it  was  arguable  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge had erred in failing to initiate an application to  the
      respondent  to  obtain  and  disclose  evidence  as  to  whether   the
      appellants' father's wife's was exercising Treaty  Rights;  failed  to
      take into account that the marriage between the appellants' father and
      his wife had not been dissolved  and  had  failed  to  take  the  best
      interest of the youngest child into account.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out in clear and  unambiguous  terms
      the lack  of  evidence  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  appellants'
      stepmother or her income, if any. He set out the inconsistent evidence
      including contradictory information given to the  immigration  officer
      as to their proposed trip to the UK,  as to whether the stepmother was
      at the airport, or at work and whether the marriage was subsisting. He
      set out the contradictory information given to the immigration officer
      as to who exactly was meeting the three  appellants.  The  immigration
      officer extended temporary admission to the three appellants to enable
      their step mother to attend to provide evidence of her presence in the
      UK; she never attended. No explanation was given by the appellants for
      either the inconsistencies, contradictions or lack of attendance.


   5.  No request was made for the respondent to initiate disclosure of  any
      documents. No evidence was given either to the Immigration Officer  or
      the First-tier Tribunal as to the presence of the stepmother in the UK
      save for a phone call from a woman purporting to be  her.  There  were
      not even the beginnings of evidence that  she  was  exercising  Treaty
      rights.


   6. Although the respondent has not revoked the father's residence  permit
      that is irrelevant to the issue at hand - there was simply no evidence
      that the appellants were, on entry, dependent  upon  an  EEA  national
      exercising Treaty rights.


   7. In so far as Article 8 is concerned, the first appellant was 17 on the
      date of the respondent's decision and four  days  short  of  being  an
      adult on the date of the hearing. They made no  application  that  the
      decision was a breach of Article 8 and did not  appeal  on  Article  8
      grounds. The First-tier Tribunal judge  nevertheless  considered  such
      evidence as there was and reached a decision that was plainly open  to
      him given the almost total lack of any significant evidence that there
      was any  dependency  between  the  appellants  and  their  father  and
      stepmother and no significant evidence as to  their  private  life  as
      established following their arrival in the UK.  Although  neither  the
      judge  not  the  respondent  considered  s55  there  was  no  evidence
      whatsoever that the best interests of the children were served by them
      being in the UK. They had been in Nigeria for years and separated from
      their father. In the absence of evidence that even begins to raise  an
      issue of the best interests of a child, where such evidence  as  there
      is, is a mix of contradiction,  inconsistency  and  error,  and  where
      there is no point pleaded that there has been any lack of respect  for
      family or private life any such error is immaterial.


   8. There is no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge. He reached findings that were plainly and uncontrovertibly open
      to him.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision.

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeals  stands.


                                    Date 27th October 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
