
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/01599/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 February 2018                        |On 14 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                              Mr arshad zeeshan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 8 April 1989.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to  issue  him
    with a residence card as the alleged extended family member of  an  EEA
    national.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 21 June  2017,  Judge  Kelly  (the  judge)
    found there was no valid right of appeal and dismissed the  appeal  for
    want of jurisdiction.

 4. The grounds claimed the judge erred.  As  Sala  was  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal there was a request to "hold the decision"  otherwise  it  would
    lead to JR proceedings.

 5. Judge Chamberlain granted permission on 28 November 2017.  He said that
    subsequent to the application being made the Court of  Appeal  held  in
    Khan [2017] EWCA Civ  1755  that  a  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card to an extended family member was  an  EEA  decision  and
    therefore could be appealed to the First-tier Tribunal in the  ordinary
    way.

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Mills asked me to adjourn the hearing pending  the  appeal  of  Khan
    which I refused.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. In light of Khan, Judge Chamberlain granted permission to appeal on the
    basis that it was arguably wrong for the judge to have  concluded  that
    he did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 9. The judge through no fault of his own erred in law for the reasons  set
    out  in  Khan.   Accordingly,  the  First-tier   Tribunal   does   have
    jurisdiction to determine the appeal and therefore the decision to  the
    contrary of the judge is set aside.

10.  The  appeal  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  a
    substantive consideration of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

11. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error of law.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remit the appeal for a de novo hearing.

12. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 12 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
