
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/01759/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2nd December 2016                      |On 22nd December 2016             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                        Ali Metwalli Mohamed Metwalli
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Doshi, Legal Representative instructed by A
                    Bajwa & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen  of  Egypt  who  is  married  to  a  Hungarian
    citizen, appeals with permission against the respondent's  decision  to
    refuse him an EEA family permit under Regulation 17 of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended), as  the  spouse
    of a Hungarian citizen exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in  2009  as  a  student,  but
    after that visa expired, he worked illegally.  On 6 December  2011,  he
    was discovered doing so and served with notice of removal.  He  claimed
    asylum.  The respondent refused his asylum claim in May  2014  and  his
    appeal rights against that decision are exhausted.

 3. The parties to the marriage met in March 2015 when  they  were  working
    together at a restaurant, and began living together, on their  account,
    on 1 June 2015.  They went through an Islamic marriage  ceremony  on  4
    June 2015. Towards the end of 2015, the parties approached a  Registrar
    of Births,  Marriages  and  Deaths,  seeking  to  enter  into  a  civil
    marriage.   The Registrar contacted the respondent, who said  that  the
    marriage could not proceed until she had an opportunity to  investigate
    further.  On 2 December 2015, the respondent wrote to the registrar  on
    2 December 2015, to say that the marriage could  proceed.  The  parties
    married just over a month later, on 11 January 2016. It  is  that  date
    which is the relevant date for establishing whether this is a  marriage
    of convenience.

 4. The respondent's refusal letter  of  8  February  2016  challenges  the
    evidence provided by the appellant and his  spouse  as  not  supporting
    their claim to have lived  together  from  June  2015,  when  they  had
    entered into an Islamic marriage.  The respondent says that "[b]ased on
    the evidence that you have provided, this department has  no  basis  to
    confirm that you were in a relationship and residing together prior  to
    your marriage...the Secretary  of  State  has  sufficient  evidence  to
    believe that the marriage undertaken on 11  January  2016...is  one  of
    convenience for the sole purpose of you remaining here  in  the  United
    Kingdom".   That is the totality of her reasoning on the point.

 5. I have had regard to the assistance given in the decisions of the Upper
    Tribunal in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC) and in Agho v The Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1198, to which I do not  need  to  refer  in
    detail save to note that at paragraph 13 of Agho the Court  of  Appeal,
    Lord Justice Underhill, with whom  Lord  Justices  Vos  and  Moore-Bick
    agreed, made it perfectly  clear  that  the  legal  burden  is  on  the
    Secretary of State to show that  any  marriage  proved  by  a  marriage
    certificate and the spouse's passport is a marriage of convenience  and
    that that burden is not  discharged  merely  by  showing  a  reasonable
    suspicion.

 6. That principle was affirmed by the Court of Appeal, in Rosa v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14,  at  [27]  in  the
    judgment of Lord Justice Richards, with whom Lord  Justices  Floyd  and
    Moore-Bick agreed, in these terms:

         "27.   ...Regulation 17 of the EEA Regulations  provides  that  the
         Secretary of State must issue a residence card on  application  and
         production of a valid passport and proof that the  applicant  is  a
         family member of a relevant  EEA  national.  On  the  face  of  it,
         production of a marriage certificate is sufficient proof  that  the
         applicant is such a family member. It is true that, by the combined
         effect of regulation 7 and regulation 2, "family member"  does  not
         include a party to a marriage of convenience. But Mr Kellar rightly
         stopped short of submitting that every applicant  for  a  residence
         card on the basis  of  marriage  has  to  produce  proof  that  the
         marriage was not one of convenience. He said that such proof needed
         to  be  produced  only  where  the  Secretary  of  State  raised  a
         reasonable suspicion that the marriage was not one of  convenience.
         When translated into the position  before  the  tribunal,  that  is
         tantamount to saying that the legal burden of proof in relation  to
         marriage of convenience lies on the Secretary of State but that  if
         the Secretary of State adduces evidence capable of pointing to  the
         conclusion that the marriage is one of convenience, the  evidential
         burden shifts to the applicant."

 7. The reasoning in  the  refusal  letter  is  not  such  as  to  raise  a
    reasonable suspicion that the marriage was  one  of  convenience.   The
    respondent's reasons for refusal letter dated 8 February 2016 lacks any
    explanation why, having had an opportunity to investigate the  parties'
    intentions at the end of  2015  and  approved  the  marriage,  she  now
    considers that (presumably between 2 December 2015 and 11 January 2016)
    the parties' intentions in relation to this marriage, or  the  evidence
    concerning whether it was a  genuine  marriage,   changed  to  such  an
    extent that she now considers it to be a marriage of convenience.   The
    respondent has not  interviewed  the  appellant  or  his  spouse.   Her
    refusal letter says there is insufficient evidence of cohabitation  and
    that the relationship is short.   Many people marry when they  are  not
    living together and have not known their spouses for  long.   It  takes
    more than that to raise a prima facie case that the marriage is one  of
    convenience.

 8. The respondent's analysis of the residence documents is nothing to  the
    point, as the burden had not shifted to the appellant and his  wife  to
    rebut evidence that the marriage was one  of  convenience.   They  were
    entitled to have their marriage treated as genuine, and it follows from
    that, since they  produced  the  wife's  passport  and  their  marriage
    certificate, that the appellant is entitled to a residence card as  the
    spouse of an EEA citizen.

 9. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision is allowed and I substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

10. I direct the respondent to issue  the  appellant  with  an  EEA  spouse
    residence card under Regulation 17 forthwith.



Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date: 21 December 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
