
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01755/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2019                  |On 04 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 HAFIZ UDDIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Berlow Rahman,
                    Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Swaney, promulgated on 10 October 2018, dismissing his  appeal  against
    refusal of an application for a residence card.

 2. The first ground of appeal is that the FtT erred by  failing  to  apply
    Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54, which held at [28] that it is  for  the
    respondent to establish that a marriage is one of convenience.

 3. The FtT directed itself at [19] that there is "... an evidential burden
    on the respondent to show that there is evidence capable of pointing to
    [the conclusion that the marriage is one  of  convenience].   Once  the
    respondent has discharged that burden, it is for the applicant to  show
    that the marriage is not one of convenience."  Papajorgji  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 is cited.

 4. Mr Govan pointed out that Papajorgji was referred to at [16]  and  [28]
    of Sadovska.  He said that no different rule was laid  down,  and  that
    the FtT's self-direction remained correct.

 5. In Papajorgji at [20] the UT  thought  the  correct  approach  was  "an
    evidential burden in the first place on [the SSHD]  and  then  shifting
    ... in the light of the relevant information rather than a formal legal
    burden" - which is not as emphatic as suggested by  the  FtT,  even  if
    Papajorgji stands as an authority.

 6. In Sadovska the Court at [31-32] saw a difference between her as an EEA
    national whose rights were being taken away and the co-appellant Malik,
    who had no established rights.  The  appellant  here  is  not  the  EEA
    national.  However, I do not think that the Court intended tribunals to
    apply two different schemes.

 7. At [14], the Court found it apparent that the  FtT's  "whole  approach"
    was to require proof from the appellants that the marriage proposed was
    not one of convenience, rather than to require the SSHD to  prove  that
    it was.  The outcome was a remit to the FtT for a  full  rehearing  for
    both appellants, applying the correct approach.

 8. The FtT's decision in this case says at the outset of its  analysis  at
    [24] that the  burden  on  the  respondent  has  been  satisfied.   Its
    approach to the substance of the case, from [25]  onwards,  is  all  on
    basis of an onus on the appellant.

 9. At the end of [28] of Sadovska the Court said:

         "One of the most basic rules of litigation is that he  who  asserts
         must prove.  It was not for  Ms  Sadovska  to  establish  that  the
         relationship was a  genuine  and  lasting  one.   It  was  for  the
         respondent  to  establish  that  it  was  indeed  a   marriage   of
         convenience."

10. I do not think that the Court intended that to be limited to appeals by
    EEA nationals, or intended  future  tribunals  to  think  in  terms  of
    shifting burdens.

11. The view I have taken of Sadovska is also the view taken in MacDonald's
    Immigration Law and Practice, 2nd supplement  to  9th  ed.,  6.191  and
    20.122.

12. Ground 1 is established.

13. The second ground of appeal is that  the  FtT  should  have  taken  the
    previous grant of a residence card "as a strong starting point".

14. The authority cited is HS [2011]  UKUT  165,  where  it  is  said  that
    previous acceptance of the exercise of treaty  rights  is  "a  material
    consideration".

15. At [26] the FtT said that the fact that  a  card  had  previously  been
    issued was "relevant but not determinative".

16. The context of HS was different.  The principle may be much  the  same,
    but the ground overstates it.  There is little if anything  between  "a
    material consideration" and "relevant but not determinative".

17. Ground 2 shows no  error.   At  best,  it  feeds  into  ground  1;  the
    appellant may have had a starting point which was not the  same  as  an
    EEA  national,  but  was  stronger  for  the  previous  recognition  of
    entitlement to a card.

18. Ground 3 challenges the FtT's analysis of the  evidence  as  "wholesale
    speculation", under sub-headings (i) - (vii), all  going  to  what  the
    judge made of discrepancies, or alleged discrepancies, arising from the
    extensive interview records.

19. Mr Winter developed this ground  further,  with  a  series  of  further
    examples taken from the respondent's refusal decision and the interview
    records.

20. Mr Govan accepted that some discrepancies were minor,  and  that  there
    was no point so powerful that it might have been decisive on  its  own.
    However, he said that those points which survived further scrutiny were
    cumulatively enough to support the conclusion reached.

21. This ground was essentially an adequacy of reasons  challenge.   It  is
    sufficient to say that at least some of the reasons given were shown to
    be debatable and others weak.  The reasons which might survive are  not
    of such strength that the outcome must have been the same, irrespective
    of the error on ground 1.

22. Mr Winter, correctly, did not press grounds 4 and 5.  Ground 4 is  only
    a generality and a disagreement.  Nothing in ground 5, (i) - (iii), has
    any purchase.

23. Grounds 1 and 3 together require the decision of  the  FtT  to  be  set
    aside. It stands only as a record of what was said at the hearing.

24. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.

25. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Swaney.

26. Although the previous hearing in the FtT was at  Taylor  House,  future
    listing should be at Glasgow.

27. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




             [pic]
             UT Judge Macleman


             28 February 2019


