
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01256/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2018                              |On 19 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                           MR FRANK JOSEPH REBELLO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ian Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State ("SSHD") appeals to the Upper Tribunal from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge G Clarke sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 10 May  2017)  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the SSHD made on 13 January 2016 to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom under  Regulation  19(3)(a)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 as a person who did not have, or had ceased to have, a
    right to reside under the Regulations 2006.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not make an anonymity direction, and I do  not  consider  that  the
    claimant requires anonymity in these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a Portuguese national, who was born in Goa,  India,  on
    12 June 1979 and who appears to have spent much of  his  life  in  Goa.
    The core bundle contains a number of certificates  which  the  claimant
    obtained in Goa, including certificates issued  by  the  Nusi  Maritime
    Academy, which (according to the claimant's CV) were preparatory to the
    claimant obtaining employment on various cruise chips as  an  Assistant
    Cook.

 3. According to the claimant's CV, his last employment on  a  cruise  ship
    ran from 2 November 2012 until 30 March 2013.  The claimant is recorded
    as having applied for a national insurance number  in  the  UK  in  the
    latter part of 2014.  On 17 November 2014 Job Centre Plus wrote to  the
    claimant at an address in London SW1 acknowledging that he had recently
    applied for a national insurance number, and allocating a NINO to  him.



 4. On  13  January  2016,  the  claimant  was  served  with  a  notice  of
    immigration decision informing him that the SSHD had decided to  remove
    him under the Regulations 2006.  In the specific Statement  of  Reasons
    contained in the IS15A (EEA) Notice, it was explained that the claimant
    was specifically considered to be a person to whom Regulation  19(3)(a)
    applied because he had been in the UK for between 3 months and 5  years
    and had failed to demonstrate that  he  was  a  "qualified  person"  as
    defined under Regulation 6, namely that  he  was  either  working,  job
    seeking, self-sufficient, self-employed  or  studying.   Therefore,  by
    virtue of Regulation 24(2) of the same Regulations, he  was  considered
    to be an overstayer as defined by section 10(1)(a) of the Immigration &
    Asylum Act 1999, which was an offence under  section  24(1)(b)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 as amended.

 5. In his grounds of appeal, the  claimant  said  that  the  decision  had
    breached his rights as an EEA national, since he was a job  seeker  and
    he had registered as a job seeker with the relevant employment office.

 6. The claimant provided evidence to show that he had entered into  a  Job
    Seekers' Agreement on 26 January 2016.  In his job seeker  profile,  he
    said that the type of work he was most likely to  get  was  that  of  a
    chef.   His  work  experience  comprised   three   cruises   with   the
    Mediterranean Shipping Company, each trip being about  9  months.   His
    current circumstances were that he was  living  at  home,  and  seeking
    employment.  He had an Indian driver's licence.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-Tier Tribunal

 7. The claimant's appeal was listed for an oral hearing, but  neither  the
    claimant nor a Presenting Officer appeared before  Judge  Clarke.   The
    Judge proceeded to "hear the case on the papers in the absence  of  the
    parties" pursuant to Rule 28 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014.

 8. In his subsequent decision, the Judge pronounced himself  satisfied  on
    the balance of probabilities that the claimant was a job seeker.   This
    was because he had provided documentary evidence that he was registered
    as a job seeker.   This evidence included an  email  dated  22  January
    2016 from the Department of Work & Pensions confirming receipt  of  the
    claimant's  application  for  job  seekers'  allowance;  a   commitment
    agreement signed by the claimant on 26 January 2016; and the claimant's
    job seeker profile.  On the basis of  this  documentary  evidence,  the
    Judge was satisfied that the claimant was a job seeker at the  date  of
    the decision.

 9. The Judge observed that the date of the  hearing  was  some  16  months
    after the date of the decision, and some 16 months after  the  claimant
    had signed his agreement with the Job Centre as a job seeker.  He  also
    acknowledged that, as this was an EEA appeal, the general approach  was
    that he ought to consider the circumstances at the date of the hearing.
     However, he was of the view that  he  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    evidence from the Job Centre at the date of  decision  because  of  the
    provisions of Regulation 29(3) of  the  Regulations  2006.   The  Judge
    continued in paragraph [22]: "On the basis of Regulation 29(3), I  find
    that he is a qualified person under Regulation 6 as a job seeker and as
    such was exercising Treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom."  The  Judge
    went on to allow the appeal under the Regulations 2006.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

10. On 29 December 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  granted  the  SSHD
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal for the  following  reasons:
    "The Judge had noted that neither  the  appellant  nor  the  respondent
    attended at the hearing.  The Judge had set out  the  findings  on  the
    very limited evidence available to him.  Bearing in mind the burden  of
    standard of proof on the appellant it is arguable that the Judge failed
    to provide adequate reasons why he found the appellant  was  exercising
    Treaty rights as  at  the  date  of  hearing,  particularly  given  his
    reference to Reg 29(3) which does not appear to be  relevant  but  upon
    which he appears to rely."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

11. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, there  was  no  appearance  by  the  claimant  or  by  his  former
    representatives, Shoe Lane Chambers.  I was satisfied  that  notice  of
    hearing had been  properly  served  on  the  claimant  and  his  former
    representatives, as the claimant had been  served  at  his  last  known
    address in London  SW1, and Shoe Lane Chambers  had  corresponded  with
    the Upper Tribunal about the upcoming hearing.  They informed the Upper
    Tribunal that they were no longer acting for the claimant,  as  he  had
    gone back to India and they had heard that he had died in  India.   The
    response of the Upper Tribunal was that, as this was the SSHD's appeal,
    it would continue to be listed for hearing.

12. Mr Jarvis submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should
    be set aside for the reasons given in the application for permission.




Discussion

13. A job seeker is defined in Regulation 6(4) is a person who  enters  the
    UK in order to seek employment and who provides  evidence  that  he  is
    seeking employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged.  In AG  &
    Others (EEA - job seeker -  self-sufficient  person  -  proof)  Germany
    [2007] UKAIT 00075, it was held that, when considering what  period  of
    time a job seeker has to find work, six months may be a general rule of
    thumb, but there is  no  fixed  time  limit.   Assessment  of  what  is
    reasonable must be made in the context of each individual  case.   Thus
    it may sometimes be less, and sometimes more, than six months.  In  all
    cases, however, the period in question must start from the date of  the
    person's arrival in the UK.

14. According to Home Office  records,  the  claimant  entered  the  UK  in
    October 2014.  The Judge did not  have  specific  evidence  as  to  the
    claimant's date of entry, but he  knew  that  the  claimant  must  have
    entered the UK before November 2014 as this was when  he  obtained  his
    NINO.

15. The Judge failed to have regard to  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had
    apparently only applied to be registered as a job  seeker  after  being
    served with the decision to remove him, and more than two  years  after
    he had entered the UK.  In order to  qualify  as  a  job  seeker  under
    Regulation 6, the claimant had to show that he was  a  person  who  had
    entered the UK in order to seek employment.

16. The Judge did not find that the claimant had entered the UK in order to
    seek employment. So it was not open to  him  to  treat  the  claimant's
    application for job seeker's allowance in January 2016 as demonstrating
    that he met the definition of a job seeker contained in  Regulation  6.
    As stated in the permission application, there was no  evidence  before
    the Judge that the claimant had been working or had  been  looking  for
    work in the period between his entry to the UK in October 2014 and  his
    application for Job Seekers' Allowance, which was  made  after  he  had
    been served with the decision to remove him under Regulation 19(3)(a).

17. Another requirement for meeting the definition of a job seeker is  that
    the applicant should have a genuine chance of being engaged.  There was
    no evidence before the Judge that the claimant had obtained  employment
    between registering for Job Seekers' Allowance in January 2016 and  the
    date of the hearing.  Moreover, in  order  to  show  that  the  removal
    decision was wrong in substance, the burden was on the claimant to show
    that he was exercising Treaty rights at the date of the hearing.

18. The Judge appears to have recognised that this was problematic, as  the
    claimant had not attended at the hearing, and there was no  documentary
    evidence of the recent exercise of Treaty rights.  However,  the  Judge
    relied on Regulation 29(3) as providing an  exception  to  the  general
    rule that the merits of the appeal should be assessed as of the date of
    the hearing.  The Judge's reliance on Regulation 29(3) for this purpose
    was misconceived.  The Regulation does not provide an exception to  the
    general rule.

19. For the above reasons, the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    vitiated by a material error of law, such that it must be set aside  in
    its entirety.

The Re-making of the Decision

20. On the evidence that was available to the First-tier Tribunal, the only
    sustainable conclusion was that the appeal should  be  dismissed.   The
    burden was on the claimant to show that the decision appealed was wrong
    in substance, and he  wholly  failed  to  discharge  that  burden.   No
    evidence has tendered in response to  the  arguments  advanced  in  the
    permission application.  Thus, no evidence has been  tendered  to  show
    that the claimant was in  fact  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK
    between October 2014 (the date of entry) and the date of the hearing in
    the First-tier Tribunal in May 2017.

21. As previously observed, merely applying to register  for  job  seeker's
    allowance two years after entering  the  UK  does  not  constitute  the
    exercise of Treaty rights.  Accordingly, the claimant's appeal must  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date  13 March 2018


Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal, there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date  13 March 2018


Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

