
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01197/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 December 2019                  |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                           MOHAMMAD NASEEM DHENSA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Caskie, instructed by Maguire Solicitors
(Glasgow).
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant,  a  national  of  Pakistan,  appeals,  with  permission,
    against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  McGavin)
    dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  on  19
    January 2018 refusing him a residence card as confirmation of his right
    to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse  of  a  Polish  national,
    Barbara Konarska.  The reason for the refusal was that  the  respondent
    considered that his marriage was a marriage of convenience.


 2. The only issue to be determined in this appeal was and is  whether  the
    appellant's marriage to Ms Konarska  was,  at  the  time,  the  parties
    entered into it, a marriage of convenience.  The burden of proof is  on
    the Secretary of State.  Those propositions both flow from the decision
    of the Supreme Court in Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54.  In  that  case
    the parties were not married, but at [32] the Court indicated  that  if
    the non-EU national produced evidence of the relationship, it  was  for
    the Secretary of State to show that the relationship was  not  genuine.
    At [35] the Court indicated that if the parties had been married,  that
    would "of course, enhance [his] claims".


         "It must be permissible for the state to take steps to prevent sham
         marriages, although it is also incumbent on the state to show  that
         the marriage would indeed be a sham."


 3.  At [29], the Court said this:


         "For this purpose, "marriage of convenience"  is  a  term  of  art.
         Although it is defined in the Directive and the 2009  Communication
         as a marriage the sole purpose of which is to gain rights of  entry
         to and residence in the European Union, the 2014 Handbook  suggests
         a more flexible approach, in which this  must  be  the  predominant
         purpose.  It is not enough that the marriage may  bring  incidental
         immigration and other benefits  if  this  is  not  its  predominant
         purpose. Furthermore, except in  cases  of  deceit  by  the  non-EU
         national, this must be the purpose of them both.  Clearly, a non-EU
         national may be guilty of  abuse  when  the  EU  national  is  not,
         because she believes that it is a genuine relationship."


 4. Before Judge McGavin,  there  was  written  evidence  relating  to  the
    parties' life in the United Kingdom, and  there  was  the  respondent's
    record of interviews of them both.  In addition, the appellant  and  Ms
    Konarska gave oral evidence, as did two other  witnesses  including  Ms
    Konarska's son.  The judge's decision is a lengthy one.  It  considers,
    in detail, a number of the matters upon which evidence had been  given,
    including the appellant's immigration history, the sponsor's employment
    history, the parties' attire at  their  wedding,  and  the  appellant's
    contact with his children after the wedding, as well as setting  out  a
    large number of matters upon which there was no evidence, or upon which
    the judge considered  the  evidence  insufficient.   She  concluded  at
    paragraph 31 that the evidence of the appellant  and  the  sponsor  was
    "materially lacking in credibility" for the reasons she set out in  the
    next 34 paragraphs.  As  a  result  she  concluded  that  it  was  more
    probable than not that the marriage was one of convenience.


 5. The principal burden of the grounds of appeal, drafted by Mr J W Bryce,
    and rearguing submissions that he had made at the  hearing  before  the
    judge, is that the records of the Secretary of  State's  interviews  of
    the appellant and Ms Konarska were not admissible, because they did not
    comply with the  requirements  of  the  Proposed  Marriages  and  Civil
    Partnerships (Conduct  of  Investigations  etc)  Regulations  2015  (SI
    2015/397).  There is no conceivable merit in that ground.  In the first
    place, the Regulations, made under s. 50 of the Immigration  Act  2014,
    have no application to the present case.  The Regulations, and  s.  50,
    apply only in circumstances where the registrar has referred a proposed
    marriage to the Secretary of State  and  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    decided to investigate it.   This  is  not  a  case  where  a  proposed
    marriage was referred to the Secretary of State.


 6. In any  event,  it  is  very  dubious  whether  the  records  would  be
    inadmissible in the Tribunal, even if they had  been  compiled  without
    compliance with the Regulations.  The "Rules  of  Evidence",  excluding
    certain evidence from consideration by a Court, have never  applied  in
    immigration proceedings.  The current provision in the Rules is that in
    r. 14(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 (SI 2014/2604):

         "(2) The Tribunal may admit evidence whether or not-
      a) the evidence would be admissible in a civil  trial  in  the  United
         Kingdom
         ..."

 7. The result of this provision is that what would be in a civil  trial  a
    provision about admissibility  typically  becomes,  in  an  immigration
    appeal, a consideration about weight.


 8. That was, however, not the only ground of  appeal.   The  grounds  also
    submit that, given that the burden was on  the  respondent,  there  was
    wholly insufficient evidence to establish that the marriage was one  of
    convenience and that the judge erred in  law  in  the  conclusions  she
    reached on the evidence.  Mr Caskie's submission before me  was  simply
    that the judge had failed to take into account the evidence as a whole,
    concentrating much more on discrepancy than on agreement, and that  she
    had failed to keep properly before her the issue  with  which  she  was
    concerned,  and  had  instead  concentrated  on  matters   of   dubious
    relevance.  Although he accepted, as  he  had  to,  that  the  question
    whether the sponsor was exercising treaty rights had been raised in the
    Secretary of State's refusal, he submitted that the judge had gone well
    beyond the arguments raised by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    appellant.  In particular, she had taken it upon herself to investigate
    whether the appellant was free to marry, and doubted  the  validity  of
    the death certificate of his previous wife, but apparently had  reached
    conclusions based on the misreading of it.   Further,  as  the  refusal
    letter indicated (and as Mr Clarke confirmed, the Presenting  Officer's
    note confirmed), at the hearing the judge was  clearly  told  that  the
    negative decision was based entirely on the parties' responses at their
    interviews.  In those circumstances, although the judge was entitled to
    take into account all the evidence put before her, there was an obvious
    risk of her making more of the case than the  Secretary  of  State  had
    done.


 9. Mr Clarke's position was that the judge was amply entitled to reach the
    conclusion  she  did,  for  the  reason  she  gave.   Essentially,  the
    appellant's problem was that the judge had looked at all  the  evidence
    deployed on his behalf, and had found numerous deficiencies, which  she
    identified.  If, however, I took the view that she had erred in law, Mr
    Clarke was content to rely on the reasons given for the refusal of  the
    application,  and  the  discrepancies  in  the   marriage   interviews.
    Although he was not able to identify any questions about the intentions
    behind the marriage, or about their life together as a married  couple,
    the interviews did show "ignorance on such a scale" that the conclusion
    that the marriage was a marriage of convenience should be endorsed.  It
    was clear from the appellant's history that he  would  do  whatever  it
    took to remain in the United Kingdom.  If remaking  the  decision,  the
    Tribunal should again conclude that the  marriage  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.


10. Although the judge does not cite Sadovska, and so deprives  herself  of
    some of the wisdom to be found in the decision of the Supreme Court, it
    seems to me that she made no perceptible error in her allocation of the
    burden  of  proof  or  in  identifying  the  issues  to   be   decided.
    Nevertheless, I am persuaded that her decision  does  demonstrate  both
    that she failed to take into account all the evidence that  was  before
    her and that she did not focus sufficiently on the matter  she  had  to
    decide.  The first point is, in my judgment, amply demonstrated by  the
    fact that a reader of her judgment would probably form  the  view  that
    there was really no evidence on the appellant's  side  to  counter  the
    Secretary of State's allegations.  That is far from the case,  as  will
    appear from what follows.  Mr Caskie's phrase was that  the  judge  had
    gone "over the top" in  accentuating  the  negative  and  ignoring  the
    positive aspects  of  the  evidence.   There  is  more  than  a  little
    substance in that.


11. Secondly, the judge's general conclusion is that there are  substantial
    points upon which the evidence of both the appellant and Ms Konarska is
    not to be believed.  Some of those conclusions, for example in relation
    to the death  of  the  appellant's  first  wife,  simply  do  not  bear
    examination; but most of them are  not  very  closely  related  to  the
    matters under consideration.  Of course it is right that  if  a  person
    appears not to be telling the truth  in  general,  there  may  be  very
    little ground for believing that person on  some  particular,  even  if
    there is no specific contradiction that  can  be  identified.   On  the
    other hand, without  going  so  far  as  simply  asserting  that  "love
    conquers all", it is not immediately easy to see why deficiencies in an
    account of employment history, or even a bad immigration  history,  can
    of themselves show that a marital relationship is not  a  genuine  one.
    To cite Sadovska again, at [34]:


           "Should the Tribunal conclude that [a man] was delighted to  find
          an EU national with whom he could form a relationship and who  was
          willing to marry him, that does not necessarily  mean  that  their
          marriage was a "marriage of convenience"."


12. For the foregoing reasons I set  Judge  McGavin's  decision  aside.   I
    proceed to make my own decision on  the  evidence:  there  is  no  more
    evidence than that which was before  her.   I  take  into  account  the
    submissions of both parties.  It  is  certainly  true  that  there  are
    discrepancies between the answers given at the  interviews,  but  there
    are also very substantial points of agreement, as analysed by Mr  Bryce
    in a note and table.  This is not a case where it could conceivably  be
    said that the parties demonstrated complete ignorance on one  another's
    circumstances and other relationships or  history.   The  parties  were
    married in September 2016 and there does not appear to  me  to  be  any
    good reason to suppose that they have not been  living  together  since
    their marriage.  Council Tax records were amended to  show  that,  very
    soon after the  marriage,  and  there  has  been  no  evidence  to  the
    contrary.  It is true that the evidence about their relationship before
    their marriage is much less persuasive.  In  assessing  the  nature  of
    their marriage, I regard the evidence  of  their  relationship  outside
    marriage as of lesser weight than of the evidence of  the  relationship
    within the marriage.


13. Given that they are married, it  is,  as  I  have  indicated,  for  the
    Secretary of State to show that the relationship was entered into as  a
    marriage of convenience.  It does not appear to me that the absence  of
    evidence on various topics, as identified by the judge,  can  help  the
    Secretary of State very much.  The question is whether, at the date  of
    the marriage, there is sufficient material  to  persuade  me  that  the
    predominant purpose of both the parties was to enable the appellant  to
    reside in the European Union.  At the date of the marriage the  parties
    had known each other for a considerable  period  of  time.   They  knew
    quite a lot about each other.  Nothing  that  has  happened  since  the
    marriage gives any  reason  to  suppose  that  it  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  It is perfectly clear, of course, that the appellant does
    want to remain in the EU (that is to say, in the United  Kingdom):  but
    his various attempts to do so do not, in my  judgment,  demonstrate  in
    the circumstances in this case that his  marriage  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.


14. Looking at the matter as whole, as I do, in my judgment  the  Secretary
    of State has not discharged the burden of proof.  The appellant and  Ms
    Konarska are formally married and are  entitled  to  be  considered  as
    husband and wife for the purposes of  EU  Law.   It  follows  that  the
    appellant is entitled to a residence card.


15. I therefore substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal.





                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 9 January 2020
