
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber  Appeal Number: EA/01631/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 28 November 2016                 |On: 30 November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR MD SHOHEL RANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss D Qureshi, counsel instructed by Linga & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal against the  decision,  promulgated  on  27  June
         2016, of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Flynn.

      2. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge McCarthy on 25 October 2016.



Background

      3.  The  respondent  to  this  appeal  sought  a  residence  card   as
         confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
         basis of being the unmarried partner of an EEA national.

      4. In refusing the above-mentioned application, on  25  January  2016,
         the Secretary of State pointed to a number of discrepancies between
         the respondent's answers and those of  his  EEA  national  sponsor,
         when interviewed. It was concluded that these discrepancies,  along
         with the limited  documentary  evidence  "fatally  and  irreparably
         damaged the credibility of (the respondent's)  claim  to  be  in  a
         genuine relationship..."

      5. Following the hearing before Judge O'Flynn, the appeal was allowed;
         the  judge  accepting  that  the  respondent  was  in   a   durable
         relationship with the sponsor.

      6. The grounds of application simply argued that the  judge  erred  in
         allowing the appeal of an extended family  member  outright  rather
         than remitting the matter to the Secretary of State. There  was  no
         challenge to the  favourable  findings  of  the  judge  as  to  the
         relationship in question. Reliance was placed on  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
         meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).

      7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought combined  with
         the fundamental question raised by  the  decision  in  Sala  (EFMs:
         Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

      0. The respondent did not lodge a Rule 24 response.

      6. At the hearing before me, Mr Clark simply argued that the judge had
         no jurisdiction to consider the appeal in view of  in  Sala  (EFMs:
         Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

      7. Miss Qureshi had no submissions to make on the jurisdiction  point.
         She took  the  opportunity  to  highlight  the  unfairness  to  the
         respondent of having won his appeal but  not  being  able  to  take
         advantage of this.

      8. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I  announced  that  I  had  no
         jurisdiction to consider this  appeal  owing  to  Sala,  where  the
         following was decided; "There  is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal
         against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  not  to  grant  a
         Residence Card to a  person  claiming  to  be  an  Extended  Family
         Member. "

      9. Miss Qureshi alluded to the fact that there had always been a right
         of appeal in these circumstances. On this point, I have  considered
         Virk & others [2013] EWCA Civ 652 at [23], as  follows;  "Statutory
         jurisdiction cannot be conferred by waiver or agreement; or by  the
         failure of the parties or the tribunal to be alive to the point." I
         would add only that the Secretary of State did  not  challenge  the
         judge's findings of fact  and  suggest  that  it  is  open  to  the
         respondent to provide the judge's  decision  to  the  Secretary  of
         State in support of a further application for a residence card.

      0. There is, therefore, no valid appeal before me.



Conclusions

    I have no jurisdiction to consider this appeal.

    No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason to make  such
    a direction.




    Signed:  Date: 29 November 2016


    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


