
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01028/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th December 2018                         |On 25th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                         Clement Eromosele Aikhuele
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek of Counsel, instructed by Paramount
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is  a  national  of  Nigeria  who  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 24 June 2016 refusing his  application
    for an EEA residence card as the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  This is not the  first
    application  or  decision  the  applicant  had  made,  the  first  such
    application  being  made  following  entry  in  2012  with   subsequent
    applications in the intervening years up until 6 January  2016.   Those
    applications all resulted in refusals on similar  grounds  and  two  of
    those decisions were appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  On the first
    occasion, in a decision promulgated on 16 April 2013,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed substantively by Judge Hamilton.  On the second occasion, the
    appeal was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 5  November  2014  by
    Judge White.

 2. The appeal then came before Judge Cassel in the First-tier Tribunal  on
    the most recent occasion with a decision and reasons promulgated  on  5
    October 2018.  On  that  occasion,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  the
    benefit of the respondent's bundle  of  documents  which  included  the
    previous  two  First-tier  Tribunal  decisions,  documents   from   the
    appellant including a skeleton argument and a number of documents which
    overlapped  with  those  that  had  previously  been  provided  to  the
    respondent and in previous appeals.

 3. The key issue in the appeal was whether the appellant  had  established
    dependency on the sponsor, there being no claim to previous  membership
    in the same household with the sponsor in Nigeria prior to  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom.  On that point the First-tier Tribunal  essentially
    relied upon the findings in the  previous  two  determinations,  having
    found in paragraph 12 by reference to the two previous appeal  hearings
    that those findings of fact  must  be  the  starting  point.   That  is
    correct in accordance with the case of  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -
    ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT  00702  and  it
    was noted that the only new evidence was that of Reverend Robinson, who
    had  also  given  evidence  in  a  previous  appeal.   The  appeal  was
    ultimately dismissed on the basis of the previous findings of  fact  of
    Judge Hamilton and of Judge White that there was no prior dependency in
    Nigeria between the appellant and the sponsor. For  those  reasons  the
    appeal was dismissed as the requirements of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 could not be met.

 4. The appellant appeals with permission today on the basis that there was
    a failure to properly assess that  key  issue  of  dependency  and  the
    appellant's evidence of it, with the First-tier Tribunal relying solely
    on previous decisions with no new findings made.  It was  claimed  that
    the remittance slips of money transfers had been disregarded and  on  a
    second ground, that there was no evidence from the respondent  about  a
    separate issue of deception on entry clearance.  The latter  ground  is
    not material to the outcome of the appeal.

 5. I find no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.   It  has
    been expressly  accepted  by  the  appellant  that  there  was  no  new
    documentary evidence of dependency in Nigeria, with a limited number of
    money transfer receipts available, all of which had been  submitted  to
    the previous Tribunals and considered in  the  findings  of  fact  made
    therein.  The finding at paragraph 12 of the decision that the only new
    evidence before  the  most  recent  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  of
    Reverend Robinson has  been  expressly  accepted  before  me  today  as
    accurate.  It is also accepted that  Reverend  Robinson  did  not  know
    either the appellant or the sponsor at the  relevant  time  period  and
    could only give evidence as to their general  credibility  rather  than
    anything specific about the period of claimed dependency.  In this case
    not only is the  previous  decisions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    dependency the starting point it is also inevitably the end point.   If
    there was no new evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to consider in
    this particular case, then there were no further findings of fact  that
    could be made in accordance with the principles in  Devaseelan.   There
    are no further findings because there is  no  further  evidence  to  be
    considered.

 6. Counsel for the appellant has  not  been  able  to  point  to  anything
    specific in the written statement or  the  oral  evidence  given  which
    would add to or change the position from the previous appeal decisions,
    such as to require separate consideration by the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In these circumstances, it is inevitable  that  the  previous  findings
    would not only be relevant as  the  starting  point,  but  also  upheld
    applying the principles in Devaseelan.  For these reasons, there is  no
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, as no  further
    findings or reasoning were required in the decision of Judge Cassel.  I
    make no specific findings on the lack of any evidence of  deception  in
    the entry clearance application, as this is immaterial in  the  absence
    of the appellant being unable to establish dependency in Nigeria.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     14th January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


