
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01630/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 14th July, 2017                            |On 22nd August, 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                           Mr Syed Muminur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chaudhry of KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 17th September, 1989.

2.   On 26th September, 2016 the respondent decided to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  under  European
    Community law as the extended family  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom to the  appellant.   The  appellant
    appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge E Fowell
    on 21st November, 2016.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had no relevant jurisdiction to hear the appellant's  appeal  following
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal:
    Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).  As a result the judge felt that  since
    there was no jurisdiction he had no need to prepare a determination for
    promulgation by the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   Dissatisfied with the judge's decision and relying on  LO  (Partner  of
    EEA  national)  Nigeria  [2009]  UKAIT  00034,  the  appellant   sought
    permission to appeal the judge's decision.

5.   Notwithstanding the fact that the First-tier Tribunal had not issued  a
    determination leave was granted on the basis that, "it  is  on  balance
    arguable that it is appropriate for the matter to proceed  for  hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal as  an  appeal  rather  than  being  required  to
    progress by way of judicial review."

6.   I explained to Mr Chaudhry  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    concluded that he had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appellant's  appeal
    and given the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala  (EFMs:  right  of
    appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC), and that the  Vice  President  of  the
    Upper Tribunal was on the panel in both the case of Sala and  LO,  Sala
    represents the Tribunal's current thinking.  Mr  Chaudhry  argued  that
    the decision of the Tribunal in LO was a correct statement of  law  and
    that the decision in Sala was wrong.  He confirmed that he had  nothing
    further to add.

7.   Given the decision of the Tribunal in Sala, which represents the  Upper
    Tribunal's current thinking,  I  have  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not err in concluding that he had no jurisdiction.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.
No anonymity direction is made.
Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee payable.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

