
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01741/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th February 2018                         |On 15th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                        Mr Darshan Nareshkumar Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGill, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mr Darshan Nareshkumar Patel against a decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones, promulgated on the 1st June  2017,  to
    dismiss his appeal against refusal of an  EEA  Residence  Card  on  the
    ground that there was no valid appeal.

 2. The text of Judge Jones' decision reads as follows:

         "1.  The Appellant was born on 6th August 1985 and is a citizen  of
             India.  He applied for a residence card as  the  spouse  of  a
             Portuguese national exercising free  movement  rights  in  the
             United Kingdom.   A  Notice  of  Refusal  was  issued  by  the
             Respondent on 26th January 2016 and an appeal lodged.

         2.   The parties were represented as noted above.  At the outset of
             the hearing I sought to identify the parties and the extent of
             the papers.  It became quickly evident to me on reviewing  the
             file of papers that the Respondent's basis of refusal in terms
             of Regulation 17 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
             included, amongst other things, the fact  that  the  Appellant
             produced an expired passport.   However,  Regulation  17(1)(a)
             requires a current passport to  be  produced  as  evidence  of
             identification.

         3.   I asked the Appellant if this was the case, if he had  renewed
             his passport and he said that he had thought about it but  had
             not got round to it.  He had  made  enquiries  on  Capita  and
             other websites as to how to go about it, but he had failed  to
             do this (even up to the time of this hearing of which  he  has
             had considerable notice), though he realised this  is  one  of
             the reasons why the Respondent had  refused  to  consider  his
             application.

         4.   Regrettably, I had to inform the Appellant that,  pursuant  to
             Regulation 26(2) of these Regulations, it is  clear  that  the
             Appellant does not have  a  right  of  appeal  unless  he  has
             produced such a document.  He has not produced a document  any
             more than he has it available to him today for the purposes of
             the hearing, and I advised him that the Tribunal, regrettably,
             has no jurisdiction to hear his appeal.  Ms Weston  concurred.
             Accordingly, I advised the Appellant  that  I  am  obliged  to
             dismiss  his  appeal  and  he  would  need  to  give   further
             consideration to his legal position, taking legal advice as he
             sees fit without  delay.   Whilst  there  is  nothing  in  the
             present notice which suggests he is liable to be  removed,  he
             should bear in mind that he would need to  take  steps  if  he
             wished to renew any application, or preserve any other rights,
             so that he might  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  lest  the
             Respondent takes steps to remove him and/or restrict any right
             of appeal to an out of country appeal.

         5.   There is therefore no valid appeal before the Tribunal.   When
             the Tribunal makes such a decision it shall  take  no  further
             action, save to send the parties to the appeal a copy of  this
             Notice."

 3. The principal (if not the only) complaint made in the Grounds of  Appal
    is that the judge quoted  the  wrong  subparagraph  of  Regulation  26.
    Subparagraph (2) of that Regulation is applicable only to EEA nationals
    which, as the appellant correctly observes, he is not.  Rather,  he  is
    the family member of an EEA  national.   However  this  distinction  is
    immaterial given that  precisely  the  same  requirement  is  contained
    within subparagraph (3) of Regulation 26; namely, that  he  produces  a
    passport.

 4. I quote now from the grant of permission to appeal by Judge Landes:

         "1.  This is an in-time application by the appellant for permission
             to appeal against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal T Jones promulgated on 1  June  2017  dismissing  the
             appellant's appeal for want of jurisdiction.

         2.   As is correctly identified in the grounds, the judge  referred
             to  the  incorrect  regulation  -   26(2)   EEA   regulations.
             Regulation 26(2) is relevant to the position of EEA  nationals
             only.

         3.   I have considered carefully whether any error  could  only  be
             immaterial as whereas the relevant regulation  appears  to  be
             regulation  26(3),  regulation  26(3)  also  refers   to   the
             production of a passport.  However  whilst  the  appellant  is
             likely to have had difficulties succeeding under regulation 17
             if  he  did  not  have  a  valid  passport,  the  question  of
             jurisdiction is a different one.  Bearing in mind that:

             (i)  the wording in regulation 26(3) is 'passport' as  opposed
                  to 'valid passport' and  the  appellant  had  produced  an
                  expired passport to the respondent;

             (ii) the  judge  did  not  expressly  consider  the  terms  of
                  regulation 29A EEA regulations;

             (iii)     the  EEA  regulations  fall  to  be  interpreted  in
                  accordance with the  Directive  which  provides  that  the
                  persons concerned should  have  access  to  procedures  to
                  enable them to appeal or seek review of any decision.

         I cannot say that any error made by the judge can  only  have  been
             immaterial to the question of jurisdiction."

 5. I emphasise that I have made my decision on the basis of  the  arguable
    errors of law identified by Judge Landes rather than the rather  narrow
    point that was taken by the Appellant in his grounds (see paragraph  3,
    above).

 6. I say straight away that I do not think it is arguable that  the  judge
    made an error of law in failing to give express  consideration  to  the
    terms of Regulation 29A of the EEA Regulations.   I  say  this  because
    whilst  Regulation  29A  makes  provision  for  alternative  proof   of
    identification, this is only in the context of applications  considered
    by the Secretary of State.  It is not therefore relevant to  the  issue
    of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to entertain  an  appeal  from  the
    Secretary of State.

 7. However, the matters raised by Judge Landes at sub-paragraphs  (i)  and
    (iii) of paragraph 3 of the grant of permission to appeal  are,  in  my
    judgment, highly relevant.  Whereas Regulation 17  (which  governs  the
    grant of applications) refers to  a  "valid  passport",  Regulation  26
    (which governs the right of appeal) refers only to  a  "passport".   On
    the assumption that the word "valid" equates in  this  context  to  the
    word "current", the issue in this appeal turns  upon  the  question  of
    whether its omission from Regulation 26 is significant.  In my judgment
    it  is.  This  is  because,  as  Judge  Landes  pointed  out,  the  EEA
    Regulations fall to be interpreted in  accordance  with  the  Directive
    that requires member states to ensure that the persons  concerned  have
    an effective right of appeal or review.  I therefore conclude that  the
    purpose of the requirement under Regulation 26 to provide a passport is
    merely to establish the person's identity. It  need  not  therefore  be
    'current' in the sense of authorising future cross-border travel.  This
    may also explain why it  is  unnecessary  for  Regulation  26  to  make
    provision for alternative means of identification, in contrast with the
    position under Regulation 29 [see paragraph 6, above].

 8. Returning to the facts  of  this  appeal,  the  position  is  that  the
    Appellant had produced a passport (albeit not a  current  one)  and  he
    therefore fulfilled the requirements under Regulation 26 for the making
    of a valid appeal.  It was therefore an error of law for the  judge  to
    hold otherwise.

 9. The next question is how to proceed further.  Given that the First-tier
    Tribunal has never entertained or considered the substantive merits  of
    the Appellant's appeal, it seems to me that the appropriate  course  is
    for this appeal to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  it  to
    carry out that task.  This is because the Appellant  is  in  the  first
    instance entitled to receive a decision upon the merits of  his  appeal
    from the First-tier Tribunal.  Only then might  it  become  appropriate
    for the Upper Tribunal to review the  merits  of  his  application.  On
    behalf of the Home Office, Mr McGill indicated that he did  not  oppose
    this course.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal is allowed.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  remitted  for
    the appeal to be heard at Taylor House  before  any  judge  other  than
    Judge Jones.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 14th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
