
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01723/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On 17 May 2021                       |On 26 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                        HECTOR JOSE RODRIGUES ALVAREZ
         (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE IN RESPECT OF APPELLANT's wife, 'BB')
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
An order is made under r.14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant's wife, 'BB'. This
direction applies to, amongst others, BB, the appellant and the respondent.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of
court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of  the  Dominican  Republic  who  seeks  a
    permanent residence card  as  confirmation  of  a  permanent  right  of
    residence as the spouse of an EEA citizen.

 2. His appeal was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal by means of
    a decision dated 25 September 2019. He was granted permission to appeal
    and by a decision dated 7 April 2021 this  Tribunal  (Judges  Gill  and
    O'Callaghan) set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. By its decision of 7  April  2021  this  Tribunal  confirmed  that  the
    following findings  of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    preserved:

          i)  The  appellant  and  his  wife,  BB,  were   in   a   genuine
             relationship: [10] of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

         ii) The finding at [17]:

             'I do not accept that the evidence before me shows  that  [BB]
             wanted money to assist the appellant. Nowhere in the  messages
             does she state that. What  is  stated  is  that  her  passage,
             presumably to the UK, would be paid for. I do accept that  she
             strongly rejects that and makes clear that she is not prepared
             to help the appellant. There  is  clearly  acrimony  [between]
             them for whatever reason. That  may  well  lie  in  the  issue
             described above.'

 4. It was further confirmed that the First-tier Tribunal's summary of  the
    oral evidence given by the appellant and his supporting  witnesses,  at
    [12]-[15], stood.

Anonymity

 5. An anonymity order was issued by  the  Tribunal  on  7  April  2021  in
    respect of the appellant's wife, BB. The Tribunal was satisfied that in
    circumstances where records of  BB's  employment  and  social  security
    history were directly relevant to its consideration of this  appeal  an
    anonymity order should properly be made to prevent  a  disproportionate
    interference in BB's  protected  article  8  rights  arising  from  her
    identity being made public. Such interference with  article  10  rights
    was proportionate  in  circumstances  where  BB  was  not  a  party  to
    proceedings and was unaware that elements  of  her  private  life  were
    being considered by this Tribunal.

 6. No request was made by the parties to  set  the  order  aside.  In  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that  it  remains  proportionate  for  the
    order to continue.

 7. The anonymity order is confirmed in the terms set out above.

Background

 8. The appellant is aged 48. He first entered the United Kingdom  in  2003
    as the spouse of a diplomat, Ms Juliet Solomon, who was working for the
    Commonwealth Secretariat,  London.  They  have  a  daughter  from  this
    marriage, Ms. Jade Rodriguez Solomon. The couple divorced in 2004.

 9. The appellant commenced a relationship with a Spanish national, BB, who
    was residing in the United Kingdom prior to their marriage  which  took
    place in New York in July 2006. The appellant was issued  with  an  EEA
    family  permit  as  the  husband  of  a  qualified  person  under   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ('the  2006
    Regulations') and entered the United Kingdom on 2 October 2006. He  was
    subsequently issued with a residence card as a family member of an  EEA
    national from September 2007 to September 2012.

10. The relationship between the appellant and BB broke down in late  2011,
    though they remain married. BB returned to Spain in 2015.

11. An earlier application made by the appellant for a permanent  residence
    card in 2013 was refused by the respondent and the First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed his appeal by a decision dated 5 December 2014. Judge  Oliver
    noted, inter alia,  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any
    corroborative documentary evidence  as  to  BB  exercising  EEA  Treaty
    rights in this country and  so  found  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    satisfy  the  requirements  of  regulation   15(1)(b)   of   the   2006
    Regulations.

12. A subsequent application for leave to remain on human  rights  (article
    8) grounds was refused by a decision of the respondent dated 31 October
    2017  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Veloso)   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal by a decision dated 12 December 2017.

13. The appellant applied again for an EEA permanent  residence  card.  The
    respondent refused the  application  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 by a decision dated 7 October 2019.

Decision

14. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Deller informed me that the respondent
    was prepared to accept that  the  appellant's  appeal  should  succeed.
    However, though the parties were progressing along the path of agreeing
    the basis upon which the appeal was to be allowed they had not  reached
    a mutually agreed basis by the time the  hearing  commenced.  With  the
    agreement of the parties, I directed that a consent order be  filed  by
    4pm on 24 May 2021, thereby permitting the parties a week  to  reach  a
    mutually agreeable basis for the allowing of this appeal.

15. On 19 May 2021 the Tribunal received a consent order signed by both the
    appellant and Mr. Deller. I detail its contents below:

         CONSENT ORDER UNDER RULE 39(1)

         Pursuant to Rule 39(1) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules  2008,
         the parties consent to the disposal of  the  above  appeal  on  the
         following agreed basis and  ask  that  the  Tribunal  produces  the
         required determination accordingly.

         1. The Secretary of State accepts on  the  evidence  provided  that
         [BB], Mr  Rodriguez  Alvarez's  second  wife,  entered  the  United
         Kingdom with him on 2 October 2006 and was an EEA qualified  person
         as defined in Regulation 2 for the entirety of the  following  five
         years,  as  some  combination  of  a  worker,  a  job  seeker   and
         potentially a self-sufficient person. Mr Rodriguez Alvarez,  it  is
         accepted, therefore acquired a right of permanent residence in  the
         United Kingdom on 2 October 2011 as he resided for the  same  five-
         year period as a family member under Regulation 7. He has not  lost
         this status as he has not  been  absent  for  any  two-year  period
         since.

         2. Previous  applications  were  rejected  on  the  basis  that  no
         evidence of  [BB's]  identity  had  been  provided,  but  this  was
         disposed of in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  point  is  not
         maintained.

         3. A previous application under the EU Settlement Scheme  has  also
         been refused on the basis that  [BB]  was  not  accepted  to  be  a
         Spanish national. That conclusion,  whether  based  on  a  lack  of
         identification documents or confusion with Mr  Rodriguez  Alvarez's
         first wife, is now recognised as incorrect.

         4. Accordingly the instant appeal under regulation 36 of  the  2016
         Regulations falls to be allowed as the Secretary of  State  accepts
         that  the  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a  document  confirming
         permanent right of residence was contrary to Mr Rodriguez Alvarez's
         rights under the Regulations (and previously under the Treaties).

         5. For completeness, it is also accepted that Mr Rodriguez  Alvarez
         has resided in the United Kingdom  since  and  [BB]  did  so  until
         returning to Spain in 2015. They remain married.

         6. The Secretary of State will now begin the process of recognising
         Mr Rodriguez Alvarez's position with the appropriate  documentation
         and asks that a confirmatory determination by provided as  soon  as
         possible.

16. By means of an  accompanying  email,  Mr.  Deller  confirmed  that  the
    consent order could appropriately stand as 'a full record of the nature
    and scope of the Secretary of State's concession of the case'.

17. Rule 39(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    permits the Tribunal, at the request of the  parties  but  only  if  it
    considers it appropriate, to make a  consent  order  disposing  of  the
    proceedings and making such other appropriate provision as the  parties
    have agreed. I have decided that the consent order cannot stand as  the
    Tribunal's decision, solely because BB's actual name is detailed in the
    order and an anonymity order is in place. Consequently, I  have  placed
    the consent order on file and have proceeded to author this decision.

18. I allow the appeal consequent to the respondent's confirmation that the
    appellant has enjoyed permanent  residence  in  this  country  since  2
    October 2011 and has not  lost  such  status  since  this  date.  I  am
    satisfied from a  consideration  of  the  papers  before  me  that  the
    respondent was correct to  accept  that  the  appellant  qualified  for
    permanent residence consequent to his wife, BB, exercising  EEA  Treaty
    rights in this country between 2 October 2006 and 2 October 2011.



Notice of Decision

19. By means of a decision dated 7 April 2021 this  Tribunal  set  aside  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  25  September  2019
    pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal,  Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007.

20. The decision on the appellant's appeal on this issue  is  re-made,  and
    the appeal is allowed.

21. An anonymity order is made in respect of BB.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 May 2021



To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award.

Though the appellant was ultimately successful on  appeal,  I  am  satisfied
that on the information available to the  respondent  her  initial  decision
was one that was reasonably open to her.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 May 2021

