

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01322/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre |Decision and Reasons promulgated  |
|On 5 October 2017                        |On 6 October 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                           FAISAL QADEER CHAUDHARY
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr A Mahmood, Counsel.
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                 ERROR OF LAW FINDING - DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of  First-tier  Judge  Hawden-
        Beal promulgated on 24 January 2017 in which  the  Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal against the refusal  to  issue  a  Permanent
        Residence Card pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area)
        Regulations 2006.



Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, applied for a residence  card
        as confirmation of his right to reside permanently  in  the  United
        Kingdom on the basis that he had retained his  right  of  residence
        after his divorce from an EEA national.
     3. Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny the Judge found she was satisfied that the  appellant  was
        entitled to a residence card before proceeding to consider  whether
        it should be a permanent residence card.
     4. The Judges overall conclusions are set out at  [22  -  23]  of  the
        decision under challenge in the following terms:


         "22.     Therefore, although I am satisfied that the  appellant  is
             entitled to a residence card on the basis that he has retained
             his rights, I am not satisfied that he can show  that  he  has
             been  residing  in  accordance  with  the  regulations  for  a
             continuous period of five years  prior  to  the  date  of  the
             divorce because there are gaps in the  evidence  showing  that
             his ex-wife was exercising her treaty  rights  for  that  same
             continuous period of five years.


         23.  I therefore find that the appellant  has  not  discharged  the
             burden of proof and has not demonstrated that he meets all the
             requirements of Regulation 15(1)(f) for a permanent  residence
             card. I am satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  respondent
             appealed against in this regard is in accordance with the 2006
             EEA regulations."


     5. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the Judge erred
        in law. The relevant paragraphs of the application  for  permission
        to appeal are in the following terms:


         "3.  The FTTJ erred in failing to have proper regard to and  apply
             the sole ground of appeal for EEA appeals as set  out  in  the
             2006 Regs Schedule 1 namely whether the decision breaches  the
             appellant's rights under the EU Treaties  in  respect  of  his
             entry to all residence in the UK.


         4.   The FTTJ erred and misdirected himself in determining this EEA
             ground in contention. As the FTTJ  found  that  the  Appellant
             retained  his  right  of  residence  and  was  entitled  to  a
             residence  card,  he  erred  in  omitting  to  find  that  the
             Respondent's  refusal  to  issue  a  residence  card  to   the
             Appellant under reg 10 breached the Appellant's  rights  under
             EU Treaties. The FTTJ erred in omitting to allow the appeal on
             the EEA ground in respect of reg 10.


         5.   The Tribunal is invited to consider whether in the  light  of
             the FTT's set finding the decision can be corrected under  the
             slip  rule  -  so  as  to  read  appeal  allowed  rather  than
             dismissed. Alternatively it is submitted  that  the  Appellant
             should be granted leave to appeal and his appeal allowed."


     6. Permission to appeal was granted by a Designated Judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal  the  operative  part  of  the  grant  being  in  the
        following terms:


             "It is arguable that paragraph 22 is ambiguous.  I  would  not
             agree  that  it  is  a  typographical  error  that  the  Judge
             dismissed the appeal since the use of the word  "although"  in
             paragraph 22 suggests that the Judge  was  proceeding  on  the
             basis that there were two separate limbs to  the  application,
             retaining  rights  and  residing  in   accordance   with   the
             regulations. Arguably however the one implied the other and to
             differentiate them as the Judge did was an error of  law.  All
             grounds may be argued."



Error of law


     7. Although a Rule 24 response has been filed, dated 1 September 2017,
        opposing the appeal Mr Bates adopted a far more realistic  approach
        before the Upper Tribunal in accepting that the Judge had erred  in
        law in the manner made out in the  application  for  permission  to
        appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
     8. This is an EEA  appeal  in  relation  to  which  the  appellant  is
        asserting he is entitled to a residence card in  recognition  of  a
        right already conferred  upon  him  by  European  law.  It  is  not
        disputed the appellant was lawfully married to the EEA national  on
        24 February 2010 or that their  marriage  ended  in  divorce  on  2
        January 2015. There is no cross-appeal by  the  respondent  to  the
        finding of the Judge that at the date of  the  dissolution  of  the
        marriage the EEA national  was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
        United Kingdom and it was also accepted by the respondent that  the
        marriage had lasted for more than three years and that the  parties
        had resided together in the UK for at least one year.
     9. The application for permission to appeal refers to  Schedule  1  of
        the 2006 Regulations which is in the following terms:


             "SCHEDULE 1 Regulation 26(7)

             APPEALS TO THE _1FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL_

             1._ The following provisions of, or made under, the  2002  Act
             have effect in
             relation to an appeal under these Regulations to the  _1First-
         tier Tribunal or Upper
             Tribunal_ as if it  were  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
         decision under section 82(1)
             of that Act:

             section 84(1)(a), except paragraphs (a) and (f);
             sections 85 to 87;

             section 105 and any regulations made under that section; and
             section 106 and any rules made under that section(b).

             2. Tribunal Procedure Rules have effect in relation to appeals
         under these
             Regulations."

    10. The situation in this appeal is very similar to that considered  by
        the Tribunal in MDB and others (Article 12, 1612/68)  Italy  [2010]
        UKUT 161 (IAC) in which it was held that in a case  concerned  with
        an EEA decision the tribunal judge is obliged by s.84(1)(d) of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to decide whether  the
        decision breaches any of the appellants' rights under the Community
        Treaties in respect of their entry to or residence  in  the  United
        Kingdom; see also s.109(3). Where the  decision  is  a  refusal  to
        issue a permanent residence card that may necessitate, in the event
        that refusal is found correct, considering  whether  the  appellant
        was entitled nonetheless to an extended right of residence.
    11. The finding by the Judge that the appellant is not  entitled  to  a
        Residence Card as confirmation of the right to  permanently  reside
        in the United Kingdom is not the subject of this appeal although Mr
        Mahmood his skeleton argument makes comment about  this  aspect  of
        the decision too.
    12. What is clear is that the finding by the Judge that  the  appellant
        was entitled to a residence card, is clearly  a  finding  that  the
        refusal by the Secretary of State to issue this  document  breaches
        the appellant's rights  under  Community  Treaties  which  arguably
        supports the contention that the correct decision in this matter is
        that, although dismissing the appeal against the refusal to issue a
        Permanent Residence Card, the Judge should have allowed the  appeal
        in relation to the alternative  finding  of  an  entitlement  to  a
        Residence Card.
    13. This tribunal therefore finds the Judge materially erred in law  in
        a manner material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal.  That
        decision is set aside although all findings contained  therein  are
        preserved other than the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    14. The Upper Tribunal substitutes a decision to allow the appeal.  The
        nature of the relief to be  granted,  in  light  of  the  preserved
        findings, appears to be limited to the issue of  a  residence  card
        and not to a permanent residence card.


Decision

    15. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake  the  decision
        as follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 5 October 2017










