
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/01239/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 April 2017                      |On 3 May 2017                   |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                              UBADI NATHAN IBE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:             Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Ms I Mahmud, instructed by Saviours Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Meah, promulgated on 24 October  2016,
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 25 October 1969 and is a national  of  Nigeria.
On 11 August 2010 the appellant was granted an EEA  residence  card  as  the
spouse of an EEA national. The appellant's marriage ended in  divorce  on  4
June 2014. On 22 April 2015, the appellant applied for  permanent  residence
card claiming that he had retained a right of residence in the UK.

4. On 16 September 2015, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Meah ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 8 March 2017 Judge Page  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      The respondent has identified arguable grounds of appeal that can only
      be  properly  resolved  if  permission  to  appeal  is  granted.   The
      respondent's argument is that the Judge erred in calculating that  the
      appellant had resided in accordance  with  the  regulations  for  five
      continuous years. The respondent  asserts  that  the  Judge  erred  in
      finding that the appellant had acquired a right of permanent residence
      on the basis of his self-employment from  2011  to  2016,  failing  to
      require the appellant to show that his ex-EEA  spouse  was  exercising
      treaty rights for four years prior to their  divorce.  The  respondent
      argues the appellant could only  rely  on  his  self-employment  after
      divorce. If his EEA spouse was not exercising treaty rights before the
      divorce the respondent's grounds are arguable.

The Hearing

6. Mr Tarlow moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told  me  that  the  decision
contains a material error of law because, at [13] and [14] of the  decision,
the Judge focuses solely on the appellant and finds that the  appellant  has
been working in the UK for more than five years. Mr Tarlow had no  criticism
of that finding, but told me that those findings  did  not  go  far  enough.
This case concerns a retained right of residence, and the Judge has made  no
findings at all in relation to the appellant's Ex-wife, an EEA national.  He
told me that to qualify for a retained  right  of  residence  after  divorce
from an EEA national, it is essential that the EEA national  was  exercising
treaty rights up to the date of  divorce.  There  are  no  findings  in  the
decision in relation to the EEA national. He reminded me that  for  a  right
to be retained the right has to exist in the first place. He  told  me  that
the absence of an analysis of the EEA national's position up to the date  of
divorce is a material error of law.

7. (a) For the appellant, Ms Mahmud told me that  the  question  of  whether
the appellant's ex-spouse was exercising treaty rights  had  never  been  an
issue. She took me to the respondent's reasons for refusal letter, which  is
now reproduced at page 140 of the bundle  prepared  for  the  appellant  for
this hearing. The third paragraph of that letter says

      You have provided various  self-employment  documents  from  your  EEA
      sponsor around the period that your decree  absolute  was  issued.  As
      such, it is accepted that  your  EEA  sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
      rights at the time your divorce was finalised.

(b) Ms Mahmud took me to [3] of the Judge's decision, where the Judge says

      In summary, the application  was  refused  on  the  grounds  that  the
      respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  resided  in
      accordance with the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
      2006 (EEA Regulations) for a period of five continuous years. This was
      the only ground of refusal and there  was  no  application  to  either
      amend or add to these.

(c) Ms Mahmud told me that the decision does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

8. Both Mr Tarlow and Ms Mahmud agreed that, if I was  to  find  a  material
error of  law,  I  should  substitute  my  own  decision  finding  that  the
appellant has exercised treaty rights as a worker for  a  continuous  period
of five years, and (relying on the reasons for  refusal  letter)  find  that
the EEA sponsor was exercising treaty rights up to and  including  the  date
of decree of divorce.

Analysis

9. In Amos v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department;  Theophilus  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ  552   the  Court
of Appeal held that a divorced spouse had to establish that he  or  she  had
the right of residence before  the  question  whether,  notwithstanding  the
divorce, the  right  had  been  retained  by  Article  13  of  the  Citizens
Directive could be determined. The right was subject to  Articles  16(2)  or
18 of the  Citizens  Directive.  The  former  provision  applied  to  family
members of EEA nationals who must have resided with the EEA national in  the
host Member State legally for a continuous period of five  years.  The  word
"legally" had to be given a Community meaning,  which  essentially  depended
on the exercise of Treaty rights.

10. in Diatta v Land Berlin (Case  267/83);  [1985]  ECR  567  the  European
Court of Justice (as  it  was  then)  concluded  that  separation  short  of
divorce did not affect the right of the non-national  spouse  under  Article
16 of the Citizens Directive if both the EEA national and  the  non-national
spouse continued to reside in the same Member State (paras  19  -  24).  The
Claimants were not required to show that their former spouses  were  working
for a continuous period of five years prior to their  applications  for  the
right of permanent residence. The requirements  of  the  Citizens  Directive
applicable to the Claimants were that at all times while residing in the  UK
until their divorce the spouse had to  be  a  worker  or  self-employed  (or
otherwise satisfied Article 7(1) of the Citizens Directive);  the  marriages
had to have lasted at least three years, including one year in the  UK,  and
they had  to  show  that  they  were  workers,  self-employed  or  otherwise
satisfied the penultimate paragraph of Article 13(2). The  2006  Regulations
were consistent with those  provisions.  Provided  that  the  conditions  in
regulation 10(5) continued to be satisfied,  after  five  years'  continuous
residence in the UK, a non-EEA national would be  entitled  to  a  permanent
right of  residence  under  regulation  15(1)(f)  (paras  29  -  31).  Under
regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations, the  ex-spouse  of  an  EEA  national
continues to enjoy a right of residence if he was  residing  in  the  UK  in
accordance with the Regulations when the marriage was terminated  (i.e.  the
decree of divorce was made absolute), and the marriage had lasted for  three
years, at least one of which was spent by both  parties  in  the  UK.   This
'retained' right of residence may lead to a  permanent  right  of  residence
under regulation 15(1)(f) if he has a total of five years' residence.

11. The decision contains a material error  of  law  because,  although  the
Judge correctly identifies the area of dispute between the parties, he  does
not make any findings of fact in relation to the  appellant's  EEA  national
ex-wife.

12. At [3] of the decision the Judge correctly says that there  is  no  area
of  dispute  other  than  whether  or  not  the  appellant  had  resided  in
accordance with the EEA regulations. The simple error  that  the  Judge  has
made is just that he does not record the respondent's acceptance  (contained
in the reasons for refusal letter) that

      ........ your EEA sponsor was exercising treaty  rights  at  the  time
      your divorce was finalised.

13. In the absence of finding that the EEA  sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
rights up to and including the date of decree of divorce,  the  decision  is
incomplete. Because the decision  is  incomplete  I  have  to  find  that  a
material error of law exists, and so I must set the decision aside.

14. Although I set the decision  aside  I  find  that  there  is  sufficient
material before me to enable me to substitute my own decision

15. The 2006 EEA regulations have  now  been  superseded  by  the  2016  EEA
regulations. Although the new regulations revoked the 2006  EEA  regulations
by operation of Reg 1 (2), they are preserved for the purposes of appeals.

Findings of Fact

16. The appellant is a Nigerian national, born on  25  October  1969.  On  4
June 2007, the appellant married Francia Maria Smith, an  EEA  national  who
was exercising treaty rights of movement in the UK.

17. On 11 August 2010 the respondent granted the appellant an EEA  residence
card as the family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  That
residence card was valid until 11 August 2015.

18. On 4 June 2014 the marriage between the appellant and the  EEA  national
ended in decree of divorce. From August 2010 until the  date  of  decree  of
divorce, the EEA national was a self-employed person living and  working  in
the UK. She was  therefore  a  qualified  person  because  she  was  an  EEA
national exercising treaty rights up to and including the date of divorce.

19. On 6 October 2010 the appellant started to work as a  cleaner  for  solo
service group. Since 3 November 2010 the  appellant  has  been  consistently
employed by London Borough of  Croydon  as  a  neighbourhood  caretaker.  He
continues in that employment. The appellant's P  60s  from  that  employment
from 2011 to 2017 are now reproduced in the appellant's bundle prepared  for
this appeal.

Conclusion

20. The appellant has retained the  right  of  residence  following  divorce
from his EEA national ex-wife. He is  therefore  a  family  member  who  has
retained  the  right  of  residence  in  terms  of  regulation  10  of   the
Immigration (EEA) regulations 2006.

21.  The  appellant  has  lived  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
regulations as an employed person for a continuous period of five years.  He
is therefore entitled to a permanent right  of  residence  under  regulation
15(1)(f).

22. The appeal is allowed. The  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

24. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 24 October 2016.

25. I substitute my  own  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision dated 16 September 2015 is allowed.


Signed                        Paul Doyle
  Date 1 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



