
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01418/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Centre                                 |                                    |
|On 8th April 2019                      |On 9th April 2019                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  ALMAS [R]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person, through an interpreter.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. By a decision promulgated on 17th August 2018, First-tier  Tribunal
         judge Meyler allowed Ms [R]'s appeal against a decision by the SSHD
         to refuse her a derivative residence card. It was  not  in  dispute
         that Ms [R], a Pakistani national, was the  primary  carer  of  her
         three Italian citizen children who were exercising Treaty Rights in
         the UK (at school). In support of her application for a  derivative
         residence card, Ms [R] had relied upon EHIC cards for  each  child.
         She did not have such a card for herself. The  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge found that  the  possession  of  such  a  card  was  adequate
         evidence of comprehensive health insurance, as required  under  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

      2. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on the grounds
         that an EHIC card was only applicable where the EEA national was in
         the UK for temporary purposes; that was  not  the  case  for  these
         three children who were attending school and not here for temporary
         purposes.

      3. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in her finding that  the
         EHIC card was sufficient for  health  insurance  purposes  in  this
         case; I set aside the decision to be remade.

      4. Ms [R] produced comprehensive health insurance  for  her,  and  the
         children taken out with Aviva  and  effective  from  November  2018
         together with her bank statement  showing  payment  of  the  direct
         debits required under the plan. Mr Bates  did  not  object  to  the
         submission of these documents despite an application under Rule  15
         not being made.  Mr Bates accepted the plans  were  operative.  His
         only objection was whether the plans  were  sufficient  given  they
         excluded treatment for kidney dialysis.

      5. Ms [R] gave oral evidence that neither she nor her children had any
         significant health problems; they had not sought any treatment  for
         anything  other  than  minor  childhood  illnesses.  I  accept  her
         evidence and find that there are no significant  ailments  such  as
         would not be covered by the health insurance.

      6. Mr Bates made no  direct  submission  with  regard  to  the  kidney
         dialysis. He acknowledged that the instruction to  caseworkers  was
         rather vague and that fully comprehensive health insurance was  not
         required; he was content to leave to me the  decision  whether  the
         health insurance taken out by Ms [R] was adequate.

      7. The guidance to Home Office caseworkers and  the  application  form
         require health insurance to cover the "majority of risks while they
         are in the UK". I was not aware of  any  statistical  records  that
         indicate that the risk of this appellant and her children being  in
         need of kidney dialysis was such that the health insurance plan she
         had taken out was inadequate. I am satisfied that the family are in
         good health and there are no indications that one or more  of  them
         is going to require kidney dialysis in the near or distant future.

      8. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the health insurance taken
         out by Ms [R] is adequate to fulfil the criteria that she  and  the
         children are self-sufficient.

      9. In the light of that finding and that she is the primary  (in  fact
         sole) carer of the children, her appeal against the decision by the
         SSHD to refuse her a derivative residence card is allowed.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision; I re-make the decision in the appeal  against
    the refusal of the SSHD to issue Ms [R]  with  a  derivative  residence
    card by allowing it


     Date 8th April 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
