
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: eA/01325/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16 January 2017                   |On 18 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                              RAMUNE MARTUSYTE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Unrepresented
For the SSHD:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

       1. In a  decision  dated  15  August  2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  her
          a document certifying permanent residence as  an  Accession  state
          national worker on the basis of five continuous  years  of  lawful
          residence.  The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania.

       2. The appeal  was  heard  on  the  papers  in  accordance  with  the
          appellant's request.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the
          basis for the respondent's refusal relates to an  allegation  that
          the appellant registered her employment for  'Etrusca  Group  Ltd'
          and failed to provide evidence she worked there.  In  her  grounds
          of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  made  it  very
          clear that she has been employed at 'Town Centre  Restaurant  Ltd'
          from 2007 not 'Etrusca'.   In  support  of  this  explanation  the
          appellant submitted P60s in relation to her  employment  at  'Town
          Centre Enterprises Ltd' from 2007-2012 and  'TCR  Ltd'  (with  the
          same employer address at Town Centre Restaurant  Ltd)  from  2013-
          2015.

       3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  regarded  the  evidence  provided   as
          insufficient on the  basis  that  "P60  are  notoriously  easy  to
          produce and there is  no  independent  or  objective  evidence  or
          context from other sources with  which  to  weigh  or  view  these
          individual P60 forms.  There is for example no HMRC evidence."

       4. Mr Singh invited me to  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
          entitled to approach the evidence in this way.  I  do  not  agree.
          The appellant provided a an  apparently  cogent  explanation  that
          was   supported   by   apparently   credible   P60s   and    other
          documentation.  There was no basis to suggest that the  P60s  were
          not genuine documents.  There was no such position on the part  of
          the respondent  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Further,  the
          First-tier Tribunal was mistaken in finding an  absence  of  other
          evidence.  The appellant  had  provided  evidence  confirming  her
          address  from  Newham  Council.   This  was  consistent  with  the
          address provided in the later P60s.

       5.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has   provided
          inadequate reasons for dismissing the appeal  and  has  failed  to
          engage with the  evidence  available  to  it.   This  failure  has
          infected the First-tier  Tribunal's  factual  findings  and  these
          need to be remade  completely.   The  nature  and  extent  of  the
          necessary fact finding is such that the matter  should  be  remade
          by the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

       6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

       7. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Directions

        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           (TE: 1 hr) on the first date available.

        2) The appellant shall provide the First-tier Tribunal and the Home
           Office with all relevant  documentary  evidence  (including  all
           evidence available from HMRC and  her  employer  confirming  her
           employment) 14 days before the hearing.

        3) Within 14  days  of  the  date  of  sending  this  decision  the
           appellant shall indicate to the Tribunal whether she wishes  the
           matter to proceed by way of a paper or oral hearing and  if  she
           requests an oral hearing the appropriate fee needs to be paid.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
14 January 2016

