
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01669/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2021                               |On 10 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                             KHURAM SHEZAD KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a male citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  16  January
    1993, appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Siddiqi) promulgated on 18 August 2019.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    dismissed his appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated
    27 March 2019 refusing the appellant a residence card  as  confirmation
    of a right of residence under European Community Law. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The basis of the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  concerns  the  judge's
    findings [19] regarding the question as to whether  the  appellant  had
    transferred the centre of his life to the host member  state  (Cyprus).
    The parties agree that this part of the analysis is at  odds  with  the
    decision in ZA (Reg 9. EEA Regs; abuse of  rights)  Afghanistan  [2019]
    UKUT 281 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal found at  [75]  (viii)  that
    'the requirement to have transferred the centre of one's  life  to  the
    host member state is not a requirement of EU law, nor is it endorsed by
    the CJEU.' In her Rule 24 notice dated 10 November 2020, the  Secretary
    of State acknowledges that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  but
    submits that that acknowledgement should lead  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    remake the decision allowing the appeal. The judge had  found  problems
    in the evidence of the appellant which were materially relevant to  the
    application of Regulation 9(2) of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2016. Mr Bates, who appeared for the Secretary of State at the  initial
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal, went further and, disagreeing  with  the
    conclusion of the Rule 24 response, submitted that any error of law was
    immaterial. He submitted that, notwithstanding her  findings  regarding
    the transference of the 'centre of life', the judge had also found that
    the purpose of the appellant and sponsor's residence in Cyprus had been
    to circumvent the Immigration Rules [18(f)].

 3. The judge has, at [18], made a series  of  clear  findings  which  cast
    significant doubt on the conduct of  the  appellant  and  sponsor.  The
    problem, however, is that she has equally clearly  found  at  [15]  and
    [16] there is 'nothing to suggest that [the  appellant  and  sponsor's]
    residence [in Cyprus] was not genuine.'  Following  that  finding,  the
    judge at [16] states that 'I consider Regulation 9(2)(b)  and  (c)  are
    met.' At [17], she sets out her concerns regarding the  credibility  of
    the appellant and sponsor's evidence making reference to  many  of  the
    'genuineness' factors detailed in Regulation 9(3). The outcome  of  her
    assessment of the evidence leads her to the conclusion at [18(f)] which
    I have detailed above. That conclusion directly contradicts the judge's
    finding that the  couple's  residence  was  genuine.  As  the  Rule  24
    statement states, the judge has found that Regulation 9(2) (b) and  (c)
    have been met and then uses an analysis of the 9(3) factors  which  are
    intended inform the assessment  of  the  genuineness  of  residence  to
    conclude that the residence is not, after all, genuine at  all.  At  no
    point  in  her  decision  does   the   judge   address   this   obvious
    contradiction. The resulting lack of clarity leads me to conclude  that
    the decision should be set aside. I find that the findings at  [17]  et
    seq are vitiated by the error of law and should also be set aside.







    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Siddiqi; first available date at Manchester; First-
    tier Tribunal to decide  if  face  to  face  or  remote  hearing;  Urdu
    interpreter).


Signed                              Date 9 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane













































