
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01275/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 5 October 2018                           |On : 10 October 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                ibrahim musah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, instructed by PLCS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a national of Ghana born  on  19  June  1975,  appealed
      against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
      permanent residence card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA  Regulations")  on  the  basis  of  a
      retained right of residence upon divorce from his EEA national spouse.

   2. On 16 August 2011 the appellant was issued with an EEA residence  card
      on the basis of his marriage to an EEA national, which was valid until
      16 August 2016. He applied on 18 July 2016 for a  permanent  residence
      card on the basis of a retained right of residence  on  divorce.  That
      application was made subsequent to his divorce on 24 August  2015  and
      to an immigration visit to his property on 9 March 2016. As  a  result
      of that visit and information provided by the  appellant  and  by  his
      neighbour, and due to the lack  of  evidence  regarding  his  previous
      marriage, the respondent concluded that the  appellant's  marriage  to
      the relevant EEA  national  was  one  of  convenience.  The  appellant
      produced further evidence about his marriage and his  former  spouse's
      employment with his application on 18 July 2016 but the respondent did
      not consider the evidence to be reliable and accordingly  refused  the
      appellant's application on 22 January 2017.

   3. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie on 6 April 2018.  The  judge  heard
      evidence  from  the  appellant  and  three  witnesses  including   the
      neighbour who had provided information during the  immigration  visit.
      The judge was satisfied that  the  appellant's  marriage  was  one  of
      convenience and he dismissed the appeal.

   4. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on various grounds but in particular on the ground  that  the
      judge had made no findings on the evidence of the  witnesses  who  had
      attested to having known the appellant's wife and to the fact that she
      had lived with the appellant at his current address.

   5. Permission was granted on that particular ground but the other grounds
      were not excluded.

   6. At an error of law hearing, Mr Sowerby made submissions before me.  He
      pointed out that the judge did not have sight of  the  record  of  the
      interview at the appellant's house. He submitted that, on  that  basis
      and given that the burden of proving a  sham  marriage  lay  upon  the
      respondent, the absence  of  any  findings  on  the  evidence  of  the
      witnesses who had confirmed the appellant's wife's  residence  at  his
      address was fatal to the determination of the appeal.

   7. Mr Walker conceded that the judge  had  materially  erred  in  law  by
      failing to make any findings on the evidence of the witnesses.

   8. In the circumstances it was agreed that the  most  appropriate  course
      was for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
      heard afresh.

DECISION

   9. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
      afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Devittie.



     Directions

   The respondent is to produce to the First-tier Tribunal, and  provide  to
   the appellant,  a  copy  of  the  transcript  of  the  interview  at  the
   immigration visit conducted on 9 March 2016.




Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  5 October
2018
