

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number EA/01639/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
       Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 28th March 2018
       On 4th April 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                              MUHAMMAD IFTIKHAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr J Dhanji (Counsel, instructed by AH
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:      Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. On the 9th of December 2014 he
   applied for a residence card as the extended family member (EFM) on a EEA
   national in the UK exercising treaty rights under the EEA Regulations
   2006. The application was refused and the Appellant's appeal was heard by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan at Harmondsworth on the papers and
   dismissed in a decision promulgated on the 16th of August 2017.

2. The Judge, relying on the case of Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016]
   UKUT 411 (IAC), found that the Appellant did not have a right of appeal
   against the decision of the Respondent. Accordingly he found that there
   was no valid appeal and that he did not have jurisdiction to hear the
   appeal.

3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
   grounds of the 31st of August 2017 on the basis that the Appellant did
   have a right of appeal. The application was considered by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Beach who granted permission to appeal on the 31st of
   January 2018. By the time permission had been granted the Court of Appeal
   had decided Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 which overturned Sala.

4. It is common ground that the Judge erred in finding that there was no
   valid appeal although he cannot be criticised for the approach that he
   took on the information and decisions that were available at the time. In
   the circumstances given that the Judge was in error, no findings were
   made and the case will have to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
   re-hearing. The Appellant should bear in mind that the case will be
   decided as matters stand at the date of the hearing and accordingly up-to-
   date evidence on all relevant aspects will need to be served in
   accordance with the directions previously given by the First-tier
   Tribunal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing`.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

I make no fee award which remains a matter for the First-tier Tribunal
dependent on the outcome and findings made in the remitted hearing.


Signed:


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 28th March 2018


















