
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
EA/01235/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 December 2018                       |On 14 January 2019                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                     pH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Katani, Katani & Co
For the respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the appellant to challenge the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a  determination  that  followed  a
    hearing on 10 August 2018, dismissed the appellant's appeal against the
    decision of the respondent Secretary of State on 5 January 2018 to give
    the appellant notice of liability to  detention  because  he  had  been
    considered to be a person who was not exercising treaty  rights  within
    the United Kingdom.

 2.  The judge heard evidence from the  appellant  and  made  a  number  of
    findings. Before turning to  those  findings  which  concerned  alleged
    employment with an entity known as the Penny Car Wash, it is,  however,
    necessary to consider what the judge said about the legal  position  of
    the appellant.  Beginning at paragraph 16, the judge embarked  upon  an
    analysis of  the  2016  EEA  Regulations.   The  judge  concluded  that
    regulation 6, which defines a qualified person, fell to be construed in
    a particular way.  He did so because he came to the conclusion that the
    words "remains a qualified person" in the Regulations mean that someone
    who had been a worker at one stage, but then ceased to be such,  before
    again becoming a worker, did  not  thereby  again  become  a  qualified
    person.

 3.  That is the essence of what the judge found albeit the  way  in  which
    the Upper Tribunal has just expressed it perhaps  does  not  give  full
    justice to the reasoning set out in paragraphs 16 to 24 of the  judge's
    decision.

 4.  It is, however, a finding which both  Mr  Winter,  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, and Mrs O'Brien, on behalf of the respondent, are agreed  is
    incorrect.

 5. A person who begins as a worker and who then ceases to be a worker  and
    does not satisfy any of the other conditions to be a qualified  person;
    but who then at some later stage becomes a worker again plainly, in our
    view, becomes at that point a qualified person.  If that  were  not  so
    and if such a person had to return to the beginning point, by which  we
    mean as a person who has just entered the United Kingdom and who has an
    initial three months of  residence,  then  strange  consequences  would
    ensue.  They are consequences which we are fully satisfied would not be
    compatible with a purposive reading of the  underlying  Directive,  let
    alone the Regulations themselves.

 6. This, however, is not determinative of there being an error of  law  in
    this decision, such as to necessitate the  decision  being  set  aside.
    This is because, beginning at paragraph 25 of his decision,  the  judge
    made a series of careful findings about the nature  of  the  employment
    that the appellant said he was undertaking with Penny  Car  Wash.   The
    judge  noted  in  paragraph  25  a  number  of  discrepancies  in   the
    appellant's evidence on this matter.  Further problematic  elements  of
    the documentation put forward by the appellant were identified  by  the
    judge at paragraph 26.

 7. At paragraph 27, the judge stated in terms that the  evidence  did  not
    disclose the appellant had been in  genuine  and  effective  employment
    with Penny Car Wash.  There was an absence of relevant payslips.   That
    was particularly noteworthy, given that the appellant had been able  to
    produce payslips for other jobs.  There  was  also  no  bank  statement
    evidence to show that the alleged earnings from Penny Car Wash had been
    paid into any bank account of the appellant.  There  were  failings  or
    errors in the spelling of the place at which the appellant was said  to
    be employed.  There were also problems relating to  the  alleged  start
    date of the employment.

 8. At paragraph 28, the judge looked specifically at the evidence said  to
    have come from HMRC, who said that the appellant had been  recorded  by
    them as being in employment with Penny Car Wash.  There  was,  however,
    no evidence of the source of the information imparted to the  HMRC  nor
    evidence in the judge's view of any checks carried out by  HMRC  as  to
    the veracity of any information they may have been given, regarding the
    appellant's employment with Penny Car Wash.   That  led  the  judge  to
    conclude that he was not persuaded that the confirmation by HMRC was of
    such weight as to show on balance that  the  work  said  to  have  been
    undertaken by the  appellant  with  Penny  Car  Wash  was  genuine  and
    effective.

 9. This all led to the following finding at paragraph 29.

         "Taken in the round, on a consideration of all  available  evidence
         in the appeal, notwithstanding the conclusion drawn about the  true
         construction of the 2016 Regulations, I am not persuaded  that  the
         appellant has genuine and effective employment with Penny Car  Wash
         as claimed."

10. Mr Winter sought to make good the criticisms of the  judge's  findings.
    But despite those valiant efforts, the Tribunal has  no  hesitation  in
    finding that the judge's findings on this matter are free from error of
    law.  As Mrs O'Brien pointed out in submissions, this  conclusion  does
    not  involve  any  approach  to  the  relevant  legislation   that   is
    insufficiently purposive in nature.  The question was a  plain  factual
    one; namely, whether the employment had been shown to be  genuine.  For
    the reasons that the judge gave, which  were  cumulatively  compelling,
    the judge concluded that that hurdle had not  been  surmounted  by  the
    appellant.

11.  That being so, and there  being  no  error  such  as  to  require  the
    determination to be set aside,  there  is  no  question  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal receiving further documentation. We record, however,  that  it
    is said further  documentation  relating  to  Penny  Car  Wash  is  now
    available.  If that suggests the position on all the evidence as  could
    now be put to the Secretary of State is different, then, so long as the
    appellant remains in the United Kingdom, he can put that  material  put
    to the Secretary of State and expect a reaction to it.

12. For the reasons the Upper Tribunal has  given,  however,  there  is  no
    error of law in this decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  such  as  to
    require it to be set aside, notwithstanding what we have said about the
    construction of regulation 6.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


                               Signed                     Date 31/12/18


                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
