
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01235/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2020                             |                              |
|                                              |On 5 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                zoran jandric
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Komusanac, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Serbia, born on 7 September 1976.  On  29
    January 2019 he applied for a residence card as the family member of an
    EEA national, namely his wife Natasa Mrkobrada, who has  dual  Croatian
    and British nationality.  That application was refused  in  a  decision
    dated 27 February 2019.

 2.  The  respondent's  decision  relied  on  regulation  2(1)(b)  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  (as  amended)
    ("the EEA Regulations") in terms of the definition of EEA national.  It
    was concluded that  because  the  appellant's  wife  naturalised  as  a
    British citizen on 23 May 2005 and Croatia joined  the  EU  on  1  July
    2013, reg 2(1) was not satisfied.  A further  reason  for  refusal  was
    that the proxy marriage between them was not valid.

 3. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Scott at a hearing on 2 May 2019 following which the  appeal  was
    dismissed on the basis  that  the  appellant's  wife  was  not  an  EEA
    national. Judge Scott  resolved  the  issue  of  the  validity  of  the
    marriage in the appellant's favour.

    The Grounds and Submissions

 4. The grounds of appeal in relation to Judge Scott's decision, relying on
    various decisions  of  the  European  Court  of  Justice,  contend,  in
    summary, that  Judge  Scott  was  wrong  to  dismiss  the  appeal  with
    reference to reg 2(1) of the EEA Regulations.  In very able submissions
    before me, Mr Komusanac relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  which,  in
    essence, reflected the grounds of appeal.  It  was  submitted  that  Ms
    Mrkobrada was exercising Treaty rights  before  she  became  a  British
    citizen in 2005.  Prior to that, she was the family  member  of  an  EU
    national (her former husband) who was also a Croatian national who  was
    exercising Treaty  rights  in  accordance  with  Article  7(2)  of  the
    Citizens Directive (2004/38/EC).

 5. It was submitted that the circumstances of this case  were  similar  to
    those in Ziolkowski (Freedom of movement for persons) [2011]  EUECJ  C-
    424/10 (21 December 2011).  Thus, in that case the question arose as to
    whether the applicants were able to rely on  periods  of  residence  in
    Germany prior to Poland's accession to the European Union in  order  to
    obtain a permanent right of residence.

 6. The decision in Lassal (European Citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-162/09 was
    also relied on, in terms of general principles in relation  to  freedom
    of movement.

 7. It was argued that, whereas in the instant appeal the respondent  would
    seek to rely on Kovacevic (British  citizen  -  Art  21  TFEU)  Croatia
    [2018] UKUT 273 (IAC), that was a case in  which  the  appellant  never
    exercised any Treaty rights and the case was thus very similar to  that
    of McCarthy (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-434/09 (05 May 2011).

 8. For his part, Mr Deller did indeed rely on the  decision  in  Kovacevic
    which, he submitted, defeated the appellant's argument in  the  present
    appeal. He also referred to Zekri v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWHC 3058  (Admin)  (which  was  the  decision  on  a
    judicial  review  application  by  the  spouse  of  the  appellant   in
    Kovacevic) and Lounes v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Article 21 TFEU-Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C-165/16.

 9. In his reply, Mr Komusanac submitted that  insofar  as  the  respondent
    sought to make any sort of distinction between a member of an EU  state
    and the family member of such, that is contrary to EU law and no lesser
    rights accrue to either.  It was further  submitted  that  one  of  the
    principles in the Citizens Directive is to promote social cohesion.

    Assessment and Conclusions

10. Notwithstanding Mr Komusanac's able submissions,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that there is any merit in the arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, for the following reasons.

11. The first obstacle to  be  overcome  by  the  appellant  is  the  clear
    provisions of reg 2(1) of the EEA Regulations which provide in relation
    to the definition of EEA national, as follows:

           "'EEA national' means-

           (a)  a national of an EEA  State  who  is  not  also  a  British
           citizen; or

           (b)  a national of an EEA State who is also  a  British  citizen
           and who prior to acquiring British citizenship exercised a right
           to reside as such a national, in accordance with  regulation  14
           or 15,

           save that a person does not fall within paragraph (b) if the EEA
           State of which they are a national became a member  State  after
           that person acquired British citizenship;"

12. It is evident that the appellant's wife is outside  the  definition  of
    EEA national by reason of  sub-paragraph  (b),  in  particular  because
    Croatia became a member state after she acquired British citizenship.

13. In order for the appellant to make good his argument, he would have  to
    persuade me that  that  provision  of  the  EEA  Regulations  does  not
    accurately  transpose  the  Citizens  Directive,   or   was   otherwise
    incompatible with EU law, in particular Article 21(1) of the Treaty  on
    the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU").

14. I do not consider it necessary to undertake an analysis of the  various
    cases relied on by the parties. That exercise has already been done  in
    Kovacevic, and that case is sufficiently similar to the instant case on
    the facts, and is the same in terms of the applicable law. It  provides
    a clear answer to the issues raised in the appeal before me.

15. The arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant  in  that  case  were
    rejected by a panel of the Upper  Tribunal  ("UT")  consisting  of  the
    President of the UT and UT Judge Blum.  There it  was  decided  that  a
    union citizen who resides in a Member State of which he  or  she  is  a
    national is not a  beneficiary  under  Article  3(1)  of  the  Citizens
    Directive and that a dual Croatian/British citizen who was residing  in
    the United Kingdom when Croatia  joined  the  EU,  and  who  has  never
    exercised EU Treaty rights, does not acquire a right of residence under
    Article 21 of the TFEU.

16. It is true that that case concerned the revocation  of  a  registration
    certificate on the basis that the appellant was a British  citizen  and
    not an EEA national.  However, on behalf of  the  appellant  before  me
    that difference was not relied on, nor could it be since the principles
    at play are, to all intents and purposes, the same.

17. In Kovacevic the UT said as follows at [33]:

           "Despite the impressive array of arguments  utilised  by  Mr  de
           Mello in reliance on the Citizens Directive, in our judgment  he
           cannot overcome the clear  and  decisive  ruling  of  the  Grand
           Chamber in Lounes and the unambiguous terms of Article 3(1). The
           Grand Chamber concluded, at [41] and [42], that a Union  citizen
           who resides in a Member State of which she is a national is  not
           a beneficiary under the Citizen's Directive. We  agree  with  Mr
           Blundell's submission that none of Mr de Mello's submissions can
           assail this fundamental conclusion and the CJEU's reasoning. The
           subject matter of the Citizens Directive concerns the conditions
           governing the exercise of the right to move  freely  and  reside
           within the territory of the Member States and, as a national  of
           a Member State enjoys an unconditional right to reside  in  that
           State, the  Citizens  Directive  cannot  govern  the  claimant's
           residence."

18. The decision in Lounes concerned a different situation where a  Spanish
    national, before acquiring British citizenship, had exercised the right
    of free movement as a union citizen.  That is  plainly  different  from
    the situation in the appeal before me because  the  appellant  in  this
    case was not a union citizen when she came to the UK.  Nor was she  the
    family member of a union citizen exercising Treaty rights  because  her
    husband was a Croatian citizen.  Croatia had not by that  time  acceded
    to the EU.

19. The decision in Ziolkowski does not assist the  appellant  either.   In
    the first place, the same argument based on Ziolkowski was rejected  by
    the UT in Kovacevic, in which it was  noted  that  that  case  did  not
    concern a dual national and related to a situation where  the  Citizens
    Directive "was clearly engaged and the right to free movement had  been
    exercised" [36].  In common  with  the  appellant  in  Kovacevic,  this
    appellant has never exercised any free movement rights (and nor did his
    wife).

20. In the related judicial review case of R (on the application of)  Redha
    Zekri [2019] EWHC 3058 (Admin), Swift J pointed out at  [14]  that  the
    conclusion reached  in  Ziolkowski  was  that  pre-accession  years  of
    residence could count towards the five year continuous legal  residence
    necessary to obtain a permanent right of residence.   He  also  pointed
    out that that  case  also  rested  on  the  lack  of  any  transitional
    provisions in the Citizens Directive affecting the states that  acceded
    to the EU on 1 May 2004. He said that the conclusion  of  the  CJEU  in
    Ziolkowski:

         "was only that pre-accession residence could count for the purposes
         of the article 16 residence requirement; it was not a decision that
         prior  to  accession  Mr  Ziolkowski  had  exercised  rights  under
         Directive 2004/38 (or for that matter, Article 21 TFEU)".

21. He pointed out that the claimant's submission in the  case  before  him
    required that that appellant's spouse's rights (Ms Kovacevic's  rights)
    as an EU citizen arising from her British nationality  be  ignored  and
    that the case be approached on the basis that  prior  to  1  July  2013
    Croatian nationals working in the EU were exercising rights  under  the
    TFEU which, as a matter of law, were simply not available to them.   He
    said that "To accept this submission would be to depart from  reality".



22. I respectfully agree with the reasoning in Kovacevic and  adopt  it  as
    part of my reasons in this case.  Likewise, in respect of the  decision
    in Zekri.

23. In those circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any  error  of
    law in the decision of Judge Scott dismissing the  appellant's  appeal.
    He was correct to conclude that the appellant was not entitled  to  the
    residence card sought.

    Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 04/02/2020
