
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01855/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 July 2017                           |On 14th July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            abdelghani boumellah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Abdelghani Boumellah, was born on 28 July 1979 and is  a
    male citizen of Algeria.  The  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally in August 2006.  He married an EEA national (the sponsor, who
    is an Italian citizen) on 7 January 2009.  On 11  March  2010,  he  was
    issued with a residence card which expired on 11 March 2015.  On 6  May
    2015, the appellant applied under  Regulation  15  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 in respect of his status as a
    family member of an EEA national.  The appellant was required  to  show
    that he had resided in the UK with the EEA national  for  a  continuous
    period of five years (Regulation 15(1)(b)).

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge M A Khan), in a decision promulgated  on
    30 November 2016, dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal
    of the respondent dated 12 October 2015 to grant  permanent  residence.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. At the appeal hearing at Field House on 12 July 2017, the appellant did
    not attend nor was he represented.  By a letter dated 30 June 2017, the
    appellant's previous solicitors (Ashton Ross Law) had  written  to  the
    Tribunal to  inform  it  that  they  were  no  longer  acting  for  the
    appellant.  In that letter, the solicitors  confirmed  the  appellant's
    place of residence to be [ ] London SE18 6RJ.  The Tribunal file  shows
    that a notice of hearing for 12 July 2017 was  served  by  first  class
    post on the appellant at that address  on  21  June  2017.   There  was
    nothing on the file to indicate that  the  notice  did  not  reach  its
    intended recipient. No explanation or excuse for failing to attend  has
    been received from the appellant.  In the  circumstances,  I  proceeded
    with the hearing in the absence of the appellant.

 4. Having heard the submissions of Mr Jarvis, I reserved my decision.

 5. The grounds of appeal assert first that  the  judge  miscalculated  the
    five year period during which the appellant himself was a worker up  to
    and including December 2011.  Secondly, in reliance upon  the  case  of
    Saint Prix (case C-507/12), it is argued that the judge failed to  take
    into account the fact that, following  the  birth  of  her  child,  the
    sponsor should have had a reasonable period within which to  seek  work
    and thereby assert her rights under the Treaty.  Thirdly,  the  grounds
    submit that the judge did not reject the evidence adduced regarding the
    sponsor's attempts to find work  following  the  birth  of  her  second
    child.  The grounds submit that, if the judge intended to  reject  that
    evidence and find that the sponsor had not been a jobseeker during that
    period, then the determination was unclear and insufficiently reasoned;
    on the other hand, if the judge had accepted the evidence, then  it  is
    not clear why he dismissed the appeal.

 6. Mr Jarvis accepts that the decision of Judge Khan is  not  particularly
    clear but he submitted that any error which that decision might contain
    is not material to the outcome of the appeal.  He pointed out that  the
    sponsor was not registered with any relevant employment office and also
    that the sponsor had not returned to work following the  birth  of  her
    first child but had, indeed, become pregnant with her second child,  an
    event that indicated that she had no prospect of gaining employment and
    that she was, therefore, not a worker for the  purposes  of  Regulation
    6(2).  Mr  Jarvis  also  submitted  that  any  period  of  cohabitation
    preceding the marriage of the appellant and sponsor on 7  January  2009
    should not be considered when  applying  the  regulation.   If  he  had
    sought to rely  on  a  period  of  cohabitation,  it  would  have  been
    necessary for the appellant to prove to a decision-maker that there was
    a durable relationship subject to Regulation 8(5).  The appellant  made
    no such application and, in consequence, the earliest date  from  which
    any period of 5 years must run would be from January 2009 until January
    2014.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the sponsor  had  not  been  exercising
    Treaty Rights throughout the period 5 years and that the  appeal  could
    not in any event succeed.  I accept Mr  Jarvis'  submissions  in  their
    entirety.  I agree that Judge Khan's decision  appears  incomplete  and
    unsatisfactory but I refrain from setting aside  his  decision  on  the
    basis that any error which it  may  contain  is  not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  I agree with Mr Jarvis that the 5  year  period
    in question must run from 2009-2014 and that  the  evidence  which  has
    been adduced clearly shows that the sponsor was not  exercising  Treaty
    Rights throughout that period; in particular, between the birth of  her
    two children and following the birth of the second child, the  evidence
    fails to support the contention that the sponsor had been a jobseeker.

 7. In the circumstances, I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 12 JULY 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 12 JULY 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

