
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/01608/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 18th October 2017                  |      On: 19th October 2017         |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                         MAHEBOOB ESMAIL MUSA TAILOR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of India born on the 14th March  1965.   He
    seeks from the Respondent confirmation of his derivative Zambrano right
    of residence as a direct family member caring for  a  British  citizen.
    The British citizen in question is his mother. It is asserted  that  if
    the Appellant and his wife were to leave the UK  his  mother  would  be
    compelled to leave with them.


 2. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal for two  reasons.   First,
    it found that there was a want of jurisdiction, applying Sala  (EFMs  -
    right of  appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  411  (IAC).  Second,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed on the facts for a lack of  evidence,  the  Appellant  having
    failed to attend or supply any further  documents  in  pursuit  of  his
    appeal.

 3. The Appellant is unrepresented,  and  drafted  the  grounds  of  appeal
    himself. In short his position is that  there  has  been  a  procedural
    unfairness in that he had made a request that his case  be  moved  from
    London to Manchester, the area where he  was  then  living.    Thinking
    that request had been actioned, he attended court on the appointed  day
    - the 9th December 2016 - in Manchester. The case was heard in  London.
    The Appellant requests that the appeal  be  relisted  so  that  he  can
    attend and provide oral evidence.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
    on the 25th July 2017. He considered  it  appropriate  that  there  was
    further  investigation  into  the  alleged  procedural  unfairness.  In
    respect of the jurisdiction point he considered it  arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had misapplied Sala.



    My Findings

 5. The chronology of events, insofar as it is relevant to the point  about
    procedural unfairness, is as follows.


 6. The Respondent's decision is dated the 3rd October 2015. The appeal was
    lodged, in-time, with the First-tier Tribunal on the 8th October 2015.

 7. On the 2nd February 2016 he wrote to the Tribunal requesting  that  his
    appeal be moved "from Leicester to Manchester". He gave an  address  in
    Bolton and explained that he had  moved  from  Wembley  to  there.   He
    wanted to attend the hearing with his mother and wife. The reference to
    Leicester in this letter is hard to understand; as far as  I  am  aware
    there is no IAC hearing centre in Leicester. I assume that this  was  a
    misunderstanding on the part of the Appellant, since he was  addressing
    the letter to the IAC  administration  headquarters  at  Arnhem  House,
    which is indeed in Leicester. In any case the point of  the  letter  is
    clear: he has moved to the Manchester area and would therefore like the
    appeal to be heard there so that he and his witnesses  can  attend.   I
    note that the letter referred  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    already spoken to someone within the Tribunal and had been  advised  to
    write. This claim is reiterated in the grounds of appeal before me.   I
    note that - at least as it appears in the file before me -  the  letter
    was accompanied by medical evidence relating to the Appellant's mother.
    This is to  the  effect  that  she  is  elderly  with  numerous  health
    complaints and "very poor mobility"; an application had  been  made  to
    Bolton Council for adaptations to be made to their house as a result of
    her disabilities.


 8. The first Notice of Hearing sent out to the Appellant is dated the 11th
    July 2016. It was sent to his address in Bolton and instructed him that
    he should attend court at Hatton Cross in London on  the  9th  December
    2016.  In his submissions before me the Appellant  asserted  that  upon
    receipt of this notice he wrote again, requesting that  the  appeal  be
    heard in Manchester. There was no evidence of this on the court file.

 9. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chowdhury  at  Hatton
    Cross on that day. As I have said, the Appellant did not  attend.  Nor,
    it would seem,  did  the  Respondent.   Judge  Chowdhury  reserved  her
    decision.

10. On the 13th December 2016 the Tribunal received  a  handwritten  letter
    from the Appellant.  He explained that  he  had  attended  the  hearing
    centre in Manchester on the morning of the 9th December  2016.  He  had
    been there at 9.30am. He apologised and referred to his earlier letter,
    of 2nd February 2016, in which he had  requested  that  the  appeal  be
    moved to Manchester.


11. Judge Chowdhury came to determine the matter on the  6th  January  2017
    (the determination is in fact dated 2016 but I assume  this  to  be  an
    error).  She had by then been passed  the  letter  from  the  Appellant
    dated the 13th December 2016 explaining that he had attended Manchester
    IAC in error. At paragraph 23  of  the  determination  Judge  Chowdhury
    states "for the reasons I outline below I find that it is  not  in  the
    interests of justice to grant an  adjournment  on  any  basis".    What
    follows  is  a  brief  assessment  of  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    Appellant's mother, and the conclusion that it has not been shown  that
    she would be unable to call upon the services of other agencies such as
    social services for help. The determination  then  makes  reference  to
    Sala, finds there to be no jurisdiction and the appeal is dismissed.

12. Judge McGinty considered it arguable that in so doing,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal acted unfairly. I agree. This was an  unrepresented  Appellant
    who had informed the Tribunal, by way of telephone call and letter that
    he wished his appeal moved to Manchester so that he  might  attend  the
    hearing with  his  elderly,  disabled  mother.  She  was  obviously  an
    important witness.    Whilst he was clearly in error in  assuming  that
    his request had been granted there was before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the letter received on the 13th December 2016 explaining that the  mix-
    up had occurred. The Tribunal was of course at that point  entitled  to
    proceed to determine the matter regardless.  It  had  a  discretion  to
    exercise as to whether the matter should be adjourned and  relisted  in
    Manchester. What is not at all evident from the determination is why it
    exercised its discretion in the  way  that  it  did.  The  sentence  at
    paragraph 23 ("for the reasons I outline below I find that it is not in
    the interests of justice to grant an adjournment on any basis") is  not
    followed with any discussion of that matter. There is no explanation as
    to why the Tribunal decided not to adjourn. The paragraphs that  follow
    23 simply set out the reasons why the appeal is dismissed.


13. In her submissions Mrs  Aboni  suggested  that,  the  reasons  for  nor
    adjourning the matter were in fact found before that sentence,  in  the
    preceding paragraph. I  find  that  difficult  to  accept,  since  that
    paragraph  begins  "There  was  no  explanation  for  his  absence,  no
    application for an adjournment and no  information  to  show  that  the
    position would be different on any other occasion".  The only way I can
    read that sentence is that this was the reason that the Judge  reserved
    her decision in open court on the 9th December 2016. It cannot be  said
    to have been her thinking on whether to determine the matter on the 9th
    January 2017, since she plainly by then did have an explanation for the
    Appellant's absence, an indication that he  wished  the  matter  to  be
    adjourned, and his assertion that he very much  wished  to  attend  the
    hearing".

14. It would  seem  most  likely  that  the  determinative  factor  in  the
    Tribunal's decision making process was the matter of  jurisdiction.  In
    Sala the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  extended  family  members  under
    Regulation 8 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 had, contrary to what had previously been  assumed,  no  right  of
    appeal.  Although it is not spelled out in the determination,  I  infer
    from paragraph 29 that the Tribunal saw  no  point  in  adjourning  and
    relisting the matter if there was no right of appeal.  As Judge McGinty
    observed in granting permission, this was a  mis-application  of  Sala,
    since this was not an  application  for  permission  to  reside  as  an
    extended family member. The Appellant sought  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 15A as a direct family member who is the primary carer of  a
    British citizen.  As a coda I note that the decision in  Sala  has  now
    been overturned by the Court of Appeal.

15. I conclude that this determination must be set  aside.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal was not obliged to adjourn and relist this appeal, but in  the
    absence of any intelligible reason why it declined to do so, it is  not
    possible to understand why the discretion was exercised in the way that
    it was. The most likely explanation is the Sala point, which as I  note
    above, was wrong in law.  Mrs Aboni urged me to dismiss the  appeal  on
    the grounds that this was an appeal that was unlikely to  succeed.  She
    submitted that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate that his  mother
    could not be cared for by social services. In the final  analysis  that
    may well be the outcome of the appeal, however in a case  involving  an
    elderly and unwell British citizen who asserts that she is being  cared
    for round- the-clock by her closest relatives, I am unable to say  that
    it is the  only  possible  result.     As  a  matter  of  fairness  the
    Appellant should be given another opportunity to put his  case  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

    Decisions


16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside in its entirety.


17. The matter is to be  re-heard  de  novo  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    sitting at Manchester.

18. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on  the  facts  I
    can see no reason to do so.



    [pic]




    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
    19th October 2017


