
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal: EA/01963/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 22 March 2019                     |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                             & UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 BILAL ZAMAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By letter dated 6 February 2018, the respondent declined to  grant  the
    appellant a permanent residence card.  The crux of that decision is  at
    page 2: lack of evidence that his former  spouse  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights between various specified dates, leaving significant gaps
    in the qualifying period of 5 years.

 2. FtT  Judge  Agnew  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 June 2018.

 3. The grounds of appeal to the UT focus on the regulations not  requiring
    a sponsor to be in full time employment.

 4. The grant of permission is on the view that the judge might have  erred
    by failing to  "place  weight"  on  periods  when  the  sponsor  was  a
    jobseeker, in wrongly requiring 5 years in employment, and  in  wrongly
    assuming that at one point the sponsor became voluntarily unemployed.

 5. Mr Shoaib took up these three themes in his submissions.

 6. The decision is not entirely clear  and  consistent  on  any  of  those
    themes, and periods as a jobseeker may qualify along  with  periods  in
    employment.  That is all beside the point.  Those are matters mentioned
    in passing.  The decision is clear on the issue of the significant time
    gaps which are left even on the most benevolent view of the evidence.

 7. Although this has been the one  decisive  issue  from  the  outset,  Mr
    Shoaib has provided no chronology and summary of the evidence  for  the
    appellant, referenced to the requirements of the regulations,  to  show
    that he had even a prima facie case.

 8. We gave Mr Shoaib the opportunity to assemble such a case in course  of
    submissions, although the time to do so was long before then.   He  was
    unable to do so.

 9. One point did become clearer. In terms of regulation 6 (7), the sponsor
    could not retain the required status for longer than 91  days  "without
    providing compelling evidence of  continuing  to  seek  employment  and
    having a genuine chance of being engaged".  By dates on which Mr Shoaib
    relied, the period to be explained amounted to 116 days.  There was  no
    evidence in terms of the regulation.  By that token alone,  the  appeal
    was bound to fail.

10. We also accept  the  submission  of  Mrs  O'Brien  that  no  error  was
    suggested in the FtT's findings at [14, 17 and 19] that there were gaps
    in the history which there was no evidence to fill.

11. No error by the FtT has been  disclosed  of  such  a  nature  as  might
    require its decision to be set aside.  On findings in  which  no  error
    has been shown, the appeal had to be dismissed.  On  further  reference
    to the evidence before the UT, the appellant's case became  worse,  not
    better.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

    [pic]


    8 April 2019
    UT Judge Macleman
