
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01032/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 19 December 2018        |On Monday 28 January 2019            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               MR FRANCIS [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     AN ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - GHANA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Siaw, Solicitor of KPP Oplex
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge C Greasley promulgated on 26 September 2018 ("the  Decision")
         dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  4
         January 2018 refusing the  Appellant  a  family  permit  under  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  EEA
         Regulations") to join his daughter, [A], who is a  British  citizen
         (based on ten years' residence  in  the  UK  from  birth)  and  who
         continues to live with her mother, the Appellant's wife, in the UK.
          The Appellant's  wife,  Florence,  has  been  given  a  derivative
         residence card in the UK and lives here with [A] and her twin sons,
         although recently one of the twins ([L]) has returned to  Ghana  to
         live with his father.  I will need to deal with the evidence  about
         that in due course.  The Respondent's decision was  upheld  by  the
         Entry Clearance Manager on 8 March 2018 following a review  of  the
         original decision.

      2. In short summary, the Respondent does not accept that the Appellant
         has provided sufficient evidence to show  that  he  meets  the  EEA
         Regulations to entitle him to a derivative residence  permit.   The
         Judge declined to  admit  the  Appellant's  bundle  of  documentary
         evidence on the basis that  it  was  filed  late  without  adequate
         explanation for the delay and went on to consider the appeal  based
         on oral submissions.  He concluded that  the  Appellant  could  not
         satisfy  the  requirements  of  regulation   16(5)   of   the   EEA
         Regulations.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

      3. The Appellant raises essentially three grounds of appeal.  First it
         is said that the Judge failed to provide reasons  for  his  finding
         that the Appellant could not  meet  regulation  16(5)  of  the  EEA
         Regulations.  Second, the Appellant says that the Judge  failed  to
         consider the best interests of the children.   Third,  it  is  said
         that the appeal hearing was procedurally unfair because  the  Judge
         refused to hear evidence from the Appellant's wife and daughter who
         were in attendance.

      4. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  L
         Murray on 31  October  2018  in  the  following  terms  so  far  as
         relevant:

             "... [2]  The grounds assert that the Judge erred  in  failing
             to give reasons why the Appellant  was  not  a  primary  carer
             within  the  definition  of  Regulation  16(8)  of   the   EEA
             Regulations 2016; that the Judge gave no reasons  for  finding
             that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  had  the  effect  of
             depriving an EU  citizen  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
             substance of EU rights and that the Judge materially erred  in
             refusing to allow the Appellant's sponsor to give evidence.


             [3] Whilst it is unclear from the decision whether the  First-
             tier Tribunal Judge refused to allow the Appellant's witnesses
             to give evidence, it is arguable that the Appellant was denied
             a fair hearing in view of the fact that the Judge both refused
             to admit the Appellant's bundle and refused an adjournment  in
             order for the bundle filed and served.  Whilst it is  hard  to
             see how the Appellant could have succeeded in  his  appeal  on
             the factual matrix presented, I do not  refuse  permission  in
             respect of the other grounds in view of the fact that material
             evidence was arguably excluded."


      5. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
         a material error of law and, if so,  to  re-make  the  decision  or
         remit the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.




    ERROR OF LAW DECISION

      6. In light of the terms of the  permission  grant  and  although  the
         grant was not limited, it is convenient to  begin  with  the  third
         ground concerning procedural fairness.

      7. As I pointed out to Mr Siaw, the  matter  pleaded  at  [7]  of  the
         grounds is unsupported by evidence.  Mr Siaw submitted that what is
         there said is factually  accurate;  he  represented  the  Appellant
         before the First-tier Tribunal  and  could  attest  to  that  fact.
         However, as I pointed out to Mr Siaw it is  entirely  inappropriate
         for a representative to give evidence.  As  is  made  clear  in  BW
         (witness statements by advocates)  Afghanistan  [2014]  UKUT  00568
         (IAC), a representative cannot act as both  advocate  and  witness.
         If a representative is  required  to  give  witness  evidence,  the
         appropriate course is for another person to take over the  role  of
         representative. Although Mr Siaw said  that  the  Appellant's  wife
         would also be able  to  give  evidence  of  what  occurred  at  the
         previous hearing, I pointed out that she has not prepared a witness
         statement to deal with her evidence.

      8. Ms Willocks-Briscoe was unable to assist as to what occurred before
         Judge Greasley as there was no note of the  hearing  on  her  file.
         The record of proceedings from that hearing did not  assist  either
         as there is no express record of Mr Siaw asking for the Appellant's
         wife and daughter to be allowed to give evidence.

      9. However, I have regard to the way in which the Judge dealt with the
         Appellant's bundle as recorded at [5] to [7] of the  Decision.   In
         circumstances where  the  Judge  ruled  out  consideration  of  the
         documentary evidence which included  witness  statements  from  the
         Appellant, his wife and his daughter, I consider it likely that the
         Judge would also have refused to allow oral evidence  to  be  given
         because to do so  would  have  circumvented  his  ruling  that  the
         evidence ought not to be admitted due to its lateness.  I therefore
         proceed on the assumption that what is said at [7] of  the  grounds
         is factually accurate and that  the  Judge  refused  to  admit  the
         Appellant's bundle and to hear oral evidence.

     10. Having regard to what is recorded at [5] of the Decision, the Judge
         was entitled to  regard  the  conduct  of  the  representatives  as
         "completely cavalier" ([6] of the Decision).  However, that is  the
         fault of the representatives  and  not  of  the  Appellant  or  his
         family.  The bundle of documents was limited (said to run to fifty-
         seven pages of which about thirty-one  were  social  media  message
         chats; although the bundle I have is missing some of  those  pages:
         see below).  The Respondent did not object to the late admission of
         the evidence.  His representative merely asserted that  the  appeal
         could not succeed with or without the evidence.  The Judge did  not
         consider the potential prejudice to the Appellant of  being  unable
         to produce evidence to support his case.  This  led  to  the  Judge
         deciding the issues in an evidential vacuum.

     11. Having regard to the overriding objective of disposing  of  appeals
         fairly and justly, I am satisfied that it was  procedurally  unfair
         to  determine  the  appeal  without  considering  the   documentary
         evidence  and  hearing  oral  evidence.   The   failures   of   the
         Appellant's representative to comply with the Rules and to offer  a
         good reason for those failures could have been dealt with by  other
         means such as a costs  order  against  them  in  relation  to  that
         conduct.  It was disproportionate, particularly  having  regard  to
         the very limited nature of the evidence, to rule out  the  evidence
         altogether.

     12. It follows that there is an error of law.  I am unpersuaded by  the
         other grounds when those  are  considered  individually.   However,
         since the Judge's reasoning did not include  consideration  of  the
         evidence, the error of law which I have  found  to  be  established
         impacts on those other grounds.

     13. I therefore find that the Decision contains a material error of law
         due to the procedurally unfair manner by which it was  reached.   I
         therefore set the Decision aside.

     14. Although I reserved my decision at the hearing in relation to error
         of law, neither representative suggested that the appeal  ought  to
         be remitted if I found an error of  law  to  be  established.   The
         Appellant's wife and daughter were both present at the hearing  and
         ready and willing to give oral evidence.  I also had before  me  an
         application pursuant to  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce a further statement from  the
         Appellant and two documents  relating  to  his  child  [L]  who  is
         currently living with him in Ghana.

     15. I therefore agreed with the representatives that I would go  on  to
         hear evidence and would consider all the evidence in the event that
         I found an error of law as I have done.  I therefore proceed to re-
         make the decision.

    RE-MAKING OF DECISION

    Factual Background

     16. The Appellant is a national of Ghana as is his wife,  Florence.   I
         was  not  provided  with  much  evidence  about  their  immigration
         history.  However,  from  the  Appellant's  application  for  entry
         clearance, it is evident that the Appellant came to  the  UK  as  a
         visitor in February 2008 and, having indicated that he had not made
         an  application  to  remain  in  the  last  ten  years,  must  have
         overstayed after expiry of his visit visa.  It  also  appears  from
         that application that the Appellant was refused entry on arrival in
         February 2008 due to a change of circumstance. Whatever  the  exact
         position, therefore, the Appellant was in the UK without leave  for
         a period.  He gives an address in Ghana as  his  permanent  address
         where he has lived for six years which is consistent  with  what  I
         was told, that he returned to Ghana about six years ago.

     17. The Appellant's wife has  a  derivative  residence  permit  as  the
         primary carer of [A].  I will deal with her evidence as to how that
         came about below.  Suffice it to  say  that  [A]  acquired  British
         citizenship having been born here on 22 November  2004  and  having
         lived here for ten years thereafter.   The  Appellant's  wife  said
         that she had previously been given leave to remain  also  based  on
         [A]'s status.

     18. At the time of the Appellant's application, his twin sons, [L]  and
         [Le] had not been in the UK for ten years and were  therefore  both
         listed as Ghanaian  nationals.   The  position  has  since  changed
         because both are now aged over ten years  and  have  recently  been
         granted British citizenship.  The Appellant now seeks  to  rely  on
         his relationship with those children particularly with [L] who  has
         moved to Ghana which the Appellant says shows that the  refusal  to
         admit the Appellant to the UK is having the effect of depriving [L]
         of his rights as a European citizen.

    Legal Framework

     19. The relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations are as follows:

         "Derivative right to reside


         16.-     (1)  A person has a derivative right to reside during  any
                  period in which the person-


                  (a)  is not an exempt person; and


                  (b)  satisfies each of the criteria  in  one  or  more  of
                  paragraphs (2) to (6).


             ...


             (5) The criteria in this paragraph are that-


                  (a)  the person is the primary carer of a British  citizen
                  ("BC");


                  (b)  BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and


                  (c)  BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or
                  in another EEA State if the person left the United Kingdom
                  for an indefinite period.


             ...


             (8) A person is the "primary carer" of another  person  ("AP")
             if-


                  (a)  the person is a direct relative or a  legal  guardian
                  of AP; and


                  (b)  either-


                      (i)   the person has primary responsibility for  AP's
                      care; or


                      (ii)  shares equally the responsibility for AP's care
                      with one other person who is not an exempt person.


             (9) In paragraph (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) or (5)(c), if the role of
             primary carer is shared with another person in accordance with
             paragraph (8)(b)(ii), the words "the person" are to be read as
             "both primary carers".


             (10)      Paragraph (9) does not apply if the person with whom
             care responsibility is shared acquired a derivative  right  to
             reside in the United Kingdom as a result  of  this  regulation
             prior  to  the  other  person's  assumption  of   equal   care
             responsibility.


             (11)       A  person  is  not  [to]  be  regarded  as   having
             responsibility for another person's care for  the  purpose  of
             paragraph (8) on the sole basis of  a  financial  contribution
             towards that person's care.


             ..."


    The Evidence

    Documentary Evidence and the Appellant's Witness Statements

     20. I have before me a bundle said to run to  fifty-seven  pages.   The
         Tribunal's copy of the bundle  however  runs  only  to  thirty-nine
         pages.  By a letter dated 8 January 2019, the Tribunal wrote to KPP
         Oplex asking for a full copy of the bundle to be  submitted  within
         seven days.  There has been no response to that letter  and,  since
         the correspondence from KPP Oplex provides only  a  postal  address
         and no telephone  or  e-mail  contact  details,  it  has  not  been
         possible to make any further enquiries.  I am therefore obliged  to
         decide the appeal on the basis of an incomplete bundle although  it
         appears from the index that the missing documents are likely to  be
         of a similar nature to the other documents in the copy which  I  do
         have.

     21. The bundle contains the witness statements of  the  Appellant,  his
         wife and [A].  That bundle also contains letters from [L] and [Le],
         the passport of [A] showing that  she  is  a  British  citizen  and
         certificates and letters recording [A]'s educational  achievements.
         Twenty pages of the bundle ([20] to [39]) are taken by social media
         messages between [A] and a telephone number  abroad  which  can  be
         assumed from the content to belong to the Appellant.

     22. In addition, I have a further witness statement from the  Appellant
         dated 3 December 2018 which records that [L] has been excluded from
         school,  that  [L]'s  mother  was  unable  to  take  care  of   his
         educational needs and that [L] therefore had to leave the UK to  be
         with his father, the Appellant.  There is an admission form  signed
         22 November 2018 stated to have been returned on  6  November  2018
         recording [L]'s admission to a school in Ghana and  a  letter  from
         that school stating that [L] was registered as a pupil there from 7
         November 2018 to the date of the letter on 21 November 2018.

     23. There was no application to call oral evidence by  video-link  from
         the Appellant.  In  addition  to  his  most  recent  statement,  he
         provided a short statement dated 30 August 2018.  He relies on  the
         other evidence submitted and says this  about  what  that  evidence
         shows:

             "...


             2.  That my daughter [A] was born in the  United  Kingdom  and
             that she is a British citizen.  That  since  the  Respondent's
             decision, our twin sons who  were  also  born  in  the  United
             Kingdom have been registered as British citizens.


             3.  That I  am  their  primary  carer  and  that  I  submitted
             evidence with the application, most of the evidence related to
             [A].


             4.  That they do not have an exempt person caring for them  in
             the UK.  I submitted evidence of our  regular  chats,  contact
             and the care I provide for  my  children,  [A]  and  her  twin
             brothers.  I call them to assist with their  school  work  and
             advise them on every day attitude when they are at school  and
             in public.  At the time of my application  my  sons  were  not
             registered as British therefore I did not submit any  evidence
             relating to them however I can confirm that I assist them  too
             with their school work and general help and assistance.


             5.  I regret to say that unfortunately [L] seems to be  having
             problems at school and I attribute his behaviour to  the  lack
             of father figure at home.  I attach copies of letters from his
             school and I believe that he would not have behaved in such  a
             manner if I were around him all the time.  I believe  that  my
             children will benefit greatly from my presence at home  rather
             than by communicating via social media."


     24. The school letters referred to in that statement  are  not  in  the
         bundle (those are among the documents which are missing;  from  the
         index they should have been included at [52]  to  [57])  but  I  am
         prepared to accept that [L] has been  excluded  and  has  moved  to
         Ghana for the time being to go to school there.  However, when  the
         Appellant's wife was asked about if  and  when  [L]  might  return,
         although she first said that he  would  stay  in  Ghana  until  the
         Appellant returned, she finally admitted that if the Appellant  did
         not return, [L] would return to the UK in September 2019 since  she
         has secured places for [L] and his  twin  brother  at  a  secondary
         school in the UK.

     25. The letter from [L] confirms that the Appellant helps him with  his
         homework and that he would like his father to be with him  all  the
         time.  [L] speaks of his visit to Ghana and to the efforts made  by
         the Appellant to teach him about Ghanaian customs and language.  He
         says he "had the best time of my life".  [L] speaks of  the  advice
         his father gives him to "retaliate" if someone has been rude to him
         and the comfort he derives from  his  father  if  he  is  having  a
         difficult time. [Le] has also provided a very  short  letter  which
         refers to daily contact with  the  Appellant.   He  says  that  the
         Appellant gives  him  guidance  about  discipline  and  helps  with
         homework.

     26. The social media messages reflect what  the  Appellant  says  about
         helping [A] with her homework from time to time and  providing  her
         with some moral advice as well as sending birthday wishes  and  the
         such like.  However, the messages  cover  a  period  of  some  four
         months (from 7 November 2017 to 25 March 2018) and the messages are
         intermittent (covering a total of under  fifty  days  in  the  four
         months' period).  I do not place weight on the gaps though since my
         copy of the bundle is incomplete and further messages are  probably
         amongst the missing pages.

    A's Evidence

     27. [A] has provided a witness statement dated 1 September  2018  which
         contains the following passage:

             "... 4.   I can confirm that my brothers and I regularly  have
             contact with our father who is not in the UK for his help  and
             assistance to do our  homework.  He  also  chats  with  us  on
             general discipline particularly when  we  are  in  school  and
             public  places.   Although  we  chat  regularly  we  miss  his
             physical presence at home which I believe would make a lot  of
             difference in our home if he were to be here with  us  in  the
             UK.


             5.  That we have visited our father in Ghana on two occasions,
             during our stay with him I notice a vast difference in the way
             we did normal everyday activity compared to when we are in the
             UK.  My brothers responded to him better than they do with our
             mother on her own in the UK which makes me believe that if our
             father is allowed to come and stay with  us  we  will  benefit
             enormously from his presence  at  home.   I  don't  think  our
             regular chats and phone calls alone is enough to  replace  his
             physical presence at home."


     28. [A] also gave oral evidence very briefly.  She confirmed  that  she
         contacts the Appellant via "Whats App", calls him directly and  had
         visited Ghana with her mother and two brothers in 2017 and the year
         before that.  The family stayed for six weeks on each occasion.

    Evidence of Florence [A]

     29. The Appellant's wife has provided a statement which is undated. She
         says that "[m]y husband calls the children regularly to assist them
         with their school work as I am not able to help them all the  time.
         Sometimes the children will ignore me and as soon as  their  father
         calls to speak with them they respond to him".  She also says  that
         she believes that the  children  would  "benefit  greatly"  if  the
         Appellant were in  the  UK  and  he  could  act  as  a  role  model
         particularly for her twin boys.

     30. In terms of her past immigration history, Mrs [A] says she has been
         in the UK for fourteen years.  She was granted leave to remain  for
         thirty  months  in  2014  based  on  [A]'s  residence  in  the  UK.
         Thereafter,  she  switched  to  an  application  for  a  derivative
         residence card because she was advised it was cheaper and she would
         be able to have  recourse  to  public  funds  which  would  not  be
         available to her if she was in the UK with leave  to  remain  on  a
         limited basis.  However, the position has now changed (following  a
         Supreme Court judgment) and, as a  result,  she  has  been  refused
         further assistance from the local authority.

     31. Mrs [A] gave evidence about her financial difficulties.  She  works
         but is unable to work more hours because of the need  to  care  for
         her children.  If she does not work, she does not  get  paid.   She
         confirmed  that  the  local  authority  pays   for   the   family's
         accommodation  at  present  but  would  not  continue  to   do   so
         indefinitely.   She  has  some  additional  help  from  the  church
         community and a few individuals but struggles to  make  ends  meet.
         As a result, the family are now living in  temporary  accommodation
         as they were evicted from their previous home due to rent  arrears.
         She confirmed that the Appellant is self-employed in Ghana but does
         not make enough money to make any financial contribution  to  their
         upkeep.  It was clear from her evidence that  she  is  finding  the
         situation very stressful.

     32. In relation to [L], Mrs [A] said that his  behaviour  had  suffered
         due to  his  father's  absence.   He  wanted  his  father  and  the
         Appellant's absence had affected his pride  and  self-esteem.   [L]
         was excluded from school because he reacted badly to other children
         teasing him about being homeless and not having  new  clothes.  She
         had therefore taken the decision to send him to Ghana  because  she
         thought it would help him.  As I have already  indicated,  although
         she said that [L] would  remain  in  Ghana  until  his  father  was
         allowed to come to the UK, she admitted that, if the appeal failed,
         [L] would return to the UK prior to September 2019  when  a  school
         place has been arranged for him and his brother.

     33. Mrs [A] was asked whether she had  considered  returning  to  Ghana
         with the children given her financial struggles.  She said she  had
         considered it, but the children wanted to be in the UK.   They  did
         not wish to leave their friends.  She had to try to stay in the  UK
         to give the children the opportunities of a life in  this  country.
         She would stay for the children.

    Submissions

    Respondent's Submissions

     34. Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet
         regulation 16(5) of the EEA Regulations for  two  reasons.   First,
         the evidence does not point to him having primary  care  or  shared
         responsibility for the children.  There is evidence of contact  but
         only in relation to such things in their daily  lives  as  homework
         and discipline. There is  no  evidence  of  joint  decision  making
         concerning the children.  The evidence is only of  direct  messages
         passing between father  and  children  and  not  of  correspondence
         passing between the Appellant and his wife  as  to  the  children's
         futures.

     35. Mrs [A] is the sole primary carer.  She  is  making  the  decisions
         about the children's futures and supporting them.  That is  evident
         in relation to [L].  She  discussed  his  wishes  with  him  before
         sending him to stay with his father.  She made that decision  based
         on her assessment of what was in his best interests  at  the  time.
         She says that she will remain in the UK because that  is  what  the
         children wish to do.  There is no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
         Appellant has been involved in those decisions.

     36. The family in the UK is supported by the  local  authority,  church
         community and  three  individuals  who  provide  some  respite  and
         support.  There is an absence of evidence  that  the  Appellant  is
         playing a parental role.  There is no issue  about  his  biological
         relationship with the children but that is not the  same  thing  as
         evidence  of  primary  care  or  assuming   an   equal   share   of
         responsibility for their care.

     37. Even if the Appellant can show that he is a  joint  primary  carer,
         the evidence does not show that his British citizen  children  will
         be obliged to leave the UK despite  the  challenging  circumstances
         which the family faces  here.   Mrs  [A]'s  evidence  is  that  she
         intends to stay whatever it takes because that is what the children
         want.  She  is  not  required  to  leave.   The  refusal  of  entry
         clearance has not obliged any of the  children  to  leave  the  UK.
         [L]'s (temporary) relocation to Ghana to live with his father is  a
         matter of choice made by Mrs [A] not obligation.  She has also made
         plans for his future which include his return to the UK.

    Appellant's Submissions

     38. Mr Siaw submitted  that  since  the  Appellant  is  the  children's
         father, he is by definition their primary carer and therefore meets
         regulation 16(8) of the EEA Regulations.

     39. In relation to whether the children are obliged to leave the UK, he
         pointed to [L]'s departure from  the  UK  brought  about  by  [L]'s
         exclusion from school which was triggered in part by  his  reaction
         to being taunted by his classmates about  his  situation,  in  turn
         caused in part by the absence of the Appellant and his inability to
         help with the  family's  finances.   The  only  reason  the  family
         remains in the UK is the children's wishes which Mrs [A]  is  doing
         her best to meet.  The Appellant's presence in the UK would  be  in
         the children's best interests.  Mr Siaw submitted that there  is  a
         fine line between being obliged to leave to the UK and choosing  to
         do so.  He said that the evidence points to the family being unable
         to remain due to their financial situation which is getting worse.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     40. A "primary carer"  is  defined  by  regulation  16(8)  of  the  EEA
         Regulations.  I do not accept  Mr  Siaw's  submission  that  simply
         because the Appellant is the father of his British citizen children
         (which is not disputed) this is sufficient to qualify him as  their
         primary carer.  So much is clear from the  definition  in  the  EEA
         Regulations.  He must also either have primary  responsibility  for
         the children's care or share that equally with his wife.

     41. The definition in regulation 16(8) does not define what is meant as
         "responsibility" but where the relationship is one  of  parent  and
         child, I accept that this must be of a kind which would  amount  to
         parental responsibility.  That denotes more than  simply  having  a
         biological and  emotional  parent/child  relationship  and  regular
         contact.  It suggests some form of control and direction  over  the
         child's welfare.  That is consistent with regulation  16(11)  which
         provides that financial contribution alone would not amount to  the
         assuming of responsibility for that person's care.  In  this  case,
         the Appellant does not even provide financial contribution  towards
         his children's care.

     42. Whether that form of responsibility exists  is  a  matter  of  fact
         based on the evidence.  In this case, I accept  that  the  evidence
         shows that the Appellant maintains contact with  his  children  and
         carries out some of the duties which might be expected of a  parent
         towards his children, such as providing them  with  moral  guidance
         and helping them with homework.  Notwithstanding that the  messages
         in the bundle show intermittent contact, I am  prepared  to  accept
         the evidence given by [A] and the other children that the Appellant
         is in very frequent  contact  with  them  all  and  provides  those
         parental functions.

     43.  However,  other  of  the  evidence,  particularly  that   of   the
         Appellant's wife, does not suggest  that  the  Appellant  otherwise
         assumes responsibility in setting direction  for  the  children  or
         providing for their welfare.  I appreciate that this is  likely  to
         be more difficult to show given the  Appellant's  physical  absence
         from the UK.  However, the evidence shows that,  for  example,  the
         children's schools correspond only with the Appellant's  wife.   As
         Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  points  out,  the  evidence  shows  that  the
         Appellant maintains contact with the children directly.   There  is
         no evidence that the  Appellant's  wife  and  the  Appellant  speak
         regularly  to  discuss  the  children's  welfare  and  make   joint
         decisions in relation to the children.  The Appellant's  wife  gave
         evidence  that  the  Appellant  does   not   make   any   financial
         contribution to the family in the UK and the tenor of her  evidence
         was that she  is  left  to  deal  with  the  authorities  and  make
         decisions about issues of housing and education  for  the  children
         alone.

     44. I am therefore not satisfied that the Appellant can  show  that  he
         shares responsibility for the care of the  children  at  least  not
         whilst they are in the UK.  The position is slightly  different  in
         relation to [L] who  is  now  living  with  his  father  in  Ghana.
         However, again, the Appellant's wife  gave  evidence  that  she  is
         still making decisions in relation to [L] as regards his move  from
         the UK to Ghana and his  return  and  education  once  he  returns.
         Furthermore, the Appellant is unable  to  succeed  based  on  [L]'s
         situation because [L] is not currently in the  UK  (see  regulation
         16(5)(b) of the EEA Regulations).

     45. The requirement for the Appellant to have  responsibility  for  his
         children  is  moreover  not  the  sole  criterion  under  the   EEA
         Regulations.  He must also show that his children would  be  unable
         to reside in the UK if he left for an  indefinite  period.   Again,
         this is a matter of fact to be assessed on the evidence.

     46. As indicated in the headnote in  the  case  of  Sanade  and  others
         (British children - Zambrano - Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC),
         where one parent cannot be removed  from  the  UK  (as  here),  the
         removal of the other parent does not mean that  either  the  parent
         who remains or the child will be required to leave.   As  is  there
         said "the critical question is whether the child  is  dependent  on
         the parent being removed for the exercise of  his  Union  right  of
         residence and whether removal of that parent will deprive the child
         of the effective exercise of residence in the United Kingdom ..".

     47. Even if I am wrong in  my  conclusion  concerning  the  Appellant's
         assumption of responsibility for his children, it is  difficult  to
         see how it can be argued that any of the children  (including  [L])
         are dependent on him given that he returned to Ghana some six years
         ago and the children have been able to remain with their mother  in
         the UK since then.  I recognise that the Appellant's wife has found
         it difficult to cope on her own in the period since the Appellant's
         return to Ghana.  However, her evidence was that she  would  remain
         in the UK with the children rather than returning to Ghana  because
         that was their wish and she wants to give them the opportunity of a
         life here.  Even in relation to [L], the Appellant's wife took  the
         decision to send him to Ghana to be with his father  following  his
         exclusion from school.  Her evidence did not suggest  that  he  was
         obliged to leave. In any event, she said that he would be returning
         in September as she has arranged a secondary school  placement  for
         him.

     48. For those reasons, the evidence does not show that the  Appellant's
         absence from the UK affects the children's ability to remain in the
         UK.  It does not show that they are unable to  remain.   They  have
         lived here with their mother and without the Appellant for some six
         years.

     49. Mr Siaw also referred to the children's best  interests.   He  said
         that if the Appellant were allowed to come  to  the  UK,  then  the
         children's  rights  were  guaranteed.    He   accepted   that   the
         Appellant's wife's evidence is to the effect that she will continue
         to cope as best she can in the UK because the children do not  want
         to return to Ghana, but he said that the fact that [L] had returned
         to Ghana was an indication that they may be obliged to leave in the
         future.

     50. In relation to the best interests of the children, I begin with two
         observations.  First, I have no independent  evidence  as  to  what
         those require.  The best evidence I have is that of the Appellant's
         wife who says that the children want to stay in the UK.  As British
         citizens, they are entitled to do so.  I accept it is in their best
         interests to remain.  I also  accept  her  evidence  that  [L],  in
         particular, has missed his father and that the deterioration in his
         behaviour at school may be caused at least in part by his  father's
         absence.  I also accept that she and the children would prefer  the
         Appellant to be physically in the UK with them.

     51. However, second, the best interests of  the  children  have  to  be
         considered in the context in which I am assessing  that  issue.   I
         was not addressed by either party on relevant statutory provisions,
         case-law or policies which apply in the slightly unusual  situation
         which pertains in this case.  I  have  though  had  regard  to  the
         relevant legal principles.

     52. Here, there is no human rights claim under  consideration.  I  have
         already set out the evidence of the Appellant's wife as to why  she
         has taken the decision to proceed down the route of applying  under
         the EEA Regulations rather  than  making  a  further  human  rights
         application.  Whether that was a well-advised  decision  is  not  a
         matter for me.  As a result of that decision, though, the appeal is
         squarely against a decision  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  the
         question under those  Regulations  is  whether  the  Appellant  has
         primary care responsibilities or equally shared responsibility  for
         his children (which I have held he does not) and whether they  will
         be required to leave the EU due to his absence.  For the reasons  I
         have already given they will not.

     53. I accept that the best interests of the children  remain  relevant.
         The Charter on Fundamental Rights of the European Union contains an
         obligation to take into consideration the children's best interests
         (Article 24(2)).  I also accept that, although there  is  no  human
         rights claim under consideration in this appeal, Article 7  of  the
         Charter protects the right to respect for private and family life.

     54. The current Home Office  Policy  Guidance  (Free  Movement  Rights:
         derivative rights of residence - Version  4.0.  27  February  2018)
         makes reference to best interests of the children in  this  context
         in the following:

             "The best interests of the child


             The duty  in  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009 to have regard to the need  to  safeguard
             and promote the welfare of children who are in  the  UK  means
             that consideration of the child's best interests is a  primary
             consideration  in  immigration  cases.  You   must   carefully
             consider  all  of  the  information  and   evidence   provided
             concerning the best interests  of  a  child  in  the  UK  when
             assessing whether a relevant child would be unable to  remain,
             or to continue to be educated, in the  UK,  if  the  applicant
             left the UK for an indefinite period."


     55. The guidance goes on to say that

             "Where the child is entirely dependent on the  applicant,  and
             not dependent on the other person at all, you can accept  that
             the applicant has a derivative right of residence.  Where  the
             child is entirely dependent  on  the  other  person,  and  not
             dependent on the applicant at all, you can refuse to  issue  a
             derivative residence card. In other cases, where the child  is
             more dependent on the applicant than  the  other  person,  you
             should not automatically assume that the child would be forced
             to leave the UK or EEA. Instead, you must go  on  to  consider
             the child's best interests. You must also go  on  to  consider
             the child's best interests where the child is  more  dependent
             on the other person than on the applicant.


             In a case where a child has some degree of  dependence  on  at
             least two people, the child's best interests are not on  their
             own determinative of whether requiring the applicant to  leave
             the UK for an indefinite period would force the child to leave
             the territory of the UK and/or the EEA.  They  are  a  primary
             consideration and must be considered  together  with  all  the
             other evidence  and  information  held.  You  must  take  into
             account any evidence provided in support of  the  application,
             which may include the child's own views. When considering  the
             child's  best  interests,  you  must  take  into  account  the
             consequences  on  the  child's  everyday  life  if  they   are
             separated from the applicant, for example:


                  .    would they be safe, well cared-for, and  have  access
                  to any support they need to cope with change?


                  .    would they be  able  to  keep  in  contact  with  the
                  primary carer,  for  example  through  letters,  telephone
                  calls, instant messaging,  and  video  messaging  services
                  such as Skype and FaceTime, email and/or visits?


                  .    would they need to move home, and if so, how does the
                  nature, quality and location of their current home compare
                  with where they would live in future?


                  .    would there be disruption  to  their  education,  for
                  example could they keep attending the same school?


                  .    would they be able to  keep  in  contact  with  their
                  friends and any other family members?


             You should write out for further information  if  you  do  not
             have enough information to know what is in  the  child's  best
             interests. However, you can generally assume that it is in the
             child's best interests to:


                  .    remain in the UK, unless they have equal or  stronger
                  ties to another country


                  .    live with both parents or, if the parents live apart,
                  to have contact with both parents, unless  there  are  any
                  child welfare concerns Page 54 of 65  Published  for  Home
                  Office staff on 27 February 2018


                  .    minimise disruption to their everyday life, unless it
                  is in their best interests to change the status quo"


     56.  Although reference is there made to the best interests of a  child
         being to live with both parents, the  situation  with  which  I  am
         concerned is one where the children have  lived  apart  from  their
         father for the past six years and, although I accept that they  may
         prefer to live with both  parents,  I  am  not  provided  with  any
         evidence that their welfare has been adversely  affected  in  those
         six years  by  their  family  situation  (other  than  the  limited
         evidence that the family's situation may have contributed to  [L]'s
         exclusion from school - see above).  They have  managed  to  retain
         contact with their father by other means and have  visited  him  in
         Ghana.

     57. The Home Office guidance is stated to have  been  amended  to  take
         account of the CJEU's judgment in Chavez Vilchez  v  Raadvanbestuur
         van der Sociale Verzekeringsbank & others [2018]  QB  103  ("Chavez
         Vilchez").  Those cases were concerned with the proposed removal of
         third country national parents  who  were  the  primary  carers  of
         European citizen children, where the other European citizen  parent
         was either absent or played a minimal role in the child's life  and
         are  therefore  far  removed  from  the  factual  situation   here.
         However, the CJEU's judgment  as  to  the  best  interests  of  the
         children in this context and how those are  to  be  considered  are
         instructive.  The Court considered the issue of the interaction  of
         the establishing of derivative rights and the best interests of the
         child and reasoned as follows:

             "68.      In that regard, it must be  recalled  that,  in  the
             judgment of 6 December 2012, O and Others .... the Court held
             that factors of relevance, for  the  purposes  of  determining
             whether a refusal to grant a right of residence  to  a  third-
             country national parent of a child  who  is  a  Union  citizen
             means that that child is deprived of the genuine enjoyment  of
             the substance of the rights conferred on him by  that  status,
             include the question of who  has  custody  of  the  child  and
             whether that child  is  legally,  financially  or  emotionally
             dependent on the third-country national parent.


             69. As regards the second factor, the Court has stated that it
             is the relationship of dependency between  the  Union  citizen
             who is a minor and the third country national who is refused a
             right  of  residence  that  is  liable   to   jeopardise   the
             effectiveness  of  Union  citizenship,  since   it   is   that
             dependency that would lead to the Union citizen being obliged,
             in practice, to leave not only the  territory  of  the  Member
             State of which he is a national but also that of the  European
             Union as a whole, as a consequence of such a refusal (see,  to
             that effect, judgments of 8 March 2011, Ruiz Zambrano ... of
             15 November 2011, Dereci and Others,...; and of  6 December
             2012, O and Others, ...).


             70. In  this  case,  in  order  to  assess  the  risk  that  a
             particular child, who is a Union citizen, might  be  compelled
             to leave the territory of the European Union  and  thereby  be
             deprived of the genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the
             rights conferred on him by Article 20  TFEU  if  the  child's
             third-country national parent were to be refused  a  right  of
             residence in the Member State concerned, it  is  important  to
             determine, in each case at  issue  in  the  main  proceedings,
             which parent is the primary carer of  the  child  and  whether
             there is in fact a  relationship  of  dependency  between  the
             child and the third-country national parent. As part  of  that
             assessment, the competent authorities must take account of the
             right to respect for family life, as stated in  Article 7  of
             the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union,  that
             article  requiring  to  be  read  in  conjunction   with   the
             obligation to take into consideration the  best  interests  of
             the child, recognised in Article 24(2) of that charter.


             71. For the purposes of such an assessment, the fact that  the
             other parent, a Union citizen, is actually able and willing to
             assume sole responsibility for the primary day-to-day care  of
             the child is a relevant factor, but it  is  not  in  itself  a
             sufficient ground for a conclusion that there is not,  between
             the third-country  national  parent  and  the  child,  such  a
             relationship of dependency that the child would  be  compelled
             to leave the territory of the European Union  if  a  right  of
             residence were refused  to  that  third-country  national.  In
             reaching such a conclusion, account must be taken, in the best
             interests  of  the  child  concerned,  of  all  the   specific
             circumstances, including the age of  the  child,  the  child's
             physical  and  emotional  development,  the  extent   of   his
             emotional ties both to the Union citizen  parent  and  to  the
             third-country national parent, and the risks which  separation
             from the latter might entail for that child's equilibrium.


             ...


             78. ... Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as not precluding
             a Member State from providing that the right of  residence  in
             its territory of a third-country national, who is a parent  of
             a minor child that is a national of that Member State and  who
             is responsible for the primary day-to-day care of that  child,
             is subject to the requirement that the third-country  national
             must provide evidence to prove that a refusal of  a  right  of
             residence to the third-country national parent  would  deprive
             the child of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of  the
             rights pertaining to the child's status as a Union citizen, by
             obliging the child to leave  the  territory  of  the  European
             Union, as a whole. It is however for the competent authorities
             of the Member State concerned to undertake, on  the  basis  of
             the evidence  provided  by  the  third-country  national,  the
             necessary enquiries in order to be  able  to  assess,  in  the
             light of all the specific  circumstances,  whether  a  refusal
             would have such consequences."


     58. Both the Respondent's  policy  and  the  case-law  underlying  that
         policy, therefore, consider what is in the child's  best  interests
         in this context by reference to the  level  of  dependency  of  the
         child on the  parent  to  be  removed  (or  in  this  case  seeking
         admission) and whether  that  dependency  would  entail  the  child
         having to leave the Union.  I am in the slightly  unusual  position
         in this case of knowing what will occur if the Appellant is removed
         because he is already physically absent from the UK  and  has  been
         for six years.  The children have not been obliged to leave the UK.
          I have already concluded that [L]'s move to Ghana is temporary and
         was a matter of choice made by his mother.

     59. In terms of the children's dependency on the  Appellant  for  their
         welfare which is what consideration of the child's  best  interests
         is designed to safeguard and promote, I have already concluded that
         they are not dependent on the Appellant.  Their mother is  the  one
         who makes decisions about  their  education,  housing  and  welfare
         generally.  It is therefore in the  children's  best  interests  to
         remain in the UK with their mother as they have done for  the  past
         six years.

     60. I have accepted, as is stated in the  judgment  in  Chavez-Vilchez,
         that Article 7 of the Charter protects the  right  to  respect  for
         private and family life.  Although I accept that the absence of the
         Appellant may have had some limited impact on the behaviour of  [L]
         who may have behaved badly at school in  reaction  to  taunts  from
         other  children  about  his  family  circumstances  (although   the
         evidence which I have in that regard comes only from  [L]'s  mother
         and not any independent source), there is otherwise  a  paucity  of
         evidence to show that the children's  welfare  has  been  adversely
         impacted by the absence of the Appellant from their lives.

     61. I accept that the Appellant's wife is  struggling  financially  but
         the family has been supported by the  authorities  in  the  UK  and
         remains housed by them.  I accept her evidence that the authorities
         are reaching the stage  where  they  may  be  unable,  legally,  to
         support her in the future but at the time of the hearing, they were
         continuing to do so and seeking to support the family's  future  by
         providing her with assistance whilst she seeks  further  employment
         to provide for herself and her family.  There is no  evidence  that
         the children's welfare  is  not  being  adequately  safeguarded  or
         promoted by a combination of their  mother's  care  and  assistance
         from the local authority.

     62. Based on the evidence before me,  therefore  I  conclude  that  the
         children's best interests are to remain in the UK with their mother
         as they have done for the past six years.  Whilst the  children  in
         particular have indicated a preference to have their father  living
         with them, the Appellant has failed to  provide  evidence  to  show
         that their well-being is suffering as a  result  of  the  situation
         which the family has lived in for the past six years.  The children
         continue to have regular,  direct  contact  with  their  father  in
         Ghana.  The right to respect for their family life does not, on the
         evidence before me, require that the Appellant be permitted to come
         to the UK.

     63. For all of those reasons, I dismiss the appeal.  The Appellant  has
         not established that he  is  entitled  to  a  derivative  right  of
         residence.

    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  C  Greasley  promulgated  on  26
    September 2018 is set aside.

    I re-make the decision.  I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


    Signed [pic] Dated:  23 January 2019
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
