

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/01533/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th January 2018                      | On 05th March 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mr Zaeem Gulshad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  on  22nd  October
    1988 and is a male.  He appeals against the decision of the  Respondent
    Secretary of State made on 21st January 2016, refusing the Appellant  a
    grant of an EEA residence card, as  a  confirmation  of  his  right  to
    reside in the UK.  The decision was made  under  Regulation  8  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 that  deals  with
    the issue of residence cards to Extended Family  Members  (EFMs).   The
    Appellant claims to be a partner of an EEA national and is in a durable
    relationship because he and his partner are not married or in  a  civil
    partnership.

 2. On 19th September 2016, the decision in Sala (EFMs - Right of  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 411 was promulgated, and this was to the effect that  there
    is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State not to grant a residence card to a person claiming  to  be  an
    Extended Family Member.

 3. On 18th March 2017 the Appellant's representative wrote to the Tribunal
    contending that the case of Sala was wrongly decided and  deprived  the
    Appellant of a right of appeal.  However, the representations  did  not
    explain why the decision of Sala was wrong.  The Tribunal decided  that
    there was an insufficient basis to allow the appeal.

 4. By a decision dated 5th May 2017, the Tribunal  refused  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that there was a want of jurisdiction.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, and at the hearing today,
    both Mr N Bramble, the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, and Mr  S
    Khan, of Counsel, appearing on behalf of  the  Appellant,  agreed  that
    there was an error of law in the decisions below, such that the  matter
    should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal such that  a  proper
    right of appeal can be exercised.

 6. I have taken into account the decision in Khan v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1755, which is to the effect that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong  in
    law to conclude that it did not have jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal
    with the result that the decision be set aside.  As evidence is  to  be
    led it is appropriate that it be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  It is set aside and in terms of Section 12(2)(b)(i)
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007,  and  of  practice
    statement 7.2, remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before a judge other than Judge Mitchell.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018





