
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01425/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th November 2019              |On 29 November 2019                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                      mr Henry Fernando Arequipa Cando
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Naqvi instructed by Irvine Thanvi Natas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, the determination of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain dated 4th July 2019 which dismissed  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of  4th  March  2019  to  refuse  his
    application for retained rights of residence following the end  of  his
    marriage to an EEA Spanish national, Ms Monica [J].

 2. The reasons for refusal letter noted that the EEA national sponsor left
    the UK on 7th November 2015 and the appellant was unaware when divorce
    proceedings began.  The documents provided did not  confirm  the  date.
    In the absence of this information  the  Secretary  of  State  required
    evidence that the appellant's sponsor was a  qualified  person  on  the
    date of divorce which was 13th November 2017.  It was accepted that the
    sponsor was a qualified person between September 2013 to  October  2015
    but not that the sponsor continued to exercise  treaty  rights  to  the
    date of divorce.     The application was refused under Regulation 10 of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 3. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  asserted  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision was vitiated by material errors of law.

      i) the judge referred at [15] referred to an extract which stated that
         those eligible to obtain a divorce in Spain  included  someone  who
         was  a  national  of  Spain  and  living  there.   There   was   no
         consideration whatsoever in the determination as to the possibility
         that the appellant's sponsor could have misled the  Spanish  courts
         about her residence when she  petitioned  the  Spanish  courts  for
         divorce (in the summer  of  2015  if  the  appellant's  belief  was
         correct).

     ii) there was  no  reference  anywhere  in  the  determination  to  the
         evidence of the appellant's sister who provided a witness statement
         in support of the appellant's appeal  as  follows  "I  also  recall
         speaking to Monica (a sponsor) at the time in order to persuade her
         to withdraw the divorce proceedings  however  talking  to  her  was
         futile as she appeared to have already made  up  her  mind".    The
         appellant's sister's evidence was not challenged but there  was  no
         mention of this in the determination.

 4. The judge recorded the following evidence

      i) the application was refused because the appellant had not  provided
         adequate evidence that his EEA former spouse was a qualified person
         or had a right of permanent residence on the date of termination of
         the marriage or civil partnership.  The appellant had claimed  that
         his sponsor left the UK on 7th November 2015 and that he was  told
         by his then wife she had started proceedings in summer 2015 but  he
         did not believe her [5]

     ii) at paragraph 5 the judge recorded in his application  at  8.17  the
         appellant stated he did not know when the legal proceedings  began.
         [5];

    iii) in oral evidence the appellant stated that  he  discovered  he  was
         divorced in March 2018, had visited the court  in  Spain,  and  had
         been shown a document which confirmed that he was already divorced;



     iv) the judge recorded in oral evidence that the appellant was asked to
         clarify when his wife went to Spain and he stated that  he  thought
         it was in August 2015 despite paragraph 14 of his statement  saying
         that it was 7th November 2015 [9];

 5. The judge directed himself correctly at paragraph 13 that an  applicant
    claiming to have a retained right of residence had to prove that at the
    initiation of divorce proceedings resulting in the termination  of  the
    marriage, that his sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights.   Baigazieva
    and the Secretary of State [2018] EWCA Civ 1088 confirms  that  at  the
    very latest the ex-wife must have been exercising  treaty  rights  when
    she initiated divorce proceedings.  The judge noted that the  appellant
    was told by his partner that she had instructed a lawyer  in  Spain  to
    start divorce proceedings which he tried to talk her  out  of  and  she
    then came back to this country but finally left  in  November  2015  or
    alternatively August 2015 if the appellant's oral evidence was correct.
     The judge, however, made a specific finding at paragraph 13

         'whether it is the date of initiation of the divorce or the divorce
         itself which, in this case took place on 13th November 2017, in  my
         view there  simply  is  not  any  evidence  that  the  sponsor  was
         exercising treaty rights in this country'

 6. Bearing in mind the contradictions and  vagueness  in  the  appellant's
    evidence (oral and written) and the absence of any objective  evidence,
    that finding in paragraph 13 was open to the judge.

 7. As the judge observed

         "17      In my view, the appellant has not helped his case  by  not
             making greater  efforts  to  obtain  a  copy  of  the  divorce
             petition, which may well have had an indication on its face as
             to the day  it  was  lodged  with  the  court  or  a  separate
             confirmation from the court as to when commencement began. The
             appellant, personally went to the  court  in  Barcelona,  from
             where he obtained a copy of the divorce certificate. He  could
             have asked for more.

         18 Sympathy for the appellant is not sufficient  to  discharge  the
             burden of proof on him.  The respondent was  right  to  expect
             evidence of the sponsor's exercise of treaty rights, when  the
             divorce was initiated. The appellant  has  not  been  able  to
             provide that evidence and accordingly, it seems to me that  if
             the refusal of his application was inevitable. I find that the
             respondent  was  justified   in   refusing   the   appellant's
             application."

 8. At the hearing before  me  Mr  Naqvi  submitted  that  the  appellant's
    sponsor may have had to be domiciled in Spain to obtain a divorce which
    would place her outside the United  Kingdom  when  divorce  proceedings
    were initiated but she may have given  misleading  information  to  the
    court.  Be that as it may, as the judge  noted,  there  was  simply  no
    objective or firm evidence as to  when  the  divorce  proceedings  were
    commenced or where the sponsor was at that time.  As the judge recorded
    in [15] the appellant as at a loss to explain how  divorce  proceedings
    could have been initiated in Spain in the summer of 2015  when  it  was
    not until much later that the appellant's partner went to live  there'.
    It is not for a judge to speculate as to whether misleading information
    was given regarding the provision of misleading information and, I have
    read the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal and there was
    no indication that that issue was specifically raised before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The explanation for the  three-year  gap  between
    filing for divorce and obtaining a divorce was owed to  the  'perpetual
    delays of the Spanish legal system'. Those defects in the evidence were
    present whether or not the ex-wife had failed to proceed in  accordance
    with Spanish divorce law.

 9. Mr Naqvi also submitted that the appellant had made an application  for
    the residence card in January 2019 and by  then  had  no  passport  and
    could not go to Spain to obtain the relevant  evidence.   He  submitted
    that a solicitor could not write to a Spanish court,  which  I  do  not
    accept, and that the respondent should have done so and the  respondent
    should have made inquiries.  The appellant went to the  courts  at  the
    time in March 2018  and  discovered  that  he  was  divorced.   It  is,
    however, clearly open to solicitors on the appellant's instructions  to
    write to Spanish court to obtain information. The  appellant  made  the
    application in January of this  year  and  had  ample  time  to  pursue
    documentary evidence.

10. Turning to the second ground, the appellant's sister did not give  live
    evidence and even if her  evidence  was  not  referred  to  it  is  not
    material given the nature of the case because it does not take the case
    further.  There was a reference to the divorce being finalised on  23rd
    November 2017 at paragraph 11 of Miss Cando's statement  and  that  "he
    was hoping that she  had  abandoned  the  divorce  procedure  that  she
    informed me that she had commenced in the summer of  2015  however  she
    had not" but that was the extent of  the  statement.     The  statement
    gives no definitive answer as to when the proceedings  were  initiated.
    The statement also refers to the ex-wife departing  from  the  'UK  for
    Spain in 2015' without any more detail. The statement  gives  no  clear
    information as to where the EEA  national  was  residing  when  divorce
    proceedings were commenced.

11. The ex-wife, EEA national, was last recorded  as  being  employed  with
    Mayfair Cleaning  on  31st  October  2015  but  overall  there  was  no
    documentary evidence as to when the divorce proceedings  were  in  fact
    instituted, contradictory information as to when the  ex-wife  departed
    the UK and an unhelpful extract  concerning  the  technicalities  of  a
    Spanish divorce.  It is for the appellant to prove his case. The  judge
    made findings which were open  to  him  and  any  absence  of  detailed
    reference to the sister's evidence was, owing  to  its  vagueness,  not
    material. As the judge found at paragraph 18,  the  appellant  had  not
    provided sufficient evidence to prove his case.

12. I find there is no error in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M
    B Husain and the decision will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Helen   Rimington                                Date     27th
    November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
