
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01083/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 December 2018                            |On 9 January 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                Zabeeh Ullah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Logan, R & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (FtT) dated 26 April 2018.   In  that  decision  the  FtT
         accepted all the relevant requirements  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
         Regulations 2016 had been met save one.  The only  issue  that  the
         FtT found against the appellant was a failure to  provide  a  valid
         national identification card or passport for his spouse.   The  FtT
         was satisfied that the relevant EEA national spouse was  exercising
         treaty rights at the date of divorce and  that  the  appellant  was
         exercising Treaty rights at  the  relevant  time  but  went  on  to
         dismiss the appeal for the reason I have provided.

      2. In grounds of appeal prepared on behalf of  the  appellant  it  was
         argued that the FtT erred in law in  requiring  him  to  provide  a
         certified  copy  of  identity  documents   given   the   particular
         circumstances of this case.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by
         FtT Judge Simpson.  She noted the relevant background included  the
         following: the appellant's marriage irretrievably  broke  down  and
         there was a lack of amicable relations between the parties; the ex-
         wife  had  only  agreed  to  provide  him  with  a  copy   of   her
         identification card; the appellant had previously  been  granted  a
         residence card on 13 January 2014 in respect of the  self-same  EEA
         national  when  the  respondent  would  have  had  sight  of  their
         identification document.  Judge Simpson also drew attention to  the
         provision in the Regulations to the effect that  the  Secretary  of
         State may accept alternative evidence of identity  and  nationality
         where the person is  unable  to  obtain  or  produce  the  required
         document due to circumstances beyond the person's  control.   Judge
         Simpson observed that there was an arguable failure  to  take  this
         provision into account,  and  this  was  compounded  by  the  FtT's
         expectation that  the  copy  of  the  identification  document  the
         appellant did produce for his ex-wife should have been  by  way  of
         certified copy from a solicitor or like professional.

      3. At the hearing before me the parties agreed that the FtT's decision
         contains an error of law as identified by FtT  Judge  Simpson  when
         granting permission  to  appeal.   Mr  McVeety  also  pragmatically
         accepted that there  is  now  clear  and  cogent  evidence  of  the
         relevant identification of the EEA national in question  such  that
         it is conceded that this appeal against the  decision  of  the  FtT
         should be allowed and that I should remake the decision by allowing
         the appellant's appeal.  Given that clear concession  there  is  no
         need for me to give any further reasons  save  to  observe  that  I
         entirely accept that Mr McVeety  has  done  the  correct  thing  in
         conceding the appeal in the manner that he has.

      4. The decision of the FtT contains an error of law and is set  aside.
         I re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.


Signed                              Dated

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     20 December 2018

