

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01779/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 July 2021                              |On 04 August 2021              |
|                                             |                               |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                              Fatuma Nakanwagi
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                  PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 13 March 2019 to refuse her an EEA family permit to  permit  her  to
    join her Swedish national husband in the United Kingdom as his  spouse,
    with reference to Regulations 2, 7 and 12 of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The  appellant's  Swedish  spouse  is
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.   The  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Uganda.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer's decision errs in referring  to  the  2006
    Regulations: the  applicable  Regulations  are  the  2016  Regulations.
    There is no difference of substance in the relevant provisions of  each
    set of Regulations.

 3. The respondent considered that  the  marriage  contracted  between  the
    appellant  and  sponsor  was  a  marriage  of  convenience   and   that
    Regulations 7 and  12  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 were applicable.  She refused entry clearance.

Background

 4. The appellant and sponsor married on 23 August 2018  in  Uganda.   They
    have produced some photographs, a Ugandan marriage certificate,  and  a
    decree of divorce for the sponsor from his previous spouse.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer did not consider that these documents  were
    adequate or reliable:

         "Ugandan marriage certificates are readily available, difficult  to
         verify, and on their own provide little evidential  value  to  your
         application.   In  your  supporting   documents,   you   have   not
         demonstrated a relationship prior to this, nor that you  have  been
         in contact since this, and  I  am  not  satisfied  that  a  genuine
         wedding took place.

         I am  therefore  satisfied  on  the  totality  of  information  and
         evidence before me that it is more probable than not that you  were
         and are a party to a marriage of convenience for the  sole  purpose
         of gaining entry into the United Kingdom. "

 6. The Entry  Clearance  Manager  upheld  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision adding that the respondent would expect  to  see  evidence  of
    contact before, during and  after  the  wedding,  which  had  not  been
    provided.

 7. The appellant exercised her out of country right of appeal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 8. The First-tier Judge heard evidence from the sponsor.  The sponsor  was
    55, and the appellant was 34  years  old  at  the  date  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.  There was no witness statement from  the  appellant:
    the sponsor said he did not know he needed one.

 9. The sponsor gave details of his previous relationship and of his family
    members in Uganda.  The sponsor said  that  he  met  the  appellant  in
    Uganda when he was still married, in December 2013.  He  was  not  free
    then, but his marriage was already in difficulty.   The  appellant  and
    sponsor stayed in contact as friends. The sponsor's marriage had  ended
    with a decree absolute in February 2017.

10. The marriage had been a registry office affair,  followed  by  a  small
    celebration in a local restaurant.  Wedding photographs were  taken  by
    the bride's sister:  they did not invite many  people  as  he  did  not
    believe in collecting money for weddings. They were saving for a bigger
    church wedding later, to take place in Uganda so that  the  appellant's
    family could attend.

11. The sponsor travelled to Uganda in December 2018 to help with the entry
    clearance application. Following  the  refusal,  he  stayed  on  for  5
    months, returning to the United Kingdom in May 2019.  He  was  planning
    to go back in November 2019.  He showed his passport  with  the  travel
    stamps.  The sponsor  had  obtained  a  confirmatory  letter  from  the
    Ugandan Registration Services Bureau, confirming that the marriage  had
    taken place and that the parties were lawfully married.

12. The First-tier Judge found the evidence to be very thin.  There was  no
    evidence from the registrar, the sponsor's sister, or the other  person
    present.  The sponsor was recently divorced and nearly 20  years  older
    than his wife.  They had not known each  other  long.   The  judge  was
    surprised that there was no evidence  from  the  appellant  herself  in
    support of her appeal, the marriage, and her reasons for entering  into
    it, or from family members  who  could  corroborate  the  circumstances
    surrounding the  marriage.   Evidence  of  telephone  calls  and  money
    transfers was post-application and of little assistance.

13. The First-tier Judge accepted that a  valid  legal  marriage  had  been
    undertaken, but was satisfied that it was a  marriage  of  convenience.
    He dismissed the appeal.

14. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

15. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge O'Brien, who  said
    this:

         "3.  The judge appeared to consider the age difference between  the
         couple as material to his or her decision,  and  yet  there  is  no
         indication in the reasons that the sponsor was asked  about  it  or
         otherwise  put  on  notice  that  it  might  be  held  against  the
         appellant.  Conversely, it is unclear whether the judge  took  into
         account in his or her conclusions the  arguably  relevant  evidence
         given by the sponsor of the time the couple  spent  together  after
         refusal [of the application] in Uganda."

Rule 24 Reply

16. The respondent in a Rule 24 response argued that the previous  marriage
    was relevant and the First-tier Judge was entitled to  have  regard  to
    it.  It was not a disputed fact.  The sponsor's witness statement  gave
    background information about his marital history.   The same  was  true
    of the age difference: neither issue took the sponsor by surprise.

17. As regards the appellant's  challenge  to  the  burden  of  proof,  the
    respondent relied on Rosa v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 14, which had been applied by the First-tier  Judge  at
    [14] in his decision, and the shifting evidential burden therein.   The
    First-tier Judge had  been  entitled  to  find  that  the  evidence  in
    relation to the marriage was so sparse, and the sponsor's  explanations
    so inadequate, that the evidential burden on the  respondent  had  been
    discharged.  There was no evidence from the  appellant  herself  as  to
    whether the marriage was one of convenience, that is to say, whether it
    was entered into for the purpose of evading immigration  controls.  The
    subsequent subsistence of any relationship was nothing to the point  in
    that respect.

Rule 25 Reply

18. Ms Heybroek's Reply was received out of time. It was  received  by  the
    Upper Tribunal at 11.26 a.m. on  the  morning  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing, which was listed for 10:30 a.m. I was not  made  aware  of  it
    until 12:01 when it was emailed to me.  By that  time,  the  Reply  had
    been overtaken by the agreement at the hearing for further  submissions
    and a rule 15(2A) application to follow the hearing.

19. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

20. At a hearing on 13 November 2020, I set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Judge for inadequacy of reasoning. The First-tier Judge had  erred
    in placing the burden  of  proving  the  marriage  to  be  genuine  and
    subsisting  on  the  appellant,  not  the  respondent  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, and in conflating the 'genuine and subsisting' test  with  the
    EEA test for a marriage of convenience which is set out below.

21. The appellant wished to adduce additional evidence and  it  was  agreed
    that she should be given an opportunity to make  an  application  under
    rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (as
    amended) if so advised, within 14 days from  the  sending  out  of  the
    decision, to be followed by final submissions from  both  parties.   No
    final submissions were received, but Ms Heybroek did  file  a  Rule  25
    Reply out of time.  There was no application for an extension of time.

22. The parties agreed that no further oral hearing would be necessary  and
    that the final remaking decision could be made on the  documents  which
    would then be before the Upper Tribunal.

Rule 15(2A): additional evidence

23. Rule 15(2A) provides that:

         "(2A) In an asylum case or an immigration case-

         (a) if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence  that
         was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that  party  must  send  or
         deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and any other party-

             (i) indicating the nature of the evidence; and
             (ii) explaining why it was not  submitted  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal; and

         (b)  when considering whether to admit evidence that was not before
         the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal  must  have  regard  to
         whether  there  has  been  unreasonable  delay  in  producing  that
         evidence."

24. On 1 December 2020, the applicant filed further evidence,  but  without
    making a rule 15(2A) application. There being no  explanation  for  the
    delay in producing this evidence, I do consider  that  there  has  been
    unreasonable delay in producing it.  Despite that,  this  is  the  only
    evidence before me from the appellant herself and  I  have  decided  to
    give it such weight as it will bear.

25. The new evidence does not greatly assist the  appellant.  The  evidence
    produced consists of a witness statement from the appellant, one from a
    Ms Rebecca Nalusiba, the sponsor's cousin, and  another  from  Ms  Jane
    Nanyondo, a Ugandan national living in  the  United  Kingdom,  together
    with copies of the sponsor's passport confirming his travels to Uganda.
     There are no travels after November 2019 but given the effect  of  the
    Covid pandemic, that is unsurprising.

26. Strikingly, there is still nothing from any member of  the  appellant's
    family and it remains unclear whether they are aware  of  the  marriage
    she has contracted.  No member of the appellant's family  attended  the
    small wedding ceremony.  The appellant has not explained their absence,
    both in person and in writing. Nor does she explain  why  this  witness
    statement is the first evidence from her in these proceedings.

27. In her witness statement, the appellant says she has read the sponsor's
    statement.  She  understands,  incorrectly,   that   her   appeal   was
    unsuccessful because there are still doubts as to whether the  marriage
    is legal, and whether it is 'genuine and subsisting'.   The appellant's
    statement does not address whether the marriage is one of  convenience.
      There is nothing about her  personal  circumstances  in  Uganda,  nor
    those of the sponsor in the United Kingdom, apart from her having had a
    difficult previous  relationship  and  he  a  difficult  marriage.  The
    appellant speaks of their mutual support, before they married.

28. She says that she has had relationships with men her own age, but those
    have not been satisfactory, and that the sponsor is  a  better  husband
    for being older.  She was distraught when entry clearance  was  refused
    and the sponsor took unpaid leave to remain  with  her  in  Uganda  for
    nearly 6 months.  He travelled there  again  in  November  2019  for  a
    further four weeks together.  They have maintained contact during their
    enforced separation by WhatsApp and telephone.   He  has  continued  to
    support her financially.  The appellant gives no details of her  living
    expenses, or how much and how often the sponsor sends money.

29. Ms Nanyondo is an Ugandan national living in the United  Kingdom.   She
    was one of the two witnesses to the marriage and her  name  is  on  the
    marriage certificate. She says that she has no doubt  that  the  couple
    are genuinely in love, having seen the relationship develop over  time.
    They are dedicated to each other.  The appellant  has  suffered  'great
    sadness, which she should  not  have  to  endure',  by  reason  of  the
    continued separation.

30. Ms Nalusiba is the sponsor's first cousin and  she  too  is  a  Swedish
    citizen.  she confirms that she attended  the  wedding  and  the  small
    reception.  She says their relationship is 'genuine and subsisting' but
    her statement really takes matters no further.

Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016

31. Regulation 2 of the 2016 Regulations defines a marriage of convenience:

         ""marriage of convenience" includes a marriage entered into for the
         purpose of using these Regulations, or any other right conferred by
         the EU Treaties, as a means to circumvent-
         (a)  immigration rules applying to non-EEA nationals (such  as  any
         applicable requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom); or
         (b)   any  other  criteria  that  the  party  to  the  marriage  of
         convenience would otherwise have to meet in order to enjoy a  right
         to reside under these Regulations or the EU Treaties; ...
         "spouse" does not include-
         (a)  a party to a marriage of convenience; ..."

32. The effect of these definitions is that  Regulation  7,  which  defines
    'family member' as  including  a  person's  spouse  or  civil  partner,
    excludes any spouse in a marriage of convenience.  Such a person is not
    a spouse for  the  purpose  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   Regulation  12
    requires an Entry Clearance Officer to issue an EEA family permit to  a
    person who is a 'family member', but again, a person who is a party  to
    a marriage of convenience is not a 'family member' because they are not
    a spouse as defined in the Regulations.

33. The question whether this marriage when contracted was  a  marriage  of
    convenience is therefore likely to be determinative of the appeal.

Analysis

34. The First-tier Judge's finding of fact that the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience was based on the sponsor's evidence alone.  There has  been
    no explanation from the appellant as to why  she  gave  the  First-tier
    Judge no assistance by providing evidence of the type now  advanced  in
    her witness statement and those  of  her  two  witnesses.   As  already
    stated, the evidence which has been advanced continues to focus on  the
    wrong issue and gives the Tribunal little  assistance  in  whether  the
    marriage, when contracted, was one of convenience or not.

35. The  question  of  the  sponsor's  age  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be
    determinative.  Marriage between a man in his 50s and a  woman  in  her
    30s is not particularly extraordinary.  The very sparse nature  of  the
    ceremony, and the lack of any relative of  the  appellant's  there,  is
    significant.  The sponsor's account that he was  saving  for  a  better
    wedding but did not want to invite people  and  collect  money  at  the
    registry office wedding is internally contradictory.

36. The sponsor did spend time in Uganda after the wedding, but there is no
    confirmation that he spent it with the appellant.  He has family  there
    too.  He seems to have been in the habit of returning  for  visits:  he
    says he met the appellant on a holiday visit in  2013.    There  is  no
    detail as to whether he has met her family now, or how they spent their
    time together.

37. The evidence continues to be particularly sparse in this  appeal,  even
    with the addition of the new witness statements.  There is insufficient
    to  rebut  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is   one   of
    convenience.

DECISION

38. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the appeal.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      26 July
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



