
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
EA/01823/2015

                                                  hu/10822/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2017                           |On 22 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                   ERROL SHELBY ARNOLD (FIRST Respondent)
                 SHEREEN ALTHIA MALLETT (SECOND respondent)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Mr. M. Clapham, Legal Representative.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal with the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and  Mr  Arnold  and
    Miss Mallett as the first and second appellants.

 2. The first appellant appealed against a decision by the respondent of  7
    October 2016 to issue him with a  residence  card  under  the  European
    Economic Area Regulations (EEA Regulations).  He applied for  the  card
    which would have stated that he had a right of residence in the  United
    Kingdom as the (now divorced) ex-partner or spouse of a person,  namely
    one Ehuia Edith Aka, Italian or  EU  citizen  who  had  claimed  to  be
    exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  respondent
    maintained that  the  marriage  had  been  a  sham  or  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

 3. The second appellant is the mother of the child of the first appellant.
     That child was born following a brief affair  in  2009.   In  November
    2017, the child will be 7 years of age.  The second  appellant  claimed
    under human rights to be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom either
    in her own right under family life within Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights or in terms of family life where  the  child
    has contact with her father (the first appellant) and should be allowed
    to remain in order to facilitate  that  contact  in  the  child's  best
    interest.  The judge was referred to Collins Agho [2015] EWCA Civ  1198
    at paragraph 38.

 4. The two appellants' appeals were linked and heard at  Taylor  House  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Telford who, in a decision promulgated
    on 17 August 2017, allowed them.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal J  M  Holmes  on  12  September  2017.   His
    reasons for so doing were:

          1) "In a decision promulgated on 17  August  2017  Judge  Telford
             allowed the appellants' appeals against the decision to refuse
             to issue A1 with a residence card, and to grant  A2  leave  to
             remain.

          2) The application is in time.

          3) Whilst the judge was no doubt not assisted by the  failure  of
             the respondent to attend the hearing it is arguable that  this
             brief decision failed to properly  engage  with  the  evidence
             relied upon by the respondent, and failed to apply the correct
             burden and  standard  of  proof;  Rosa  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  14,
             Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54.   The  decision  does  not  refer  to
             relevant jurisprudence".

 6. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 7. Mr Kotas  accepted  at  the  outset  that  contrary  to  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal the judge had referred  to  and  adopted  relevant
    jurisprudence as to how the issues in this appeal should  be  resolved.
    Moreover, the issues that the appellant's marriage interview throughout
    did not "stand up" was resolved  in  light  of  the  evidence  and  the
    judge's findings.  Irrespective though of this he nonetheless sought to
    rely upon the respondent's grounds seeking permission to appeal.

 8. Mr Clapham urged me to accept that the judge's  decision  disclosed  no
    material error of law.

 9. I agree with Mr Clapham's submissions.  Relying on  relevant  authority
    the judge has applied the correct burden and standard of proof.  He was
    entitled to come to the conclusions that he did having  considered  the
    evidence.  They were open  to  be  made.   The  decision  discloses  no
    arguable error of law.  It is adequately reasoned and contrary  to  the
    asserted grounds the judge has not erred.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set the decision aside.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 21 November 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



