
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: EA/01873/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 March 2018                     |On 27 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                 Ahsan Rasul
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Lamptons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons

    Details of appellant and basis of claim

      1.    The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  S  J  Clarke)  found  that  the
         Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appellant's appeal against
         the decision of the respondent to refuse him a residence card as an
         extended family member under the EEA Regulations.  He  applied  the
         decision in Sala [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) in support of his decision.

      2.    The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 6  July  1987  and
         his EEA sponsor is his father-in-law. Initially his application for
         permission to appeal against the Tribunal's  decision  was  refused
         (on 12 December 2017 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Boyes)  but  on
         renewal it was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 22  January
         2018. Judge Grubb found that following Khan [2017] EWCA  Civ  1755,
         the First-tier Tribunal had been wrong in law to conclude  that  it
         had no jurisdiction. He proposed to  set  aside  the  decision  and
         remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal unless  either  of  the
         parties objected within 7 days of that decision.

    Consideration

      3.    The parties confirmed at the hearing before me that they had  no
         objections to the course of action proposed by Upper Tribunal Judge
         Grubb. As no objections have been raised, I  therefore  proceed  to
         set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
         remit it back to another judge of that Tribunal for a fresh hearing
         and the re-making of the decision.

    Decision

      4.    The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law.  The  decision  is
         set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
         hearing and for the decision to be re-made.

    Anonymity Order

    5.     I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and see no reason
         to do so in any event.

    Directions

    6.     All additional documentary evidence relied  on  by  the  parties
         must be filed and served no later than seven working days prior  to
         the hearing.




         Signed:
         [pic]
         Dr R Keki?
         Judge of the Upper Tribunal


         22 March 2018
