
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
EA/01918/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 September 2017                  |On 17 October 2017              |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between

                           LUKMAN OLAKUNLE OLAYEMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:        Mr Djukotola of SLA Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant, a national of Nigeria was  born  on  28  April  1982.  The
   Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated
   20 October 2015 to refuse to grant an application for a residence card as
   a confirmation of his right to reside in the UK as the Spouse of  an  EEA
   citizen exercising treaty rights.
3. The refusal was on the basis that the Appellant could not establish  that
   he  was  a  family  member  of  the  EEA  citizen  because  the  marriage
   certificate  produced  dated  31  January  2015  related  to  a  marriage
   conducted under Nigerian Native Law and Custom and proxy  marriages  were
   not permitted under Nigerian Law.
4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge decided the case on the papers.  The  Judge
   concluded that while such a marriage was permitted under Nigerian Law the
   Appellant had failed to establish that  proxy  marriages  were  awful  in
   Hungary the country of nationality of the EEA spouse.  In  reaching  that
   conclusion he applied the guidance found in Kareem (proxy marriages -  EU
   law) [2014] UKUT 24.
5. At the hearing before me Mr Bates confirmed the contents of the  Rule  24
   Notice that it was conceded that in the light of Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA
   Civ 178 Kareem had been wrongly decided and there was no  requirement  to
   establish that the proxy marriage was lawful in Hungary.
6. The advocates were content for me to remake the decision.

Error of Law
7. I am satisfied that the Judge was in error  in  applying  Kareem  in  the
   light of the decision in Awuku. Where a  case  is  found  to  be  legally
   flawed, the reasons for so finding will  have  existed  both  before  and
   after its notification.  The  error  is  effectively  replicated  in  the
   decision which followed it and so there would be an error of law in  that
   decision too.

Remaking the Decision

8. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge  Samimi  and  given  that  no
   other issues were taken in this case        the  Appellants  appeal  must
   succeed.

CONCLUSION

9. I therefore found that an errors of law has  been  established  and  that
   the Judge's determination must be set aside.

Decision

10. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal with regard to Article 8 such that the decision is set aside

11. I remake the appeal.

12. I allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations 2006.

Signed                                                              Date
29.9.2017

Debra Birrell

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of the fees paid as the decision  was  based  on  an  assertion  that  proxy
marriages are not legal in Nigeria an issue that has never been pursued.

Signed

Debra Birrell

Deputy         Judge         of         the          Upper          Tribunal
          Date 29.9.2017




