
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/01786/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 8th August 2017                     |On 29th August 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                           MR BERNARD EGBE AIWUYO
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ikeh, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Proceedings

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  5th  of  May  1980.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lingam
      sitting at Taylor  House  on  21st  of  November  2015  in  which  she
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent
      dated 12th of October 2015. That decision was to refuse to  issue  the
      Appellant with an EEA family permit as a family member/extended family
      member of an EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
      Kingdom. The Appellant stated in his  application  form  that  he  had
      entered into a marriage by proxy with his  spouse  a  Spanish  citizen
      ("the Sponsor").


   2. The Respondent refused  the  application  because  the  Appellant  had
      failed to show that he was the spouse of the Sponsor or in  a  durable
      relationship with her.  The  validity  of  the  proxy  marriage  under
      Nigerian law was not accepted for the lengthy  reasons  given  in  the
      refusal letter and it was not accepted that the Sponsor was exercising
      treaty rights.


   3. The Appellant appealed that decision arguing that his  proxy  marriage
      with the Sponsor was valid as it  met  the  requisite  law  where  the
      marriage was performed. The marriage had been registered in accordance
      with local specifications and the marriage certificate was issued by a
      competent authority in Nigeria.  There  was  no  bar  to  the  Sponsor
      entering into a proxy marriage with him. She was in gainful employment
      when the application was lodged on 1 May 2015. By August 2015 she  had
      left her employment and was now engaged in self-employment.


      The Proceedings at First Instance


   4. There was no appearance on behalf of the Appellant at the  hearing  at
      first instance. The Presenting Officer relied on  the  Upper  Tribunal
      decision in the case of Sala  [2016]  UKUT  411  in  which  the  Upper
      Tribunal held that there was no statutory right of appeal against  the
      decision of the Respondent to refuse to grant a residence  card  to  a
      person claiming to be an extended family member under Regulation 8  of
      the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  now  2016.
      At paragraphs 8 to  13  of  her  determination  the  Judge  considered
      whether she had jurisdiction to hear the appeal in the light  of  Sala
      and concluded that  she  did  not  noting  at  paragraph  9  that  the
      Appellant failed to fall within Regulation 7 of the  2006  Regulations
      as a family member of an EEA national (which still did carry  a  right
      of appeal).


   5.  The Judge was satisfied that the Appellant had not applied under  the
      immigration rules as a dependent spouse of his partner but had made an
      application for a residence permit as an extended  family  member.  As
      the Tribunal could not accept a notice of appeal where  there  was  no
      appealable decision the Judge found that there was no statutory  right
      of appeal and in effect dismissed the Appellant's appeal, although the
      wording of the determination does not say so in so many words.


   6. The Appellant appealed this decision arguing that the  Judge  had  not
      considered the Appellant's appeal on the basis of his  proxy  marriage
      to the sponsor. The Court of Appeal had recently given guidance in the
      case of Awuku [2017] EWCA Civ 178  that  a  proxy  marriage  could  be
      recognised  in  the  United  Kingdom  provided  it  was  conducted  in
      accordance with the laws of Nigeria. As it  had  been  argued  by  the
      Appellant in the grounds before the First-tier Tribunal  that  he  was
      married, by proxy marriage, he did have a  right  of  appeal  and  the
      Judge did have jurisdiction to hear the appeal. Sala, it was contended
      had been wrongly applied by the First-tier Tribunal. Consideration  by
      the Judge of the evidence before her might have affected  the  outcome
      of the appeal.


   7. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on 26th of June 2017. She  granted
      permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the  points  raised  in  the
      grounds (which I have summarised above) ere arguable.  The  Respondent
      replied to the grant of permission by letter dated 13th of July  2017.
      The Respondent opposed the Appellant's appeal and  would  submit  that
      the  Judge  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   had   directed   herself
      appropriately. It was accepted  that  there  had  been  a  significant
      period between the determination in this case and the subsequent grant
      of permission during which time there had  been  developments  in  the
      case law on the validity of proxy marriages. The Appellant had applied
      on the basis that he was in a durable relationship and it was  unclear
      what evidence was provided to indicate that it was  a  valid  marriage
      under Nigerian law. I pause to note here that that last submission  is
      incorrect as a careful reading of the Appellant's application on  Form
      EEA(FM) indicates. The Judge, it was said in the letter,  was  correct
      to apply the principles in Sala.


The Hearing Before Me


   8. Following the grant of permission to  appeal  the  matter  was  listed
      before me on 8th of August 2017  to  determine  whether  there  was  a
      material error of law in the Judge's  determination  and  whether  the
      decision should be set aside and the appeal re-heard. For the  hearing
      the Appellant had submitted further submissions relying on the case of
      Awuku. The  production  of  an  affidavit  and  a  customary  marriage
      certificate were prima facie  evidence  that  the  marriage  had  been
      performed in accordance with the laws of Nigeria, the country where it
      was  conducted.  The  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the  2016
      Regulations and was entitled to a right of appeal. The  Appellant  and
      Sponsor were in a durable relationship as their  relationship  started
      in 2014.


   9. The Appellant also relied on an earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal
      in the case of CB [2008] UKAIT 80 in which it was held that the United
      Kingdom recognised marriages if they were valid under the domestic law
      of the country in which they took place provided that  they  had  been
      executed properly. The validity of the marriage was  not  governed  by
      the law of either party's domicile. The customary marriage certificate
      was issued after compliance with the requirements of section 42 of the
      Nigerian Birth, Deaths etc (Compulsory Registration) Act  2004.  There
      was an affidavit from a witness that the consent of  the  families  of
      both sides were  obtained  and  the  local  procedures  followed.  The
      country of origin information report of June  2013  indicated  that  a
      traditional marriage registered by way  of  affidavit  was  sufficient
      proof of the existence of such a marriage and  thus  would  serve  the
      same purpose that a marriage certificate would serve.  Although  proxy
      marriages could not be contracted in the United Kingdom  this  country
      would recognise proxy marriages if they were valid under  the  law  of
      the country in which took place. Copies of the documents  referred  to
      in the further submissions were enclosed.


  10. In brief oral submissions, the Appellant's solicitor  noted  that  the
      Appellant had not been represented on the day as  he  had  wanted  the
      matter decided on the papers but  in  fact  there  had  been  an  oral
      hearing in which the Respondent had made submissions. In my view there
      was nothing wrong with  that  procedure,  it  was  a  matter  for  the
      Tribunal whether to permit submissions in any given case in  which  an
      Appellant had asked for his case to be dealt with on the papers.



Findings



  11. The Judge decided the case on the basis that she was  dealing  with  a
      Regulation 8 (extended family member) appeal. The Sponsor in this case
      was a citizen of Spain,  born  in  Equatorial  Guinea.  Following  the
      earlier Upper Tribunal decision in TA (Kareem explained)  there  would
      have needed to be evidence before the Tribunal  that  proxy  marriages
      were recognised in Spain in order that the  Appellant  could  claim  a
      right of appeal under regulation 7. It does not appear from  the  file
      that there  was  such  evidence  beyond  the  bare  assertion  of  the
      Appellant.  However,  the  decision  in  TA  (Kareem  explained)   was
      overruled in Awuku. Where, as in this case the Appellant was  claiming
      to be in a valid marriage conducted by proxy, the  appeal  potentially
      engaged Regulation 7. The absence  of  evidence  of  Spanish  law  was
      irrelevant and there was thus a right of appeal.


  12. As the Respondent  pointed  out  in  her  response  to  the  grant  of
      permission, the law had changed since the First-tier Tribunal  decided
      the  matter  but  since  decisions  of  the  Court   of   Appeal   are
      retrospective in operation there was potentially a right of appeal for
      the Appellant. That being so it was a material error of  law  for  the
      Judge to find that no right of appeal existed. This  was  not  a  Sala
      case. I indicated that I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  as  it  involved  a  material  error  of  law.  I  canvassed
      submissions on whether the case should be remitted back to the  First-
      tier, the Appellant submitted  that  it  should,  the  Respondent  was
      neutral on the matter. There had not been a substantive hearing of the
      Appellant's appeal in this case against the Respondent's  decision  to
      refuse to issue  a  family  permit.  In  accordance  with  the  Senior
      President's Practice Direction it was not appropriate  for  the  Upper
      Tribunal to proceed to  determine  the  matter,  the  case  should  be
      remitted back to the First-tier.


  13. At that re-hearing the First-tier  will  be  able  to  consider  those
      matters which I refer to in paragraph 2 above. All  such  matters  are
      more properly dealt with by the First-tier rather than  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal. I allowed the Appellant's appeal at the hearing indicating I
      would give written reasons which I have done so in this determination.
      The case will be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard
      de novo at Taylor House by any Judge save Judge Lingam.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I direct that the appeal be remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard de novo.

Appellant's appeal allowed to the extent stated.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 24th day of August 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of a fee award must be decided afresh by the First-tier at the  de
novo hearing. I set aside the previous decision making no fee award.


Signed this 24th day of August 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


