
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01254/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2018                        |On 06 February 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                             Mr Houseyn Esenchay
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTiON not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Hayward, Counsel, instructed by Owens Stevens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Cyprus and his date of birth is  17  May
    1982.  The  Appellant  has  committed  a  series  of  relatively  minor
    offences resulting in ten convictions since  2005.   The  Secretary  of
    State made a decision to remove him under Section 10 of  the  1999  Act
    with reference to Regulation 19(3)(a) of the 2016  Regulations  on  the
    basis that the Appellant does not have or ceases to  have  a  right  to
    reside under the 2016 Regulations.  There is mention in  the  paperwork
    before me of a decision under Regulation 21B (2) of the Regulations but
    my understanding is that there has not been a decision in  relation  to
    this Appellant involving abuse of  rights.  This  was  agreed  by  both
    parties.

2.   The Appellant has been in the UK since 2002. He  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State on the basis that he  has  permanent
    residence here.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    S J Clarke following a hearing on 31 August  2017.   The  decision  was
    promulgated on 14  September  2017.   Permission  was  granted  to  the
    Appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge I D Boyes on 22 November 2017.

3.   The judge heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  his  partner,  Ms
    Miliotis and the Appellant's parents.

4.   The judge concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not  exercising  treaty
    rights and that he did not have  permanent  residence.   The  Appellant
    gave evidence of employment between 2002 and 2013 and at the hearing he
    produced  some  payslips.   The  judge  relied  on  a  record  of   the
    Appellant's interview with the Respondent (Annex C of the  Respondent's
    bundle).  During this interview the Appellant was asked  for  dates  of
    his employment and he stated in answer 2008 - 2009.   The  judge  found
    that the Appellant had made no attempt to produce evidence  to  support
    his evidence as advanced before him that he had been employed from 2002
    to 2013.  He did not produce the email that he stated was sent  to  him
    with his pay  slips  and  there  was  no  P60  or  bank  statements  to
    corroborate his claims.

5.   At the start of the hearing  Mr  Hayward,  representing  the  Appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal, made an application for an  adjournment
    on the basis that the Appellant had made enquiries with  HMRC  and  was
    awaiting a response.  The application was opposed  by  the  Respondent.
    The HOPO relied on what the Appellant was recorded as  having  said  in
    the interview (Annex C). The judge rejected  the  Appellant's  evidence
    that he was not given a full opportunity to provide a complete history.
     The judge concluded that "it was fair and in the interests of  justice
    to proceed in the absence of evidence from HMRC".  In  any  event,  the
    judge did not accept that the Appellant had made enquiries with HMRC as
    claimed.

6.   The grounds of appeal argue that the Appellant  submitted  evidence  to
    the Tribunal on 14 September 2017 from HMRC (following  enquiries  that
    he had made) post the date of the hearing, but before the determination
    was finalised and promulgated. The evidence is a letter  of  23  August
    2017 relating to the Appellant and previous employment and attaching  a
    schedule detailing the Appellant's  national  insurance  contributions.
    It seems from this document that contributions were made  between  2006
    and 2011/2012 and in 2012/2013.

7.   The first ground  of  appeal  raises  the  issue  of  fairness.  It  is
    asserted that the judge failed engage with the post- hearing  evidence.
    It was forwarded to her prior to the promulgation of the determination.
     Having considered the evidence  from  HMRC,  I  conclude  that  it  is
    capable of  corroborating  the  Appellant's  evidence.  Had  the  judge
    engaged with this post- decision evidence or had it been before her  at
    the hearing she may well have reached the  same  conclusion  dismissing
    the appeal.   However, it is possible that the judge may have  attached
    less weight to the record  of  the  interview  (Annex  C)  and  reached
    different conclusions in respect of the  Appellant's  credibility.   In
    addition the evidence is at least  capable  of  establishing  that  the
    Appellant made enquiries with HMRC prior to the hearing. This  was  not
    accepted by the judge when refusing the adjournment request.   I cannot
    conclude for certain that had the evidence now before  me  been  before
    the judge it would not have made any difference to the outcome  of  the
    Appellant's appeal. For the above reasons  fairness  demands  that  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside and remitted to the FtT.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the judge is set aside and the matter remitted  to  the  FtT
for a hearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam               Date 30 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



