
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01329/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at a remote hearing via Teams  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 June 2021                      |On 7 July 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                              AUGUSTINA DAMPTEY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Mr Beyebenwo, Equity Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mrs Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mrs Willocks-Briscoe  conceded,  and  I  accept,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (FTT)  materially  erred  in  law  in  appearing  to  require
    cohabitation for the relationship between the appellant and her sponsor
    to be genuine and in dealing with the case on the basis that regulation
    23(3) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 was relied upon by  the
    respondent when the decision  letter  appears  to  be  predicated  upon
    regulation 23(4). The findings of fact are infected by these errors  of
    law and I accept that the FTT decision must  be  remade  entirely.   Mr
    Beyebenwo agreed with this approach.

 2. I have had regard to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement and the nature and extent of  the  factual  findings
    required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this  is  an
    appropriate case to remit to the  FTT.   Mr  Beyebenwo  submitted  that
    although the findings of fact  must  be  remade  entirely,  the  matter
    should be determined by the UT solely because this would  involve  less
    delay for the appellant.  He was unable to particularise this assertion
    and accepted that he was not in  a  position  to  conduct  the  resumed
    hearing today.

 3. It would be helpful to both parties to  understand  the  precise  basis
    upon which the respondent puts her case against the  appellant  in  the
    light of the past confusion.  In the circumstances the FTT may wish  to
    address this by way of directions at an early stage.



Decision

 4. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error of law.
     Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

 5. The appeal shall be remade by FTT by a judge other than FTT  Judge  Ian
    Howard, on a de novo basis.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 30 June 2021
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
