
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01184/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 24 November 2017                           |On 28 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                          Ben Allassane COULIBALLY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of the Ivory Coast who arrived
    in this country in or around 2006 where he remained, certainly for some
    of the period without leave, until on 26 June 2010 he married a  French
    national who was exercising treaty rights  in  this  country.   He  was
    granted a residence card on 16 December 2010.  The marriage broke  down
    and his wife left the matrimonial home in December 2011.  However, they
    did remain married until their divorce on 2 March 2015.   Subsequently,
    in July 2015 the appellant applied for a permanent residence card under
    the provisions set out within the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006.
    It is, and has always been, agreed between the parties that at the date
    of dissolution of the marriage the appellant was himself a  worker  for
    the purposes of the Regulations, that he and his former wife  had  been
    married for over three years and  that  he  had  been  living  in  this
    country at a time when his now ex-wife was also living in  the  country
    for a period in excess of one year.  It is established in jurisprudence
    that the couple would not have been required to live together  for  the
    requirements under the Regulations to be satisfied.   Accordingly,  the
    only other  requirement  which  needed  to  be  satisfied  before  this
    appellant would be entitled to a permanent residence card was  that  at
    the date of the dissolution of his marriage his ex-wife was  exercising
    treaty rights.

 2. To this end the appellant  submitted  various  documents  to  the  Home
    Office, including documents purporting to be income tax  returns  which
    had been submitted to HMRC by his ex-wife  during  the  years  2011  to
    2015.  As I noted in  a  previous  decision  which  I  made  (to  which
    reference will be made below and  a  substantial  amount  of  which  is
    incorporated into this decision) the respondent  did  not  accept  that
    these documents were genuine, although she did not appear  to  make  an
    explicit finding to this effect.  However, due to an  implicit  finding
    to this effect the application  for  a  permanent  residence  card  was
    refused.

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns sitting at  Taylor  House  on  3
    April 2017.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated just over two  weeks
    later on 20 April 2017, Judge Burns dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.
    While it was accepted within the decision that the only live issue  was
    whether or not the appellant's former  wife  was  a  "worker"  for  the
    purposes of this Regulation (and if she was she was  exercising  treaty
    rights) the  judge's  decision  was  also  predicated  on  an  implicit
    although not explicit finding that the documents could  not  be  relied
    upon.

 4. The appellant was given permission to appeal against this decision  and
    the appeal came before me on 24 August 2017 when  I  found  that  Judge
    Burns' decision had contained an error of law such  that  the  decision
    needed to  be  remade  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   I  was  particularly
    concerned that the judge had relied upon a decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in  Amos  v  SSHD  [2011]  1  WLR  2952  as  authority  for  the
    proposition that it was not the respondent's duty to enquire of HMRC as
    to whether or not the documents submitted by the  appellant  purporting
    to be copies of her revenue returns were genuine or  not.   The  reason
    why I considered Judge Burns to be wrong in this case was that this was
    not a case such as was the position in Amos where the appellant had  no
    evidence and sought the assistance of the Secretary of State to  obtain
    evidence which she did not have; rather  this  was  a  case  where  the
    appellant had provided evidence but where the  respondent  was  seeking
    effectively to  persuade  the  Tribunal  that  that  evidence  was  not
    genuine.  In these circumstances  the  course  the  judge  should  have
    followed (which was the course I followed in the previous hearing)  was
    to direct the respondent  that  if  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    documents submitted were genuine she  should  request  the  Revenue  to
    inform her whether or not the documents were indeed genuine, which  she
    had the power to do pursuant to Section 40 of the UK Borders Act  2007.
    Accordingly I made an order to this effect.

 5. Before me at the hearing today on behalf of the  respondent  Mr  Singh,
    representing the respondent, informed the  Tribunal  that  the  records
    provided by the appellant had been checked by HMRC and that it had been
    confirmed that his ex-spouse  was  in  fact  exercising  treaty  rights
    throughout the period, including at  the  date  of  divorce,  and  that
    accordingly  that  reason  for  refusing  to  grant  a  certificate  of
    permanent residence fell away and the appeal should be allowed.

 6. It follows that this appeal must be allowed and I will so order.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns, dismissing the  appellant's
appeal is set aside and the following decision is substituted:

The appellant's appeal is allowed, under the EEA Regulations.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
      Dated: 22 February 2018
