
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/01090/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 January 2018                      |On 17 January 2018             |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               SAMUEL ENCHILL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Griffith-Anteson of Frederick Rine, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Carroll promulgated  on  2  May  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 11 August 1976 and is a national  of  Ghana.
On  20  January  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   Appellant's
application for a residence card as an extended  family  member  of  an  EEA
national.



The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Carroll  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  10  November
2017 Judge Grant-Hutchison gave permission to appeal stating

    "It is arguable that the Judge has erred in law for although the  Judge
    correctly applied the case of Sala (EFM's right of appeal) [2016]  UKUT
    41 at the time of promulgation of the decision and  reasons,  the  case
    has been overturned by Khan v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755  which  was
    issued on 9 November 2017."



The Hearing

5.    (a) Mr Griffith-Anteson, for  the  appellant,  moved  the  grounds  of
appeal. He told  me  that  the  appellant  had  previously  been  granted  a
residence card as an extended family member  of  an  EU  partner  exercising
treaty rights in the UK, so that his application  was  for  confirmation  of
his right to permanent residence in the UK. He told  me  that  the  case  of
Sala (EFM's right of appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  41  had  limited  relevance.  He
referred me to reg. 24 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and  argued
that the respondent should have treated the appellant  as  a  family  member
for the purpose of regulation 7(3) of the 2006 regulations.

    (b) Mr Griffith-Anteson relied on Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.  He
reminded me that the Judge dismissed  the  appeal  relying  solely  on  Sala
(EFM's right of appeal). He told me that the Judge was wrong  to  find  that
the appellant did not have  a  right  of  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision. He urged me to allow the appeal and  to  remit  the  case  to  the
First-tier so  that  the  substance  of  the  appellant's  appeal  could  be
considered.

6.    Ms Everett for the respondent agreed that the  case  of  Khan  v  SSHD
[2017] EWCA Civ 1755  was  against  her,  and  accepted  that  it  would  be
appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier.



Analysis

7.    The Judge's decision was (quite simply) that he  had  no  jurisdiction
to consider the appellant's case relying entirely on Sala  (EFM's  right  of
appeal). The First-tier hearing took place on 19  April  2017.  The  Judge's
decision was promulgated on 2 May 2017. Six  months  later,  on  9  November
2017, the decision in Khan v SSHD was issued.

8.    In Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that
Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal ) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) was wrongly decided  and
that the decision whether to grant an extended  family  member  a  residence
card was a decision which concerned an entitlement  as  it  was  a  decision
whether to grant such an entitlement and hence an  "EEA  decision"  for  the
purpose of the 2006  regulations.  Extended  family  members  do  therefore,
under the 2006 regulations have a right of appeal to the  tribunal  from  an
adverse decision.

9.    I have to find that the decision is tainted by material error  of  law
because the appellant has a valid right  of  appeal.   As  the  decision  is
tainted by material error of law I must set it aside. I am  asked  to  remit
this case to the First -tier. I consider whether or not I can substitute  my
own decision. The substance of the  appellant's  appeal  has  not  yet  been
considered. The initial judicial fact-finding process has not  been  carried
out and there  is  insufficient  information  before  me  to  enable  me  to
substitute my own decision. I remit this case to the First-tier  because  of
the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.



Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

10.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

11.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

12.   I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Taylor  House
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Carroll.



Decision

13.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

14.   I set aside the Judge's  decision  promulgated  on  2  May  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle





