
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/01384/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 November 2019                 |On 13 November 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                VIDA ASAMOAH
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Beyebenwo, CW Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 27 September 2019  against
          the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet,  promulgated
          on 17 June 2019 following a hearing at  Hatton  Cross  on  5  June
          2019.


       2. The appellant is a Ghanaian national born on  15  June  1972.  She
          previously held a residence card as the spouse of her EEA national
          sponsor but on 4 February 2019 applied for a  permanent  residence
          card on the basis of retained rights of residence. As she was  not
          divorced from her husband, the application was refused under  reg.
          10(5)(a)(i) of the EEA  Regulations  2016.  The  respondent  also,
          however, considered whether she qualified under reg. 15(1)(b) as a
          spouse. It was accepted that the marriage had not been  terminated
          by a divorce, annulment or dissolution and it  was  accepted  that
          the sponsor had permanent residence. However, in  the  absence  of
          any evidence that he had not left the UK since he had been granted
          permanent residence, the Secretary of State was not satisfied that
          he had maintained his residence in the UK and accordingly  refused
          the application on that basis too.


       3. At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet, submissions
          were made on the basis that the appellant was the spouse of an EEA
          national (at paragraph 11). The judge,  however,  only  considered
          the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  had  retained  rights  of
          residence, found that she did not as she remained in a  subsisting
          marriage and, accordingly, dismissed the appeal.


       4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  on
          the basis that the judge had only considered the issue of retained
          rights of residence which had not been her  case  before  him  and
          that he failed to make  findings  on  the  issue  of  whether  she
          qualified as a spouse under the Regulations.


       5. The respondent in her Rule 24 response  concedes  that  the  judge
          erred in failing to consider the second limb  of  the  appellant's
          case but maintains that as there was no evidence that  the  spouse
          was exercising treaty rights or that he had not been away from the
          UK for  less  than  two  years  since  he  was  granted  permanent
          residence, the error was not material.


          The Hearing


       6. Mr Beyebenwo represented the appellant at the hearing.  He  relied
          on the grounds, arguing that the  judge  had  not  considered  the
          second limb of the appellant's case. He submitted that Counsel  at
          the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge had asked for  an
          Amos direction. I pointed out there was nothing  in  the  recorded
          submissions to confirm that and no  note  from  Counsel  had  been
          adduced.  Mr Beyebenwo accepted that but nevertheless repeated the
          argument. He was able  to  confirm  that  the  appellant  had  not
          approached the Secretary of State to ask for help in obtaining the
          sponsor's work records and also that  she  had  not  attempted  to
          obtain any documents from her husband as there had  been  domestic
          violence in the past and he  had  not  engaged  with  the  divorce
          proceedings.


       7. Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response in which  the  respondent
          conceded that the judge had erred but argued that  the  error  was
          not material. Mr Melvin  submitted  there  had  been  no  evidence
          before the judge that the sponsor had remained in the  UK  or  had
          continued to work here and on that basis the appeal could not have
          succeeded. He confirmed that no  request  had  been  made  to  the
          Secretary of State for enquiries to be made of HMRC. He asked that
          the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge be  upheld  and  the
          appeal dismissed.


       8. I then asked Mr Beyebenwo for his submissions on why he considered
          the error was  material.  He  was  unable  to  assist  and  simply
          repeated his previous submissions.


       9. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          indicated that I  would  be  upholding  the  judge's  decision  to
          dismiss the appeal. I now give my reasons for so doing.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      10. I have considered all  the  evidence  and  the  submissions  made.
          Plainly  the  appellant  made  the  wrong   application   to   the
          respondent.  She  could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of   reg
          10(5)(a)(i) either at the date of the application, decision or the
          hearing as her  marriage  had  not  been  terminated  by  divorce,
          annulment  or  dissolution.    The  respondent,   however,   quite
          properly proceeded to consider whether the appellant could qualify
          as a spouse under reg. 15. She concluded  that  as  there  was  no
          evidence that the sponsor continued to exercise treaty  rights  in
          the UK and had remained here since  the  grant  of  his  permanent
          residence card, that provision could not be met either.


      11. It is correct to say that the appellant relied on the second  limb
          of that decision at the hearing. Although there  was  no  skeleton
          argument before the judge, that  is  plain  from  the  submissions
          recorded as having been made by her representative.   It  is  also
          correct to say that the judge made no reference at all to the case
          as argued and made no findings at all  on  whether  reg.  15(1)(b)
          could be met. As such there is no question that he erred.  Indeed,
          the respondent concedes that that is the case. The  issue  for  me
          is, however, whether that error is material or not.


      12. The appellant does not  have  any  information  on  her  estranged
          husband since 2016 other than to have obtained his address through
          a private  investigator.  That  investigator  does  not,  however,
          provide any other useful information such as  whether  the  spouse
          has remained in the UK without absences, and whether he  has  been
          working throughout his stay. No further evidence has been  adduced
          and the appellant has confirmed that she has not sought to  obtain
          any  evidence  and  has  not  sought  the  Secretary  of   State's
          assistance in obtaining the sponsor's work records. In the absence
          of any evidence that the sponsor has continued to live in  the  UK
          since the grant of his permanent residence and since the appellant
          left  the  matrimonial  home,  I  am  unable  to  find  that   the
          consideration of the second limb of  the  appellant's  case  would
          have led to a different outcome. The judge's error, therefore, has
          no material bearing on the outcome of the appeal.


      13. The appellant may wish to consider making an  application  to  the
          Secretary of State  for  assistance  in  obtaining  her  estranged
          husband's work records. That would assist her whether she makes  a
          further  application  as  a  spouse  or  for  retained  rights  of
          residence (as it would appear she has now obtained a decree nisi).




      14. In the circumstances there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
          judge's determination.


          Decision

      15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is  upheld  and  the
          appeal is dismissed.


          Anonymity


      16. No request for an anonymity order was made.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 8 November 2019






