
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01195/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 | On 30 July 2020                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                 MICHAEL [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a Nigerian national who was born on 19 July 1977.   He
    appeals against a decision which  was  issued  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Higgins ("the judge") on 5 August  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal of his  application  for  a  residence
    card as the extended family member of an EEA national.

Background

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK in 2010.  He had suffered a serious car
    accident in Nigeria in 2008.  That accident left him with  a  range  of
    health conditions, the most notable  aspects  of  which  are  epilepsy,
    severe  sight  impairment  and  panhypopituitarism  (reduced   hormonal
    secretions from the pituitary  gland).   The  appellant's  epilepsy  is
    under control and his last epileptic seizure was in 2018.   He  has  no
    perception of light in his right eye and the vision in his left eye  is
    assessed as 6/9.  He requires a range of hormonal medication, including
    regular injections, for his panhypopituitarism.

 3. It is common ground that the appellant requires some assistance in  his
    daily life as a result of his ill health.  In 2013,  having  failed  to
    secure leave  to  remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  he  made  an
    application for leave to remain, submitting that  his  expulsion  would
    breach Article 8 ECHR.  That application was refused without a right of
    appeal, as were further submissions in reliance on Article 8 ECHR.   He
    made an asylum claim in 2014 but he withdrew it  a  few  months  later.
    Then, in February 2015, he submitted to the respondent that his removal
    would be in breach of Articles 3 and  8  ECHR.   That  application  was
    refused and the appellant appealed to the FtT.  This appeal  was  heard
    by Judge Aspden, who dismissed it in a lengthy  and  detailed  decision
    dated 27 January 2016.

 4. At that stage, the appellant was living in Liverpool with his  sisters,
    both of whom are medical practitioners.   It  was  submitted  to  Judge
    Aspden  that  the  appellant  was  so  dependent  upon  them  that  the
    withdrawal of their care by his removal to Nigeria would give rise to a
    breach of the ECHR.  Judge  Aspden  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    dependent upon them to a significant degree, in that he lived in  their
    home and they cooked for him, laundered his clothes, and gave him  help
    with his medication: [38].  Having noted, amongst  other  matters,  the
    absence of evidence that such care would not be available  in  Nigeria,
    Judge Aspden found that the appellant's case  did  not  come  close  to
    meeting the high threshold in Article 3 ECHR: [44].  She accepted  that
    the relationship between the appellant and his sisters engaged  Article
    8  ECHR  in  its  family  life  aspect  but  found  that  it  would  be
    proportionate to interfere with that relationship.  In so finding,  she
    attached significance to the  possibility  of  alternative  care  being
    arranged in Nigeria and to the  appellant's  sisters  making  financial
    arrangements for such care.  She also noted that the appellant  had  no
    right to remain in the UK and that his presence presented a significant
    drain on the public purse, through the NHS, as a result  of  which  she
    considered  there  to  be  a  public  interest  in  his  removal  which
    outweighed the severity of any consequences he would experience.

 5. On 4 October 2017, the appellant made an application  for  a  Residence
    Card under the EEA Regulations.  (A previous application of that nature
    was made in 2016 but the  details  of  it  are  not  before  me).   The
    appellant submitted that he satisfied the  requirements  of  regulation
    8(3) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 ("a relative of  an  EEA
    national [who,]  on  serious  health  grounds,  strictly  requires  the
    personal care of the EEA national.").  The EEA national in question was
    said to be the appellant's cousin, [JO],  a  qualified  nurse  with  an
    Upper Second Class  degree  in  Intellectual  Disability  Nursing  from
    Ireland's Waterford Institute of Technology.  It was submitted that the
    appellant had been living with Mrs [O]  and  her  family  in  Basildon,
    Essex, since 2017.

 6. The application was initially refused without a right of appeal in June
    2018.  As  a  result  of  judicial  review  proceedings,  however,  the
    respondent agreed to reconsider her decision.

 7. On enquiry from the respondent in 2019, the appellant's sisters and Mrs
    [O] wrote letters explaining that the latter had  taken  responsibility
    for his care in 2017.  It was said that she was better placed to do  so
    as a result of her medical qualifications, her  stable  family  setting
    and her close family relationship with her.

The Respondent's Decision

 8. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 22 February 2019.
     The decision spans six pages of single-spaced  text  and  I  need  not
    rehearse its contents.  It suffices for the present  to  reproduce  the
    summary of the respondent's conclusions which appears on page 3:

         "However, you have not  provided  adequate  evidence  demonstrating
         that you have serious  health  issues  that  strictly  require  the
         personal care of your EEA national sponsor.  The reasons  for  this
         are:

          . You have submitted a simple medical report which fails to fully
            detail your medical condition.  Further, it  does  not  specify
            the type and level of care your require.

          . You have not provided any evidence which would  show  that  you
            require personal care on an everyday basis."

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant gave notice of his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on 7
    March 2019.  That appeal came before the judge on  17  June  2019.  The
    appellant was represented by counsel, the respondent  by  a  Presenting
    Officer.  The judge heard evidence from the appellant and Mrs  [O]  and
    submissions before both representatives before reserving his  decision.



10. The judge's reserved decision is carefully structured.  He set out  the
    appellant's immigration history,  including  the  decision  reached  by
    Judge Aspden, in detail at [2]-[15].   He  summarised  the  appellant's
    applications under the EEA Regulations at [16]-[20].  At [21]-[27], the
    judge summarised the respondent's decision before detailing,  at  [28]-
    [41], the oral and documentary evidence before him.  The judge  reached
    findings of fact  at  [42]-[53].   Those  findings  were  then  carried
    forward into his conclusions, which it is necessary to set out in full:

         "[54] I turn then to the requirements  in  reg  8(3).  A  potential
         extended family member's requirement of personal care  must  be  on
         "significant health grounds". The AIT concluded in TR (above)  that
         what it termed ordinary ill health was insufficient to engage reg 3
         [sic]. What an applicant has to show is  that  his  ill  health  is
         significantly more serious than that. The appellant's epilepsy  is,
         for  the  most  part,  controlled.   His   panhypopituitarism   and
         associated  problems,  and  the  effects  of  the  treatment   they
         necessitate, may well have a significant impact on the  appellant's
         quality of life, but he has adduced no evidence  as  to  what  that
         effect is in his case. The condition which  most  obviously  limits
         what he can and cannot do is  his  impaired  vision.  He  has  some
         residual vision in his left eye, but his sight has been assessed as
         severely impaired. Ill health comes in many forms.  The  conditions
         from which the appellant suffers are permanent and distinctive, and
         taken together, I am satisfied their consequences may be said to be
         significantly more serious  than  the  consequences  most  commonly
         associated with ill health.

         [55] Personal care in this context, the AIT observed in TR, must be
         such that, without it, the individual concerned would be unable  to
         function in a meaningful way. That cannot be said  of  the  support
         provided by Mrs [O]. She and her family  have  made  the  appellant
         welcome in their home and he benefits from their companionship  and
         their domestic routines. Mrs [O] administers his  daily  injection.
         She checks to ensure he has not avoided taking medication so as not
         to suffer its side effects. She ensures he is fed and clothed,  and
         she and her family accompany him on shopping outings, visits to the
         GP and hospital appointments. The support Mrs [O]  provides  is  of
         considerable value to the appellant. But he is  able  to  meet  his
         basic needs himself as is evident from the fact that  he  has  been
         able to conduct  a  relationship  and  been  prepared  to  consider
         starting a family with his partner. The support provided by Mrs [O]
         has not been necessary to enable him to function and the  appellant
         has not satisfied me in amounts to personal care for  the  purposes
         of reg 8(3) .

         [56] Were I wrong about that, and were the support the appellant is
         offered by Mrs [O] sufficient to constitute personal care  for  the
         purposes of reg 8(3), I do not accept the support Mrs Ola  provides
         is "strictly required" by him. The AIT commented  in  TR  that  the
         inclusion of the words strictly in reg 8(3) serves to underline the
         exacting nature of the requirement that needs to  be  demonstrated.
         The appellant's contention that  he  strictly  requires  Mrs  [O]'s
         personal care is not easily reconciled with the fact  that  he  has
         been able to conduct a committed relationship with a  partner  over
         an extended period, and he has not satisfied me the high  threshold
         embodied in reg 8(3) is met in his case.

              [emphasis added]

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal focus upon  the
    underlined words in the judge's conclusions.  It is  submitted  in  the
    grounds that the judge's conclusions  were  irrational  insofar  as  he
    concluded that the appellant was able to meet his basic  needs  because
    he had previously been in a relationship and thought about  starting  a
    family.  Although permission to appeal was refused by the FtT,  it  was
    granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb,  who  considered  it
    arguable

         "that the judge reached an unsustainable finding on reg  8(3)  that
         personal care was not strictly required from the sponsor given  the
         appellant's condition (severe sight  impairment)  which  the  judge
         found to be "serious health grounds" and his current need for  day-
         to-day support.  The finding is arguably irrational  based,  as  it
         is, upon the fact of a past relationship."

12. The respondent filed no response to the notice of appeal in  compliance
    with rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    ("the 2008 Rules").

13. The appeal was listed to be heard at Field House on 31 March 2020.   On
    20 March, however, the nation entered 'lockdown' as  a  result  of  the
    global pandemic and all hearings were adjourned sine die.   The  papers
    were accordingly placed before me  on  31  March  in  order  to  decide
    whether the appeal might nevertheless be progressed in  some  way.   My
    provisional view, having considered the papers, was that  the  question
    of whether there was an error of law in the judge's decision  might  be
    determined without a  hearing.   On  that  day,  therefore,  I  drafted
    directions to the parties  which  were  designed  to  elicit,  firstly,
    whether there was any legitimate objection to  deciding  that  question
    without a hearing and, secondly, any additional submissions  which  the
    parties sought to make on the appeal.

14. Due to staffing constraints at Field House as a result of the pandemic,
    my directions were not sent to the parties until 6 May.  They were sent
    by email to an email address notified to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the
    respondent for service of such directions and to  two  email  addresses
    given by the  appellant's  representatives,  Hazelhurst  Solicitors  of
    Manchester, in correspondence with the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber.
    The time for responding to all directions expired 28 days later,  on  3
    June.  Neither party responded to the directions.

15. Rule 34(1) of the 2008 Rules confers a discretion upon the Tribunal  to
    make any decision without a hearing.   By  rule  34(2),  it  must  have
    regard to any views expressed by a party when deciding whether to  hold
    a hearing. I consider both parties to be aware of the provisional  view
    I took on 31 March.  I consider  that  they  have  had  ample  time  to
    express the view that there is  a  need  for  a  hearing  to  determine
    whether there is an error of law in the judge's decision.  No such view
    has been expressed.

16. The absence of any objection is relevant but it is  not  determinative.
    It  remains  for  me  to  consider  whether,  in  the  exercise  of  my
    discretion, I should proceed without a hearing.  Having considered  the
    over-riding objective, and having reminded myself of what was  said  in
    Osborn v Parole Board [2014] 1 AC 1115, I consider it fair and just  to
    proceed on the papers.  The case involves no disputed oral evidence  or
    the credibility of a party or a witness; the  only  question,  at  this
    stage, is whether the FtT erred in law in deciding  the  appeal  as  it
    did.  I consider that I am able to determine that question  fairly  and
    justly on the basis of the documents before me.

Discussion

17. It is a signal feature of this case that,  despite  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's claim, there has been very limited medical evidence adduced
    throughout.  There  appears  to  have  been  limited  medical  evidence
    adduced before  Judge  Aspden.   There  was  limited  medical  evidence
    provided to the respondent in support of the most  recent  application,
    and only a small amount of  additional  medical  evidence  was  adduced
    before the judge.  It is surprising, in a case of this nature, that  no
    expert evidence was adduced.

18. Instead, what the appellant relied upon  before  the  FtT  was  various
    items of medical correspondence,  between  certain  NHS  practitioners.
    The  appellant's  bundle  contained,  at   item   11,   'Some   Medical
    Correspondence from 2009'.  In fact,  the  correspondence  labelled  in
    that way dates from 11 November 2009 to 24 August 2015  and  originates
    from practitioners tasked with the management of his  differing  health
    conditions.

19. More recent medical evidence appeared at items 3 and 4 of  the  bundle,
    labelled 'Medical Report of 06/04/18' and  'Latest  Medical  Report  of
    18/01/19'.  Neither document is a medical report, properly so called.

20. The first of those documents is dated 6 April 2018 but it is incomplete
    in the appellant's bundle, just as it was in the  respondent's  bundle.
    It is not clear how much of it is missing. The name of  the  author  is
    absent but it is addressed to the appellant's GP.  The letter  followed
    the appellant's 12 month review on  3  April  2018  and  discusses  the
    symptoms  experienced  by  the   appellant   as   a   result   of   his
    panhypopituitarism, including varying energy  levels,  low  libido  and
    erectile dysfunction.

21. The second letter is  complete.   It  is  dated  18  January  2019  and
    followed a clinic of  the  same  date.   The  author  is  an  Endocrine
    Specialist Nurse at the same hospital  in  Liverpool.   It  states  the
    appellant's diagnosis and medication  regime  before  setting  out  two
    paragraphs describing his  presentation  at  the  Endocrine  Nurse  Led
    Clinic.  It is said that he was  'not  feeling  at  his  best  at  this
    moment', with various reasons given for  that  statement.   The  latter
    half of that paragraph is as follows:

         "Michael reports that he is using his growth hormone pen regularly.
          He is rotating injection sites and his skin  injection  sites  are
         healthy.  He reports a poor  libido.   He  does  describe  erectile
         dysfunction.  He is unable  to  maintain  erections  and  does  not
         experience any early morning erections.  Michael states that he  is
         not attending the Liverpool Womens Hospital regarding fertility  at
         this present time.  He is not  living  with  his  partner  at  this
         present time although they are in contact.  Michael states that  he
         has not started on any more Testosterone replacement therapy as  of
         yet.   Michael  tells  me  that  he  is  compliant  with  all   his
         medications.   Pre-clinic  bloods  dated  the  27th  December   are
         attached for your records."

22. The three sentences I have underlined represented, as I understand  it,
    the first mention in any of the documents of  the  appellant  having  a
    partner and taking steps to conceive a child with  her.   There  is  no
    earlier reference to such a relationship, whether in the decision  made
    by Judge Aspden in early 2016 or otherwise.  It was not  an  aspect  of
    the case which had been considered by the respondent in  her  decision.
    On any rational view, it introduced a potentially new dimension to  the
    case, since the fact (if accepted  as  such)  that  the  appellant  had
    continued  a  relationship  and  considered  fathering  a   child   was
    potentially relevant to the seriousness of his conditions, his need for
    personal care, and his dependence upon Mrs [O] for that care.

23. Notwithstanding its  potential  significance,  it  is  clear  from  the
    judge's Record of Proceedings and from [31]-[38] of his  decision  that
    the  Presenting  Officer  asked  no  questions  about  the  appellant's
    partner.  Having himself recognised the potential significance  of  the
    point, it was the judge who asked the appellant about it.  At  [38]  of
    his decision, he wrote this:

         "When  I  asked  the  Appellant  about  the  partner  to  whom  the
         specialist nurse in Liverpool had referred in her letter to his  GP
         in January 2019, he told me he had had a partner in London  but  no
         longer sees her."

24. The Presenting Officer seemingly asked no questions arising  from  that
    answer, nor did the representative seek to do so.   No  questions  were
    asked of Mrs [O] about the appellant's relationship.  The sum total  of
    the evidence about this relationship was therefore the three  sentences
    in the specialist nurse's  letter  and  this  single  answer  from  the
    appellant.

25. With respect to  the  judge,  this  represented  no  proper  evidential
    foundation for  the  findings  he  made  at  [55]  and  [56].   I  have
    reproduced those findings above.  The judge made similar  points,  with
    language of  similar  strength,  at  [47]  and  [53].   In  the  former
    paragraph, the judge stated that

         "the degree of independence which likely to have been required  for
         him to conduct a serious relationship  is  difficult  to  reconcile
         with the accounts of the limitations  on  his  day  to  day  living
         provided by the Appellant and Mrs [O]"

26. The difficulty with all of these findings is that they  were  based  on
    such limited information about the appellant's relationship.  The judge
    did not know the identity of the woman in question or the way in  which
    she and the appellant had met.  Critically, the judge had  received  no
    evidence about how the relationship was carried on thereafter.  If  the
    appellant was able to leave his sister's house in  Liverpool  and  make
    his own way to London to carry  on  a  relationship,  it  is  certainly
    difficult to see how he could have met the high threshold in regulation
    8(3).  If, on the other  hand,  the  appellant's  partner  visited  him
    entirely at his home, it is difficult to see how  such  a  relationship
    could be thought to demonstrate a level of independence which served to
    undermine the appellant's claim  that  he  was  very  unwell  and  very
    dependent upon Mrs [O].

27. To that extent, I accept that the grounds of appeal are  made  out  and
    that the judge's decision was flawed by legal error.  I  say  'to  that
    extent' because I am conscious that irrationality  is  alleged  in  the
    grounds and it is suggested, as I understand it,  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to take the  relationship  into  account  at  all.   It  is  even
    suggested at one point that it  was  discriminatory  of  the  judge  to
    suggest  that  a  disabled  person  would  be  able  to  enter  into  a
    relationship.   None  of  these  charges  are  made  out.   As  I  have
    endeavoured to explain, the existence of the relationship  was  plainly
    relevant, and was plainly capable of having a bearing on the  questions
    posed by regulation 8(3).  It was not discriminatory for the  judge  to
    recognise the potential significance of the relationship and he  would,
    to my mind, have been remiss if he had not alerted the parties  to  his
    concern.  The error into which he fell was not as alleged in  parts  of
    the grounds, therefore; it was that he failed to establish  a  'logical
    connection between the evidence and  the  ostensible  reasons  for  the
    decision': Hayes v Willoughby [2013] 1  WLR  935,  at  [14],  per  Lord
    Sumption JSC.  In other words, the judge made a finding of  fact  which
    was wholly unsupported by the evidence about the relationship: R (Iran)
    v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982; [2005] Imm AR 535, at  [12].   The  limited
    evidence there was about the relationship could not rationally serve to
    undermine the appellant's claim to the extent thought by the judge.

28. It follows that the decision of the FtT will have to be set  aside  and
    the decision on the appeal  must  be  remade  de  novo.   None  of  the
    findings of fact made by the judge can stand.   Given the extent of the
    fact finding which is necessary, I  shall  order  that  the  appeal  be
    remitted to the FtT.

29. The appellant would be well advised to ensure that  there  is  evidence
    before the next judge dealing in detail with the matters I have set out
    at [26] above.  Three decision makers have now commented  on  the  fact
    that the letter of 6 April 2018 is incomplete and the  appellant  would
    be well advised to remedy that difficulty also.  The respondent's  next
    representative may legitimately choose to pursue the  point  which  was
    unfortunately left to the judge to explore at the first  hearing.   She
    might also consider it advisable to  file  and  serve  a  copy  of  the
    appellant's first EEA application, which was made in December 2016.

30. I make no specific directions to either party but the appellant will no
    doubt be advised that he bears the burden of proof and that  inferences
    might properly be drawn in the absence of evidence.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was erroneous  in  law  and  is  set
aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  de
novo by a judge other than Judge Anthony Higgins.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                                21 July 2020
