
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01053/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2020                    |On 26 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                              TAMILARASI ASOKAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of India, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse her  application
    for  a  residence  card.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 9 July 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Frances directed to 2 July 2020 that  the  parties
    make representations as regards the disposal of this appeal under  rule
    34 without a hearing. Both parties have made  written  submissions  and
    having considered those submissions and file carefully, I have resolved
    to determine the question of error of law without a hearing.

 3. The Secretary of State, in her written submissions  of  23  July  2020,
    acknowledges that the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law
    by failing to follow the guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal in  ZA
    [2019] UKUT 291 (IAC) when determining this appeal.  The  Secretary  of
    State reserved her position  as  regards  the  evidence  given  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal; the Secretary of State does not
    have access to the presenting officer's record of  proceedings  and  is
    unable to comment on whether the appellant did or did  not  state  that
    she had not lived with her daughter in France. The Secretary  of  State
    invites the Upper Tribunal to provide a copy of the First-tier Tribunal
    record proceedings.

 4. I have considered the  Secretary  of  State's  request  but  I  do  not
    consider it necessary or consistent with the overriding  objective,  at
    least this stage, to arrange  for  the  record  of  proceedings  to  be
    transcribed. That is because I  agree  with  the  respondent  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is, in any event, materially flawed
    on account of the judge's failure to follow ZA. For that reason  alone,
    the decision should be set aside. There will need to  be  a  new  fact-
    finding hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  If  the  Secretary  of
    State  still  requires  a  transcript  of   the   previous   tribunal's
    proceedings, no doubt she can  renew  her  request  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the request may be dealt with at a Case Management  Review
    prior to a final hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that tribunal to remake the decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing  de  novo.  (listing   directions:   First-tier   Tribunal   at
    Birmingham; any judge except Judge Burns; 1.5 hours; Tamil interpreter)


Signed                              Date 25 August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judicial decision maker
Judge C Lane
