
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal: EA/01606/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              FARZAN DALI PATEL
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms I Iteva, (Duncan Lewis Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer to  the
       original appellant, a citizen of India born on 24 February  1987,  as
       the appellant herein. He applied for a Residence Card as confirmation
       of the right of residence as the extended family  member  of  an  EEA
       national. His partner is Ms  [VB]  a  Lithuanian  national  whom  the
       appellant said he had met in November 2013. They had resided together
       since March 2014 and their daughter was born on 22 May 2015.

    2. The Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  application  for  a
       Residence Card on 24 October 2015, not  being  satisfied  the  couple
       were in a durable relationship.

    3. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before a First-tier  Judge
       on 11 March 2016.

    4. The judge having had the benefit of hearing oral  evidence  from  the
       couple "had no hesitation in accepting  that  they  were  honest  and
       genuine witnesses." He found in paragraph 68 "that  the  overwhelming
       weight of the evidence all was to the effect that the  appellant  and
       his partner were in a  durable  and  subsisting  relationship."   The
       appeal was allowed.

    5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on the  basis
       that the judge had erred in allowing the appeal outright in the light
       of Ihemedu (OFMS - meaning) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT.  The  Secretary  of
       State argued that the matter should have been left to  the  Secretary
       of State to exercise discretion under regulation 17(4).

    6. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  19
       September 2016.

    7. At the hearing reference  was  made  to  a  recent  decision  of  the
       Tribunal chaired by the Vice President - Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)
       [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) - in which  the  Tribunal  had  decided  that
       there was no right  of  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  a
       residence card as an extended family member.

    8. Mr Whitwell argued that the judge had been in error in  allowing  the
       appeal outright and in the light of Sala there was no right of appeal
       against the respondent's  decision.  Among  the  appellant's  options
       would be to make a fresh application.

    9. Ms Iteva referred to her skeleton argument and submitted  the  First-
       tier Judge had been entitled to allow the appeal in the light of  the
       extensive evidence before him and the credibility  of  the  witnesses
       was undisputed. Permission to appeal should  only  be  granted  where
       there was a material error of law.

   10. Mr Whitwell made it clear that he did  not  seek  to  go  behind  any
       concessions that had been made by the Home Office Presenting  Officer
       at the hearing before the First-tier Judge.

   11. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision. It  does
       appear that the decision in Sala establishes that the Tribunal had no
       jurisdiction to entertain this purported  appeal.  I  have  carefully
       considered the points made in the skeleton  argument  but  I  am  not
       persuaded that I should do  other  than  follow  and  apply  Sala.  I
       understand the decision is not the subject of further appeal.

   12. As Ms Iteva argues favourable findings were made in  respect  of  the
       couple and the respondent had not sought to go behind  these  in  the
       grounds of appeal. I note that neither the appellant nor his  partner
       were subject to cross-examination before the First-tier Judge.  There
       were no questions for  a  third  witness  called  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant either.

   13. I appreciate the respondent's grounds of appeal have  been  overtaken
       by the decision in Sala but unfortunately notwithstanding the  points
       made by Ms Iteva I cannot do other than find that the Tribunal has no
       jurisdiction in this matter. No doubt the parties will arrange for  a
       fresh application to the Home Office and it  does  appear  that  what
       they said before the First-tier Tribunal was not essentially disputed
       and it is to be hoped that they will not have to wait  long  for  the
       outcome they want.




       Decision

       The First-tier Judge had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal in  this
       case.

       Accordingly I re-make the decision:

       Appeal dismissed for want of jurisdiction.




       Anonymity Direction.

       The First-tier Judge made no Anonymity Order and I make none.




       Fee Award

       The judge made a fee award but it appears that he had no jurisdiction
       to make one.




  Signed
                               G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               22 November 2016


