
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01750/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2018                           |On 23 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                chetan kumar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Fisher, of Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of India born on 2 April  1986,  appeals  with
    permission against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Austin who in a determination promulgated on 20 August  2018  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 31 January 2018 to refuse a residence card as the  former  family
    member of an EEA national who had retained rights of residence.

2.   The appellant had arrived in Britain as a student in November 2009  and
    was granted  a  further  extension  of  stay  in  that  capacity  until
    September 2013.  In October 2013 he had married  a  Hungarian  national
    and on 21 January 2014 he made an application for a residence  card  as
    the spouse of an EEA national living  and  working  in  Britain.   That
    request was granted on 13 March 2014 and  he  was  given  a  five  year
    residence card valid until 13 March 2019.  The appellant's evidence was
    that he and his wife had lived together until March 2015 when they  had
    separated.  They divorced on 1 September 2017.  The application  for  a
    residence card based on retained rights  of  residence  as  the  former
    family member of an EEA national was made on 17 October  2017  and  was
    refused because the Secretary of State considered that the marriage was
    a sham entered into for immigration purposes.  On 30 January  2018  the
    appellant had been interviewed and his residence card was  revoked  the
    following day.  On 31 January 2018 the appellant's  application  for  a
    residence card made on 17 October 2017 was refused and a decision  made
    to revoke his residence card.

3.   The decision of the Secretary of State was based firstly on a  note  of
    an enforcement visit at the appellant's home made on 23  October  2014.
    The appellant  on  that  occasion  had  been  found  asleep  and  alone
    upstairs. He had stated that he had been married in  October  2013  and
    that his wife was pregnant, the baby being due in  February  2015.   He
    had stated that his wife currently lived at another  address  that  was
    closer to the hospital and as he did not have a car she lived  at  that
    other address with friends.  The interviewing officer  said  there  was
    absolutely no sign that the appellant's wife resided at the appellant's
    home or even visited and that the room was to all intents and  purposes
    "a man-pad".  The officer noted that the appellant  had  showed  him  a
    small bag of his wife's possessions and stated  that  it  was  a  token
    storage item at best and that none of her personal effects adorned  the
    room and there were no female items anywhere in the room.   There  were
    printed photographs of the wedding and  nothing  more.   There  was  no
    evidence from the appellant's phone that the two of them saw each other
    or spent any  time  together  whatsoever.   Documents  and  bills  were
    requested but the only bill relating to the appellant's wife was  dated
    before the grant of the residence card in March  2014.   It  was  clear
    from the appellant's phone and text messages that contact was  minimal.
    The Immigration Officer said in his report that he would seek documents
    relating to pregnancy, and the matter would be taken on from there.

4.   The appellant was interviewed in January 2018.  He said that  his  wife
    had not been pregnant when he had previously been  interviewed  and  he
    was vague regarding to further evidence about his  wife,  her  previous
    life and their marriage.  In the letter of refusal it was  stated  that
    at interview the appellant had stated that  all  the  guests  were  his
    friends with the exception of one friend of his wife  and  he  did  not
    know why the his spouse's mother had not come to the wedding.  He  said
    that he had never discussed the reason for this.  It  was  stated  that
    the appellant was unable to explain why his wife had gone  to  hospital
    rather than doing the pregnancy test herself and  it  was  pointed  out
    that none of her possessions were in the property when  an  Immigration
    Officer visited.  The appellant had stated that he  had  been  confused
    when he had been interviewed. The letter pointed out that no  documents
    addressed to the appellant's wife at the address  where  the  appellant
    was living had been produced and that there  was  nothing  to  indicate
    that she was self-employed.

5.   The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal came  before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Austin on 17 July 2018.  Having set out  the
    evidence and the submissions made the judge correctly  noted  that  the
    burden of proof was on the respondent  who  had  raised  the  issue  of
    whether the marriage between the appellant and his former  wife  was  a
    genuine one.  The judge found that the respondent had  discharged  that
    burden. In paragraphs 65 onwards he set out findings and conclusions.

6.   The judge went very carefully over the evidence that had been  produced
    and indeed considered some documentary evidence which showed  that  the
    appellant's wife was being pursued for enforcement action on an  unpaid
    debt and it appeared that she was using different addresses.  The judge
    referred to  the  visit  of  the  Immigration  Officer  and  noted  the
    appellant's landlord's  evidence  which  contradicted  the  Immigration
    Officer's note.  The judge said that he found the  landlord's  evidence
    lacked credibility because the landlord had said the appellant and  his
    wife shared a single bed  during  their  stay  of  eighteen  months  as
    tenants.  He noted the contradictory evidence of the appellant and  the
    landlord but stated in paragraph 72 that he preferred  the  Immigration
    Officer's written record of the visit which was detailed and was not in
    his view one-sided, nor did it exhibit the bias attributed  to  him  by
    the appellant.  He pointed to the fact there was little evidence  of  a
    female living at the address and  noted  that  the  appellant  had  not
    claimed that there was widespread evidence of his wife's presence,  but
    said that all her belongings were stored in one bag, the one bag  which
    the officer had seen.  He noted the landlord had  said  that  the  room
    contained ample storage space.   He  placed  weight  on  the  fact  the
    appellant's wife was not there and referred to the appellant's comments
    that his wife was pregnant when in fact that was not the  case  despite
    the fact that the appellant had said the baby was due four months after
    the visit. The judge noted that,  although  the  appellant's  wife  had
    supposedly produced written evidence of the relationship, she  had  not
    attended as a witness.  He also placed weight  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had said that he had no idea what his  wife  did  before  she
    came to Britain and referred to the fact that  the  appellant's  wife's
    mother had not attended the wedding.  The judge concluded that  on  the
    evidence the marriage was not  genuine  and  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proof  to  show  that  the  marriage  was  not
    genuine.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

7.   The grounds of appeal stated that the  judge  should  not  have  placed
    weight on the immigration visit and to attach significant weight to the
    document produced by the Immigration Officer: he was  wrong  to  prefer
    the content non-contemporaneous unsigned document over  and  above  the
    oral evidence of the appellant and the landlord.  The argued that there
    were shortcomings in the respondent's evidence which the respondent had
    not overcome and the judge was wrong to find that the appellant was not
    credible.  It was also argued that the judge had placed weight  on  the
    lack of explanation about  the  living  arrangements  relating  to  the
    number of occupants in the two-bed property and  stated  that  had  not
    been raised in the hearing and that therefore the hearing was unfair.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Gibb who found that the grounds were arguable.  Judge Gibb stated  that
    the judge had not placed sufficient weight on the judgment in  Sadovska
    & Anor v The Secretary of State [2017] UKSC 54 stating  that  too  much
    weight should  not  be  given  to  inconsistencies,  which  had  to  be
    considered in the context of all the  evidence and  that  the  marriage
    would only be one of convenience if the immigration benefit was at  the
    date of the marriage the predominate purpose of it.   It  was  arguable
    that the judge had not considered those matters.

9.   At the hearing of the appeal before me  Miss  Fisher  argued,  firstly,
    that the judge had placed too much weight on the enforcement  visit  in
    2014 and that he had been wrong to say that he  preferred  the  written
    record of that visit rather than the evidence of  the  appellant.   She
    stated that the report was not  signed  nor  contemporaneous  and  that
    there were comments in brackets and there was no witness statement  and
    that that evidence had not  been  tested  in  court.   She  effectively
    stated that this showed that the  respondent  had  not  discharged  the
    burden upon him.  She argued that the interview was not inconsistent as
    it clearly set out detail of the marriage  and  why  the  marriage  had
    broken down.  Moreover, the judge had placed insufficient weight on the
    oral evidence from  the  landlord.   In  addition,  there  was  clearly
    evidence on which the judge relied  which  has  not  been  put  to  the
    appellant.

10.  Miss Everett merely argued that the judge was entitled to place  weight
    on the note and that what had been said during the visit which was  not
    in dispute.

Discussion

11.  I find there was no material error of law in the determination  by  the
    judge.  It is disingenuous for it to be argued that  the  Secretary  of
    State had refused the application made merely on the  evidence  of  the
    Immigration Officer:  that is  simply  incorrect.   The  appellant  was
    given an opportunity at the interview to deal with the concerns  raised
    by the Immigration Officer's report and the Secretary of State  clearly
    weighed up the responses at interview and took those, together with the
    Immigration Officer's report  into  account  when  reaching  a  logical
    conclusion that the marriage was one of convenience.   The  reality  is
    that in the Immigration Officer report the Immigration Officer  pointed
    out the further evidence relating to the appellant's  wife's  pregnancy
    was required.  When it came to the interview it is clear that  she  had
    not been pregnant when the appellant had been interviewed and had never
    been pregnant and therefore there was  no  reason  for  her  not  being
    present where the appellant was living.  I note that the appellant  was
    interviewed in October and said that his wife was due to give birth the
    following February.  It is simply not credible to consider that  a  man
    would believe his wife to be pregnant and to  give  birth  within  four
    months when she was not.  The Secretary of State was entitled  to  rely
    on that factor and on the other factors  set  out  in  the  Immigration
    Officer's report when reaching his conclusion.   The  judge  was  fully
    entitled to find that the Secretary of State had discharged the  burden
    of proof upon him.  Moreover, the judge thereafter weighed up  all  the
    evidence and reached conclusions that were fully open to  him  thereon.
    Insofar as the grounds of appeal challenged the findings of the  judge,
    the reality is that that challenge can be considered as no more than  a
    disagreement with the findings the judge was fully entitled to make  on
    the evidence.

12.  In these circumstances I consider there is no material error of law  in
    the determination of  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    therefore dismiss this appeal.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: [pic]                           Date: 5 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
