
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01560/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 January 2018                         |On 31 January 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Evangle [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Adophy, Solicitor, Rana & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appeal concerns a challenge brought  by  the  appellant  (hereafter
    the Secretary of State or SSHD) to the decision of Judge Walters of the
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 12 May 2017 allowing  the  appeal  of
    the respondent (hereafter the claimant) against  the  decision  of  the
    SSHD refusing to grant him a permanent  residence  card.   The  judge's
    analysis and conclusions are set out briefly at paras 2-9, as follows:-




         "Substantive Issues under Appeal

         2.   This appeal is under the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
             Act 2002, against a decision to refuse to  issue  a  Residence
             Card under Regulation 15(1)(f) and 10(5)  of  the  Immigration
             (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").  The Decision
             was made by the Respondent on 27.1.16.

         3.   The basis for the Decision was that  the  Respondent  was  not
             satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had   provided   satisfactory
             evidence that he had resided in the United  Kingdom  with  his
             former EEA national  family  member  in  accordance  with  the
             Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

         4.   In his closing speech Mr. Adophy mentioned that the  Appellant
             had stated at paragraph 8.3 of his application  form  that  he
             had access rights to a child of the Sponsor, namely [RE]  (dob
             { ] 2008) who is a  French  citizen.   That  access  has  been
             ordered by a  court  in  the  U.K.  and  as  at  the  date  of
             application the Appellant had had those access rights for  one
             year.

         5.   The Respondent's reasons for refusal dated  27.1.16  makes  no
             reference to that child.

         6.    Mr  Eaton  accepted  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
             Respondent had considered the  Appellant's  access  rights  to
             that child.

         7.   I concluded, therefore, that the appeal must be allowed as the
             Respondent's decision is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law,
             following the case of Greenwood (No. 2) (para 398  considered)
             [2015] UKUT 00629 IAC.

         8.   As the appeal is indivisible, I  have  deliberately  refrained
             from making any findings of fact on its other aspect which  is
             whether or not the Appellant and his former family member have
             resided  in  accordance  with  the  2006  Regulations  for   a
             continuous period of five years.

         NOTICE OF DECISION

         9.   The appeal is allowed under the 2006 Regulations as being  not
             in accordance with the law."

2.   The SSHD's first ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  judge  should  have
    recognised that the court order for access to a child was immaterial as
    the claimant was held to meet the alternative  regulation  10(5)(d)(i).
    The SSHD's second ground is that the judge erred in failing to  address
    the fact that 'the requirements to cease to be a family member  due  to
    the termination of a marriage still apply as  do  the  requirements  of
    regulation 10(6).  The claimant had also to show that he and his former
    EEA national family member resided for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years'.

3.   A Rule 24 response was submitted by  those  representing  the  claimant
    and I heard submissions from both Mr Avery and Mr Adophy.

4.   I do not find the SSHD's grounds or the claimant's Rule 24 response  to
    be models of lucidity and the oral submissions were of limited help  to
    me.

5.   The SSHD's first ground is broadly correct as it stands insofar as  the
    refusal decision did accept that the claimant had produced evidence  to
    show that his marriage lasted for more than 5 years, from 2008 to 2015.
     It did not expressly state that it was accepted that he and his former
    spouse resided in the UK for at least 1 year during their marriage  but
    it can be inferred from the refusal letter read as a  whole  that  that
    too was accepted.  Hence although the refusal letter made no mention of
    regulation 10(5)(d)(i) it can be inferred from its text that  the  SSHD
    accepted this  requirement  was  met  and  that,  accordingly,  it  was
    immaterial whether 10(5)(d)(iii) - which is an alternative limb  -  was
    also met.  But this ground of appeal in itself  does  not  explain  why
    this feature of the judge's decision rendered erroneous his decision to
    find it not in accordance with the law.

6.   That presumably  is  the  rationale  behind  the  second  ground  which
    effectively maintains that the  judge  should  have  grasped  that  the
    claimant could not succeed under the Regulations  because  meeting  the
    requirements of regulation 10(5)(d) was  insufficient  on  its  own  to
    establish permanent  residence.   Albeit  this  ground  is  cryptically
    drafted, I consider it made out.  There was  no  basis  for  the  judge
    deciding that the decision was not in accordance with the law  if  that
    decision on its face contained a correct assessment of a failure on the
    part of the claimant to meet at least one essential requirement of  the
    2006 Regulations governing  the  right  to  permanent  residence.   The
    judge's decision entirely fails  to  address  the  SSHD's  reasons  for
    considering that the claimant had not shown he had 5 years'  continuous
    residence.

7.   Accordingly, the judge was not entitled to  allow  the  appeal  on  the
    basis it was not in accordance with the law.  The only reason  he  gave
    for doing so was not a material one.  The decision is vitiated by legal
    error necessitating that I set aside the decision.

8.   Given the wholesale failure  of  the  judge  to  make  any  finding  in
    relation to the material issues I shall remit  the  case  to  be  heard
    afresh by a FtT judge other than Judge Walters.

9.   Whilst it will be for the parties to identify the relevant  issues,  it
    seems to me that in broad terms the SSHD's  decision  letter  correctly
    identifies them.

10.  If the claimant  could  demonstrate  that  his  spouse  was  exercising
    Treaty rights for 5 continuous years during their  marriage,  he  could
    succeed without recourse to regulation  10.   The  claimant's  Rule  24
    response does not  mount  any  argument  or  produce  any  evidence  to
    demonstrate there was such a period of continuous residence.

11.  If the claimant's spouse was not working at the date of  divorce,  then
    he cannot bring himself within the material scope of regulation 10,  as
    he would not have a right capable of  retention.   The  SSHD's  refusal
    letter does not accept that the spouse has produced sufficient evidence
    to show this, albeit it is accepted  that  the  claimant  was  able  to
    produce a photocopy of an HMRC employee history letter  indicating  she
    was employed at Comptoir Gourmand Ltd  at  the  time  of  divorce.   It
    should be within the power of the claimant to produce the  original  of
    this letter and if he does that, that might then bring him  within  the
    material scope of regulation 10.

12.  Assuming the claimant is able to do that, then he would  have  to  show
    that he met the requirements of regulation 10(b) by demonstrating  that
    he himself had been a worker for a period which,  when  taken  together
    with the period (short of 5 years) for which  his  spouse  was  working
    prior to their divorce, amounted to 5 years.

13.  If he can do that then he would be in a position to  establish  he  had
    acquired permanent residence.

14.  For the above reasons:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is remitted to  the  FtT  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Walters.


Signed:  [pic]             Date: 31 January 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
