
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: EA/01504/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2018                  |On 23 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                            Modupe Olamide Laguda
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Emezie, Solicitor, Matt Rowland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons




    Background

      1.    The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 28 April 1993.  She
         seeks a permanent residence card as the extended family  member  of
         her EEA sponsor, her maternal  aunt.  The  respondent  refused  her
         application on the basis that she had failed to establish that  the
         EEA member had exercised treaty rights for a period of  five  years
         in accordance with Regulation 15(1)(b). The  respondent  maintained
         that there was no evidence of her employment between  6  July  2008
         and 12 November 2012 or of her incapacitation from 5 April 2014.

      2.    The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bashir  at  a
         hearing at Bradford on 13  July  2017.  the  judge  considered  the
         evidence but concluded that the five year period  selected  by  the
         appellant  had  not  been  covered  by  the  documentary  evidence.
         Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

      3.    In her grounds, the appellant argued  that  the  respondent  was
         satisfied that her sponsor was  exercising  treaty  rights  between
         2008 and 2012 because she had been granted  a  residence  card  for
         that period. It was argued further that there was  evidence  before
         the judge to show that  the  sponsor  had  been  exercising  treaty
         rights from 2011 - 2016 and that the judge gave no weight to it and
         failed to note that a two tear gap in the five years was permitted.
         Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Martins on 29 November 2017.

      4.    There has been no Rule 24 response from the respondent.




    The hearing

      5.    I heard submissions from both parties at the hearing  before  me
         on 12 February 2018.

      6.    Mr  Emezie  submitted  that  evidence  for  2008-2012  had  been
         provided when the appellant made her application  for  a  residence
         card so the respondent should not have required that evidence to be
         re-submitted. He maintained that there was documentary evidence for
         2011-2016 before the First-tier Tribunal and if that  was  not  the
         case, then it was now available. He submitted that  a  letter  from
         the DWP dated 26 March 2014 was handed in at  the  hearing  and  it
         covered payments for  the  period  until  15  September  2015.   He
         submitted that even if there were gaps,  there  was  discretion  to
         disregard them.

      7.    In response, Mr  Duffy  criticized  the  appellant's  bundle  as
         unhelpful and containing much irrelevant information. He  submitted
         that all the judge needed to see was evidence of economic  activity
         and that was not present for the five year period. He  pointed  out
         that the judge made no reference to the production of a  letter  at
         the hearing. Mr  Duffy  submitted  that  the  earlier  grant  of  a
         residence card only demonstrated  that  treaty  rights  were  being
         exercised at the date of the issue. He submitted that  if  evidence
         was being relied on, it should have been produced. With respect  to
         the issue of a permissible gap, he pointed out that the  judge  had
         in fact referred to this at paragraph 10 and that  even  with  this
         gap, there still had to be evidence covering five years.  Mr  Duffy
         submitted that the determination was properly reasoned and that  if
         the appellant had fresh material to rely  on,  she  should  make  a
         fresh application.  There had been no error of law.

      8.    Mr Emezie submitted that the appellant  had  gone  to  court  to
         address the lack of evidence identified in the refusal letter.  She
         dealt with that by way of oral evidence. He  argued  that  had  the
         judge wished to deal with a different period, the case should  have
         been adjourned and further documentary evidence  should  have  been
         requested.

      9.    That completed submissions. I  then  reserved  my  determination
         which I now give with reasons.




    Findings and conclusions

     10.    I have carefully considered all the evidence before me  and  the
         submissions that have been made by both parties.

     11.    The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was a simple  one;  had
         the requirements of reg. 15 been  met,  that  is  to  say  had  the
         appellant shown that her sponsor was a qualified person for a  five
         year period.

     12.    The judge found that this had  not  been  shown.  The  appellant
         argues that the evidence had been adduced.

     13.    First, I concur with Mr Duffy's view of the appellant's bundles.
         They have been poorly put together, the documents are  not  in  any
         chronological order and  there  is  no  detailed  schedule  of  the
         evidence. A number of the documents are unrelated to the  issue  to
         be determined. It has taken unnecessary time to go through all  the
         documents. There is also duplication between the bundles.

     14.    Mr Emezie's submissions did not advance the appellant's case. He
         initially submitted that  the  appellant  had  adduced  documentary
         evidence to address the shortfall in the evidence identified by the
         respondent  in  her  decision  letter  and  that  there  had   been
         documentary evidence for 2011-2016 before the Tribunal. However, it
         then transpired that in fact the appellant had not  fully  done  so
         but had maintained in  oral  evidence  that  the  period  had  been
         covered. He also submitted that a letter from the DWP of  26  March
         2014 had been  handed  in  at  the  hearing  but  he  was  not  the
         representative at that hearing, the document does not appear on the
         Tribunal file, it is not referred to in the judge's  determination,
         it is not referred to in the Record of Proceedings and there is  no
         statement of truth from Counsel who represented  the  appellant  to
         confirm that it had been adduced. What I see from the file, is that
         it was  submitted  after  the  hearing  with  the  application  for
         permission to appeal. It was not a document before  the  judge  and
         the complaint that it was disregarded is wholly without merit.

     15.    Also without any merit is the complaint that the  judge  had  no
         regard to  the  permissible  gap  of  employment.  That  is  wholly
         misleading as the judge plainly refers to this at paragraph  10  of
         the determination. The position is not that two  years  of  a  five
         year period can be discounted so that evidence of economic activity
         only has to be shown for three years, but that period  of  economic
         activity can be aggregated so that the  five  year  period  can  be
         built up with gaps.

     16.    Mr Emezie argued that the judge should have adjourned the appeal
         hearing and asked for further documentary evidence if he was  going
         to consider a different period to that considered by the respondent
         in her decision letter. This is a hopeless  point.   The  appellant
         chose the five year period herself; it was put forward  by  Counsel
         at the hearing as 6 July 2011 - 6 July 2016 (at  paragraph  9)  and
         the judge proceeded to consider  the appeal on that  basis.  It  is
         worth mentioning that there was no attempt at the hearing to  argue
         that there were any gaps in these five years. Indeed, the case  was
         presented on the basis that there was evidence  to  cover  economic
         activity for that period.

     17.    The submission that the respondent had  been  satisfied  with  a
         previous period of economic activity between 2008 and 2011  is  not
         supported by any evidence. At best, it can be argued that when  the
         residence  card  was  issued  in  2008,  the  respondent  had  been
         satisfied that the sponsor had been a qualified person. I  fail  to
         see how it demonstrates that the respondent was satisfied that  the
         position would or did remain the same for the next five  years.  It
         was for the appellant to set out the relevant five years period and
         then to show that the evidence  covered  it.   She  had  a  further
         opportunity to adduce the required evidence at the hearing.

     18.    On that basis, the judge considered  the  available  documentary
         evidence. His findings are set out at paragraphs 10-13 .  He  found
         that only a period of 39 months was covered by the evidence.  There
         was no evidence for the period 25 April 2014 - 6 July 2016.  Whilst
         evidence of later employment was submitted, that did not assist the
         judge in determining  whether  the  chosen  five  year  period  was
         covered.

     19.    It follows that I conclude that the  judge  properly  considered
         the evidence that had been adduced and that he made  no  errors  of
         law in his examination of that material. As Mr Duffy submitted,  if
         the appellant has fresh evidence she wishes to put forward,  it  is
         open to her to make a fresh application  to  the  respondent   with
         that evidence presented in an orderly and well detailed manner.




    Decision

     20.    There are no error of law in the determination of the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.




    Anonymity order

     21.    There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
         and I see no reason to make one.




    Signed:


    [pic]
    Dr R Keki?
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    19 February 2018


