
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01227/2016
     EA/01230/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2018                        |On 8 March 2018                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MRS DOLORES ANDAYA
                     MRS MARIA CORAZON BONAGUA BAGACINA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are appeals by two nationals of the Philippines who applied for a
    residence permit as the extended family members of an EEA national  who
    is said to be British.  The Appellants claim that they are entitled  to
    remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  the  "Surrinder  Singh"  principle
    because their sponsor has exercised Treaty rights outside the UK and is
    returning to live here.

 2. The Appellants' applications were  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  20
    January 2016.  They were however given a right of  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision.

 3. On 7 April 2017, the appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  NMK
    Lawrence.  By a decision promulgated on 27 April 2017 ("the Decision"),
    the Judge dismissed the appeals on the basis that there  was  no  valid
    right of appeal.  He did so in reliance on  the  case  of  Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) ("Sala").  At that time,  Sala
    represented the law on appeal rights for extended family  members  and,
    as a reported decision of this Tribunal, the Judge was bound to  follow
    it.  However, in the case of Khan v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the Court of Appeal held that Sala was
    wrongly decided.  That is now also confirmed by the Supreme Court in SM
    (Algeria) v Entry Clearance Officer, UK Visa  Section  [2018]  UKSC  9.
    Sala has therefore been overturned and is no longer good law.

 4. Permission to appeal the Decision was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Pitt on 21 December 2017 in the following terms:-

         "1.  In the light of  Khan  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the First-tier Tribunal was  wrong
         in law to conclude that it did not have jurisdiction  to  hear  the
         appeal.

         2.   The Tribunal is minded to find an error of law, set aside  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the case to the First-
         tier Tribunal.

         3.   That is also the view of the Tribunal where  the  approach  to
         the medical evidence provided in support of an  adjournment  raises
         an arguable procedural error.

         4.   A party who is opposed to this course is  directed  to  inform
         the Tribunal in writing (giving reasons), not  later  than  7  days
         from the  date  this  decision  is  sent  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         Following that period, the Upper Tribunal will issue its decision."

 5.  No  written  objection  was  received  by  either  party.    Strictly,
    therefore, the further decision remitting the appeal  could  have  been
    made without a hearing.  However, the appeals were placed  in  my  list
    and since I did not become aware of the nature of the case  until  late
    in the day and the Appellants are in person, I dealt with the matter at
    the hearing and explained to the Appellants that I would  be  remitting
    their appeals in  accordance  with  Judge  Pitt's  decision  and  would
    provide my reasons in writing as now represented by this decision.

 6. There is an error of law in the Decision based on the Judge's  finding,
    premised on Sala, that he had no jurisdiction to  decide  the  appeals.
    Accordingly, I set aside the Decision and remit  the  appeals  for  re-
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  Judge  NMK
    Lawrence.

Decision

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  NMK  Lawrence
promulgated on 27 August 2017 is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.

Signed[pic]                         Dated:  7 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith



