
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01860/2017
                                                               EA/01858/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th September 2008               |On 02nd November 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                          MS CARMEN CANTO PIMENTEL
                         MR MORUFU ADEKUNDLE IGBEDE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr O Olujinmi, OA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Igbede is a citizen of Nigeria.  His date of birth is
    15 January 1960.  He is married to the Appellant Ms Pimentel.  Ms
    Pimentel is a citizen of the Netherlands.  Her date of birth is 13th
    January 1954.

 2. The Appellants applied for permanent residence under the Immigration
    (European Economic Area Regulations 2016 (the "2016 Regulations").
    Their applications were refused by the Secretary of State on 7th
    February 2017.

 3. The Appellants appealed against that decision. Their appeal was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Samimi in a decision
    which was promulgated on 20 December 2017 following a hearing at Hatton
    Cross on 13 November 2017.

 4. The appeal was dismissed because the judge did not accept that the
    evidence established that Ms Pimentel had been exercising Treaty Rights
    throughout the material period.

 5. The Appellants were granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge I D Boyes on 6th February 2018.   Thus, the matter came before me
    to determine whether the judge erred.

 6. At the start of the hearing the Appellants' representative referred to
    evidence in the substantial Appellants' bundle consisting of 428 pages
    which was before the First-tier Tribunal.   The Appellants asked for
    the appeal to be determined on the papers.  I put the matter back so
    that the Appellants' representative could show Ms Everett the specific
    documents in the bundle which were before the First-tier Tribunal on
    which the Appellants sought to rely and which it is asserted she did
    not take into account.

 7. The hearing resumed. Ms Everett conceded on behalf of the Secretary of
    State that the evidence that was in the Appellants' bundle established
    that they met the requirements of the Regulations, namely, the
    Appellant Ms Pimentel was exercising Treaty rights throughout a
    continuous five-year period.  She conceded that the judge materially
    erred because she did not take properly consider this. Had she done so
    she would have allowed the appeal.

 8. It was accepted that the Appellants' bundle was before the judge (or at
    least it should have been because it had been sent to the FTT by the
    time that the matter was determined. The judge in this case was not
    assisted by the presentation of the Appellants' appeal. However, I
    conclude that there has been material error of law insofar as there was
    evidence which established that the Appellants met the requirements of
    the 2016 Regulations.   There was evidence that Ms Pimentel had been
    exercising Treaty Rights for a continuous period of five years.  There
    was no cross challenge by the Secretary of State relating to the
    judge's findings about the validity of the marriage and the
    relationship between the Appellants. There is no need to interfere with
    those findings.

 9. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the
    Appellants' appeal.  I re-make the appeal. I allow the appeal under the
    2016 Regulations.

10. The Appellants' appeal is allowed under the 2016 Regulations.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 24 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
