
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01950/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3rd April 2018                       |On 12 April 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              mr khalid mahmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rana, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 4th January  1972.   The
    Appellant had applied for a residence card on the basis that he  is  an
    extended family member who has  been  dependent  on  his  EEA  national
    Sponsor/a dependent member of his EEA national Sponsor's household  and
    continues to be so in  the  UK.   His  application  was  considered  in
    accordance with Regulation 8(2) of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 and was refused on the basis that the Appellant sought a residence
    card as confirmation of a right to reside by Notice  of  Refusal  dated
    12th October 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cohen sitting at Taylor House on 2nd August 2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 10th August  2017  the  appeal  was
    dismissed for want of jurisdiction  on  the  basis  that  the  Tribunal
    considered the decision under appeal to be one to which the guidance in
    the case of Sala (EFMs:  right  of  appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC)
    applied.

 3. On 24th August  2017  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 1st February 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Beach
    granted permission to appeal.

 4. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me.   The  Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel Mr  Rana.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Wilding.

 5. It is accepted by both legal representatives that the decision in  Sala
    was overturned by the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Khan  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ  1755  which
    confirmed that an extended family member did have the right  of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal as  an  extended  family  member  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 6. Consequently through no fault of his own the judge  in  following  Sala
    made an error of law.  This matter has  never  been  aired  before  the
    Tribunal.   In  such  circumstances  it  is  agreed   by   both   legal
    representatives that the correct approach is to set aside the  decision
    and to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Notice of Decision

 1) On finding that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  discloses  a
    material error of law the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside.

 2) The appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Taylor House with an ELH of two hours to be heard before any  judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Cohen.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve a copy of such
    objective and/or subjective evidence upon which either party relies  at
    least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 4) That an Urdu interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 11 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 11 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




