

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
EA/01789/2016

                                               EA/01790/2016

                                               EA/01791/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision Promulgated             |
|On 16 June 2017                          | On 19 June 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              ben nyarko afful
                              seth tetteh abbey
                            francis antwi nyarko
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Adams, instructed by BWF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants appeal, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the respondent's decision  to
refuse to issue them with residence cards under  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

The appellants, who say they  are  cousins,  are  citizens  of  Ghana  born,
respectively, on 20 March 1970, 1 December  1970  and  14  July  1977.  They
entered the UK in 2006. On 25 April 2007 they applied  for  residence  cards
as the extended family members of  their  cousin  Juliana  Nyarko,  a  Dutch
national, but their applications were refused on  28  September  2007.  They
were issued with  residence  cards  on  26  August  2008  further  to  their
subsequent applications on 21 January 2008.  However  on  13  November  2013
their applications of 24 July 2013 for permanent residence were refused  and
their appeals  against  that  decision  were  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 2 July 2014. They  applied  for  residence  cards  again  on  11
August 2014 but their applications were  refused  on  21  October  2014  and
again their appeals against the decision were dismissed, on 15 May 2015.


The appellants then applied for residence cards  once  again  on  19  August
2015 as the extended family members of their cousin  Juliana  Nyarko.  Their
applications were refused on 22 January 2016. The appellants lodged  notices
of  appeal  appealed  against  the  decisions,  but  were  referred  by  the
Tribunal, in a Notice issued on 17 November 2016, to the  decision  in  Sala
(EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  and  were  directed  to  provide
legal reasons why their appeals should be regarded as valid in light of  the
decision in that case. The appellants did not respond to the directions.


The  "appeals"  then  came  before  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
McCarthy who found that the appellants did not have valid rights  of  appeal
and accordingly dismissed the "appeals" for want of jurisdiction.


The appellants sought permission to appeal Judge McCarthy's decision on  the
grounds that, having previously  been  issued  with  residence  cards  under
Regulation 7(3) of the EEA Regulations, they had become family  members  and
were therefore no longer to be treated as extended family members.  As  such
the decision in Sala did not apply to them and the judge had  erred  in  law
by considering that it did. They were  therefore  entitled  to  a  right  of
appeal against the refusal decisions.


Appeal hearing and submissions

At the hearing Mr Adams relied on the grounds  of  appeal,  submitting  that
the appellants had become "family  members"  rather  than  "extended  family
members" when  they  were  issued  with  residence  cards  in  August  2008,
pursuant to Regulation 7(3), and that that continued to be their  status  at
the time of the appeal before Judge McCarthy. Accordingly they did not  fall
within the ambit of Sala  and  they  had  a  right  of  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision refusing to issue them with residence cards.

Mr Tarlow relied on the respondent's Rule 24 response which referred to  the
appellants' failure to respond to  the  Tribunal's  directions  and  to  the
absence of evidence to show that their  previous  residence  cards  had  not
expired or been revoked.


The EEA Regulations 2006

I set out the relevant parts of the Regulations as follows:

      Family member

      7.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of these Regulations
      the following persons shall  be  treated  as  the  family  members  of
      another person-

           (a)his spouse or his civil partner;

           (b)direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner
      who are-

                 (i)under 21; or

                 (ii)dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;

           (c)dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of
           his spouse or his civil partner;

           (d)a person who is to be treated as the family member of that
           other person under paragraph (3). ....

      (3) Subject to paragraph (4), a person who  is  an  extended  family
      member and has been issued with an EEA family permit,  a  registration
      certificate or a residence card shall be treated as the family  member
      of the relevant EEA national for as long as he  continues  to  satisfy
      the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation to that
      EEA national and the permit, certificate or card has not ceased to  be
      valid or been revoked.

      "Extended family member"

      8.-(1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means  a  person
      who is not a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation
      7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2),
      (3), (4) or (5).

      (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the  person
      is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil partner and-



           (a)the person is residing in an EEA State in which the EEA
           national also resides and is dependent upon the EEA national or
           is a member of his household;

           (b)the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
           accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or wishes to
           join him there; or

           (c)the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has
           joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to
           be dependent upon him or to be a member of his household. "


Consideration and findings.

The appellants' grounds rely on Regulation 7(3),  asserting  that  following
the issuing of residence cards in August 2008 they were  to  be  treated  as
family members of their EEA national sponsor and were thus not  applying  as
extended family members and therefore not subject  to  the  restrictions  on
rights of appeal in Sala.

This was,  of  course,  an  argument  which  was  not  raised  before  Judge
McCarthy. The appellants provided no response to the  directions  issued  by
the Tribunal on 17 November 2016 for submissions to  be  made  as  to  legal
reasons why the appeals should be regarded as valid following  the  decision
in Sala.  Accordingly,  and  in  accordance  with  those  directions,  Judge
McCarthy went on to consider the issue of validity of the  appeals  and,  in
the absence of any reasons given by the appellants as to why  Sala  did  not
apply to them, was fully entitled to conclude that Sala did apply  and  that
the appeals were not valid.


In any event, the submission now  made  in  regard  to  Regulation  7(3)  is
patently wrong as it ignores  the  second  part  of  that  Regulation  which
provides that the persons be treated as family members of the  EEA  national
"for as long as he continues to satisfy the conditions in  regulation  8(2),
(3),  (4)  or  (5)  in  relation  to  that  EEA  national  and  the  permit,
certificate or card has not  ceased  to  be  valid  or  been  revoked".  The
appellants have provided no evidence that their  residence  cards  have  not
ceased to be valid. As Mr Tarlow submitted, the residence  cards  issues  in
2008 would have expired in 2013 and there is  no  evidence  that  they  have
been extended. On the contrary, the evidence is that  applications  made  on
24 July 2013 for permanent residence cards were refused on 13 November  2013
and further applications made on 11 August 2014 as extended  family  members
were refused on 21 October 2014.  On  both  occasions  the  appellants  were
found not to be extended family members of the EEA national sponsor as  they
were not dependent upon her and had not  continually  been  members  of  her
household. Those decisions were both  upheld  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
with clear findings made on both occasions  that  the  appellants  were  not
extended family members. Extracts from Judge Thomas's  decision  of  2  July
2014 are contained in the refusal decision of 26 January 2016 and Mr  Tarlow
provided me with the full decision of Judge Chapman in the  appeals  decided
on 15 May 2015 in which the judge found the appellants not  to  be  credible
in their claims as to dependency and that they were  not  dependent  on  the
sponsor or members of her household. Clearly, therefore, the appellants  had
been unable to satisfy the conditions  in  Regulation  8(2)  for  some  time
after being issued with  their  residence  cards  in  2008  and  accordingly
ceased, at least from 2013, to be treated as family members.

As such the applications made by the appellants on 19 August 2015  were  not
made as family members of the EEA national sponsor, but as alleged  extended
family members, and the refusal of their applications  clearly  fell  within
the terms of Sala such that they were not entitled to  a  right  of  appeal.
Judge McCarthy accordingly properly found that their appeals were not  valid
and  correctly  and  lawfully  dismissed   the   "appeals"   for   want   of
jurisdiction. There are no errors of law in his decision.

DECISION

The appellants'  appeals  are  accordingly  dismissed.  The  making  of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a  point  of
law. The decision to dismiss the appellants' appeals therefore stands.

Signed: [pic]                           Dated:           16 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
