
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01668/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 February 2018                      |On 02 May 2018                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                          moses damilare anifowose
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Nnamani, Counsel for Samuel Lewis Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 2 June 1992.  He appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 24 January  2016  refusing
    to issue him a residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in
    the UK as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty Rights in the
    UK.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Asjad and
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on 21 February 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  7  December  2017.   The  permission
    states that  the  respondent's  refusal  letter  found  only  that  the
    evidence did not show that the sponsor was  exercising  Treaty  Rights.
    It declined to comment on the genuine nature  of  the  marriage.   This
    issue was raised in the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  and  evidence.
    The First-Tier Judge made  a  finding  of  a  marriage  of  convenience
    without the appellant having had the opportunity to address this.   The
    permission states that it is not sufficient to say that  the  appellant
    could have attended the hearing and addressed the new evidence.  He did
    not know that evidence about the marriage being a sham was going to  be
    adduced so did not know that he should attend to deal with  this.   The
    documents suggesting that the sponsor has very recently assisted  other
    non-EEA  nationals  to  obtain  residence  cards  on  the  basis  of  a
    relationship with her is on the face of it very strong, but it  remains
    the case that procedural fairness  requires  that  it  be  put  to  the
    appellant in order for him to have the opportunity to respond.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel submitted that the appellant had no chance to address  the  two
    points referred to in the permission.

 5. Counsel then went on to deal with whether the sponsor in this claim  is
    a qualified person.  She submitted that it is clear  that  the  sponsor
    was working and documents have been provided.   Evidence  was  supplied
    from HMRC to show that the sponsor worked for Tudor  Employment  Agency
    Limited and other companies.  She submitted that  as  the  sponsor  was
    exercising Treaty Rights this appeal should have been allowed.


 6. She submitted that on the day of the hearing the respondent brought  up
    the point of whether the marriage is one of convenience.  She submitted
    that although this is mentioned in the refusal letter at  paragraph  4,
    the marriage is  not  challenged.   She  submitted  that  the  evidence
    produced before the First-Tier Judge shows that  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant are engaged to each other.


 7. I put to Counsel that the First-Tier Judge was not satisfied  with  the
    evidence about the sponsor's employment.  Counsel  submitted  that  the
    HMRC letter may well not have been  seen  by  the  appellant  which  is
    another "unfair" issue, but I pointed out  that  the  HMRC  letter  was
    actually sent to the appellant at her address so  she  must  have  seen
    this.  I also referred her to paragraph 13 of the decision in which the
    Judge states that he has not  seen  a  marriage  certificate.   Counsel
    again submitted that the issue of a sham marriage was not mentioned  in
    the refusal letter and so the appellant had no chance to deal with  it.




 8. The refusal letter refers to Tudor Employment Agency Limited not  being
    able to be contacted  by  telephone  or  located  at  Companies  House,
    Yell.com or Google and that the tax codes on the  wage  slips  are  not
    compatible with those provided by HMRC for the  period  specified.   It
    refers to discrepancies in the wage slips in regard to the  appellant's
    total gross earned amount, deductions, net paid total and year to  date
    totals.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  HMRC  letter  refers  to  Tudor
    Employment Agency Limited so Tudor does exist and is a trading company.
     She submitted that although there is no evidence, apart from the  HMRC
    letter, of the sponsor's employment by other companies, this may not be
    necessary, now that the HMRC document is on file.


 9. She submitted that the additional documents provided by the  respondent
    about the problems with the subsistence of the marriage  were  provided
    too late for the appellant to deal with.


10. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no merit in the  grounds
    of application.  He submitted that it is not clear whether the  sponsor
    is the wife of the appellant as there is no  marriage  certificate  and
    she is referred  to  as  his  partner.   He  submitted  that  different
    regulations apply if the sponsor is his partner and not his wife.


11. The Presenting Officer referred to the refusal letter which states that
    there  is  insufficient  evidence  of  the  sponsor's  employment.   He
    submitted that in the refusal letter it is stated "Regulation 2 of  the
    Immigration EEA Regulations 2006 states that a spouse does not  include
    a party to a marriage of convenience".  The refusal goes  on  to  state
    that as there is insufficient evidence to show that the EEA national is
    exercising Treaty Rights, it was  not  necessary  for  the  appellant's
    relationship with the sponsor to be considered and the application  has
    been solely considered under Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations.   The
    refusal goes on to state that should the appellant be in a position  to
    provide further new evidence that the EEA national is exercising Treaty
    Rights it is open to him to submit a  new  application.   He  submitted
    that this was sufficient warning to the appellant that  the  respondent
    doubted the genuineness of the relationship.  He submitted that all the
    terms of the Regulations are to be  satisfied  and  this  part  of  the
    refusal letter put the appellant on  notice  that  if  he  can  provide
    evidence of the sponsor exercising Treaty Rights.  Regulation  2  would
    then be an issue.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that an oral hearing was requested  by
    the appellant and it was expected that the appellant  and  the  sponsor
    would attend.  He submitted that the evidence before the Judge relating
    to the sponsor's employment cannot be accepted as the tax codes on  the
    wage slips are not compatible with those  published  by  HMRC  for  the
    period  specified  and  there  are  discrepancies  in  the  wage  slips
    regarding the sponsor's gross earned amount, deductions, net paid total
    and year to date totals.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant  did  not
    produce  anything  to  satisfy  these  issues.   I  was   referred   to
    discrepancies in the application  form  and  the  HMRC  letter  and  he
    submitted that if the Judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  is
    exercising Treaty Rights, he did  not  require  to  consider  the  sham
    marriage and it is clear from the  decision  that  the  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that the sponsor was exercising Treaty Rights  and  therefore
    the part of the  decision  relating  to  the  sham  marriage  makes  no
    difference to the Judge's final findings.  He submitted that the  error
    is not material.


13. Counsel submitted that the respondent has to prove that the marriage is
    one of convenience.  She referred to the material being served late and
    to the appellant not being put on notice that Regulation 2 was going to
    be argued.  She submitted that the  statement  in  the  refusal  letter
    referred to by the Presenting Officer is not sufficient.


14. She referred to Regulation 6 and the independent evidence  provided  by
    the sponsor to show that she is working and was employed by  Tudor  and
    she submitted that what has been  provided  discharges  the  burden  of
    proof so Regulation 6 has been satisfied.


15. With regard to whether the appellant and the sponsor  are  married  she
    submitted that if the respondent was  not  satisfied  about  this  then
    proper reference should have been made to it in the refusal letter.


16. I was asked to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision and to remit the case to be reheard in the  First-Tier
    Tribunal.

Decision and Reasons

17. The respondent's refusal letter found that the  evidence  provided  did
    not show that the sponsor was exercising Treaty Rights.  There  is  now
    an HMRC letter which the appellant has clearly seen as it was addressed
    to her at her home address.  This refers  to  Tudor  Employment  Agency
    Limited in the years ended April 2015 and April 2016 but  it  is  clear
    that the sponsor also worked  for  other  employers  and  there  is  no
    evidence about any of these on file.  The evidence  provided  does  not
    tally with  the  HMRC  letter  for  the  reasons  referred  to  by  the
    Presenting Officer. These are also referred to in  the  decision.   The
    HMRC letter was before the Judge and is referred to by him at paragraph
    12 of the decision.  The letter gives  an  employment  history  of  the
    sponsor from 2012 to 2016.  The application  was  made  in  2014.   The
    record  shows  that  the  sponsor  has  worked  for  various  companies
    including Tudor Employment Agency Limited.  The Judge  has  also  noted
    that the HMRC record does not show that  the  sponsor  is  earning  the
    amount recorded on the application form.   The  Judge  is  clearly  not
    satisfied with the evidence produced about the sponsor's employment and
    refers to the discrepancies.


18. As all the terms of the Regulations have to be satisfied.  The  Judge's
    findings about  the  appellant's  relationship  with  the  sponsor  and
    whether it is subsisting and genuine do  not  have  to  be  taken  into
    account as the application must fail based on the sponsor's  employment
    and her exercise of her Treaty Rights.


19. The refusal letter suggests that a  new  application  is  made  by  the
    appellant with the required information about the sponsor's employment.
     That is the logical thing for this appellant to do.  When he does this
    and all the relevant paperwork about her employment  is  provided,  the
    genuineness of the relationship can be dealt with as no doubt this will
    be relevant when the decision letter is  issued  relating  to  the  new
    application.  The marriage certificate can also be supplied.

Notice of Decision

20. As there is no material error of law in the First-Tier Judge's decision
    her decision, promulgated on 21 February 2017, must stand.

21. Anonymity has not been directed.




Signed                                  Date 01 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
















