
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
EA/01719/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10 January 2019                       |On 1 February 2019                    |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|     |THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT          |             |
|Appellant                                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|     |              MS JUSTINA HANSEN                         |             |
|     |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                              |             |
|     |                                                        |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, of Afrifa and Partners Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malone who, in a  decision
    promulgated on 11 October 2018 following  a  hearing  on  21  September
    2018,  allowed  the  appeal  of  Ms  Justina  Hansen   (hereafter   the
    "claimant"), a national of Ghana born  on  8  August  1979,  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State of 24  January  2018  to  refuse  to
    issue a permanent  residence  card  as  confirmation  that  she  had  a
    retained right of residence as the former family member (spouse) of  Mr
    Yaw Amoako, a German national (date of birth: 28 February  1965),  said
    to be exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The issue in this appeal is whether Judge Malone  materially  erred  in
    law by departing from  a  finding  made  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal C J Woolley in an earlier appeal  by  the  claimant  that  the
    claimant had not established that Mr  Amoako  exercised  Treaty  rights
    from 21 July 2011 until 4 April 2012 (hereafter the "Gap Period").

 3. This issue involves consideration of the  principles  in  Devaseelan  v
    SSHD * [2002] UKIAT 702.

 4. Whilst Judge Woolley heard oral  evidence  from  the  claimant  and  Mr
    Amoako, Judge Malone did not hear any oral evidence. The hearing before
    Judge Malone proceeded on submissions only, although the  claimant  was
    present at the hearing (para 7 of Judge Malone's decision). Mr Akohene,
    who appeared for the claimant  at  the  hearings  before  both  judges,
    confirmed at the hearing before me that there was  no  evidence  before
    Judge Malone that was not also before Judge Woolley.

 5. Mr Akohene and Mr Avery also  agreed  that  Judge  Malone  reached  his
    finding that the claimant had  established  that  Mr  Amoako  exercised
    Treaty rights for the duration of the Gap Period on the  basis  of  his
    own interpretation of a letter dated 6 November 2015  from  Smith  News
    (hereafter the "SN Letter"), taking a different view  from  that  which
    had been taken by Judge Woolley.

 6. The decision that was the subject of the appeal  before  Judge  Woolley
    was made under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (the "2006 Regulations") whereas the decision that was the subject
    of the appeal before  Judge  Malone  was  made  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. Both require applicants  who
    claim to have a retained right of residence to establish,  inter  alia,
    that their ex-spouse was exercising Treaty rights  continuously  for  a
    relevant 5-year period.

 7. In the appeal before Judge Woolley, the 5-year period relied  upon  was
    from 2010-2015 (para 16 of Judge Woolley's decision). Judge Woolley was
    satisfied that the claimant had established that  Mr  Amoako  exercised
    Treaty rights from 2010 until 26 2016 save for the duration of the  Gap
    Period. He was also not satisfied that  the  claimant  had  established
    that Mr Amoako exercised Treaty rights after 26 October 2016. Since the
    hearing before him took place on 8 September 2017, it follows  that  he
    was not satisfied that the claimant  had  established  that  Mr  Amoako
    exercised Treaty rights from 27 October 2016 until 8 September 2017.

 8. Judge Malone found that the claimant had  established  that  Mr  Amoako
    exercised Treaty rights from 2010 until 26 October 2016.

 9. It is therefore  obvious  that,  if,  pursuant  to  the  principles  in
    Devaseelan, Judge Malone erred in law in departing from the finding  of
    Judge Woolley that the claimant had  not  established  that  Mr  Amoako
    exercised Treaty rights of the duration of the Gap  Period,  the  error
    would be material to the outcome.

10. As recorded in Judge Woolley's decision (para 12) and  noted  by  Judge
    Malone (para 19), Mr Akohene declined an opportunity offered  by  Judge
    Woolley for an adjournment so that the claimant could submit  documents
    from HMRC, because (Mr Akohene said) Mr Amoako has not been paying  tax
    over the period as he should have been and  any  HMRC  documents  would
    therefore have had no  probative  value  (para  19  of  Judge  Malone's
    decision).

11. Finally, the Secretary of State's grounds in the instant  appeal  state
    that the claimant did not seek  to  challenge  the  decision  of  Judge
    Woolley. It would therefore appear  that  she  instead  chose  to  make
    another application to the Secretary of  State  about  2  months  after
    Judge Woolley's decision was promulgated, i.e. the  application  lodged
    on 5 December 2017. This was the application that was  the  subject  of
    the decision that, in turn, was the subject of the appeal before  Judge
    Malone.

Immigration history

12. The claimant entered the United Kingdom on 30  June  2010  having  been
    issued with an EEA family permit on 15 January 2010 on the basis of her
    marriage in Ghana on 16 August 2008 to Mr Amoako. She was  subsequently
    issued with a residence card on 23 November 2010.  Divorce  proceedings
    were commenced on 15 September 2017. The marriage was terminated  on  2
    October 2017 (qns 8.16-8.18 of the claimant's application).

Judge Malone's decision

13.  At  para  16  of  his  decision,  Judge  Malone  directed  himself  on
    Devaseelan. At para 18, he noted that the 5-year period in  respect  of
    the exercise by Mr Amoako of Treaty rights relied upon before  him  was
    the same 5-year period that had been relied upon before Judge  Woolley.
    At para 19, he noted that Judge Woolley found that  no  documents  were
    submitted to evidence  Mr  Amoako's  economic  activity  over  the  Gap
    Period.

14. At  paras  20-25  onwards,  Judge  Malone  considered  Judge  Woolley's
    assessment of the SN Letter. Judge Malone  took  the  view  that  Judge
    Woolley's  interpretation  of  the  SN  Letter  was  "an  impermissible
    interpretation or construction of the letter  in  question",  it  being
    "inconsistent with the letter's language" (para 24  of  his  decision),
    that Judge Woolley's conclusion as to what the letter meant "is  not  a
    "finding of fact", that he "cannot  accept  [Judge  Woolley's]  finding
    that follows from his interpretation of what the [SN Letter] meant" and
    that "I feel compelled to depart from it" (para 25  of  his  decision).
    Judge Malone then interpreted the SN Letter for himself, at paras 26-27
    of his decision. At para 29, Judge Malone  dealt  with  the  fact  that
    Judge Woolley had  found  the  claimant  and  Mr  Amoako  "unimpressive
    witnesses". He took the  view  that  Judge  Woolley's  doubts  did  not
    adversely affect his own positive finding as to  Mr  Amoako's  economic
    activity.

15. It is worth quoting, in full, Judge Malone's reasoning. He referred  to
    Judge Woolley, at times, as Judge Woolley and at times  as  the  judge.
    Paras 16-30 of Judge Malone's decision read:


        "16.     In accordance with the decision in Devaseelan  2002  UKIAT
             702, I must take IJ Woolley's findings of fact as my  starting
             point. I should follow his findings of fact, unless there  are
             good reasons justifying my departing from them.


        17,      [The claimant] claims she has permanent residence  on  the
             basis that she  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
             continuous  period  of  5  years  in   accordance   with   the
             Regulations. In the case under consideration,  "in  accordance
             with the Regulations" means while Mr. Amoako was  a  qualified
             person within the meaning  of  Regulation  6.  [The  claimant]
             claims that, at all material times,  Mr.  Amoako  has  been  a
             "worker".


        18.      The 5 year period Mr. Akohene sought to rely on before  me
             was the same as that he sought to rely on before  IJ  Woolley,
             years 2010-2015. In paragraph  28  of  his  determination,  IJ
             Woolley stated:


                 "The effect of this evidence is that  [the  claimant]  has
                  shown that her sponsor was a qualified  person  from  2010
                  until 20 July 2011, and then again from 5 April 2012 until
                  26 October 2016 (the last date shown on the bank statement
                  for money received from Smiths News)."


        19.      He found that there was a gap between 20 July 2011  and  5
             April 2012 because no documents had been submitted to evidence
             his  economic  activity  over  that  period.  The  Judge  also
             recorded that he had indicated he would have been amenable  to
             an application for an adjournment for [the claimant] to obtain
             documents from HMRC for the period in question.  However,  Mr.
             Akohene told me he declined the invitation on [the claimant]'s
             behalf, as Mr. Amoako had not been paying tax over the  period
             as he should have been and any HMRC documents would  therefore
             have had no probative value. There were documents  before  the
             Judge and me to show that [the claimant]  [sic?,  Mr  Amoako?]
             was in tax arrears.


        20.      To overcome the gap identified by the Judge,  Mr.  Akohene
             pointed to a letter from Smiths News dated  6  November  2015.
             The letter reads:


                 "I'm writing to confirm that Mr. Yaw  Amoako  has  been  a
                 delivery contractor with our company since  14/10/2010.  He
                 works on a contract basis renewable  yearly.  Mr.  Amoako's
                 yearly salary is around 34,000 Pounds.


                 If I can provide any additional information please contact
             me on 01793824038.


                 Yours sincerely
                 Kamran Kamm
                 Depot Manager Swindon."


        21.      The Judge found that Mr.  Amoako  had  worked  for  Smiths
             News. He had seen  his  bank  statements  evidencing  payments
             received from Smiths News. He also had an invoice submitted by
             Mr. Amoako to Smiths News for fees earned.


        22.      It is of critical importance that the Smiths News'  letter
             of 6 November 2015 was not in any way  challenged,  either  by
             the Respondent or by the Judge. The  letter  was  accepted  as
             genuine.


        23.      The Judge did not rehearse the terms of the  Smiths  News'
             letter in his  determination.  However,  he  wrote  of  it  as
             follows:


                 "As it [the letter] stands, however, the letter  does  not
                 show continuity of self-employment - it merely  shows  that
                 the sponsor began work for Smiths News in that  period  and
                 not that this work  has  been  carried  through  without  a
                 break."


        24.       That,  with  great  respect  to   IJ   Woolley,   is   an
             impermissible interpretation or construction of the letter  in
             question. It is inconsistent with the letter's language.  What
             the letter says is that  Mr.  Amoako  "has"  been  a  delivery
             contractor for Smiths  News  "since"  14  October  2010.  That
             statement connotes a continuous period  of  engagement  (self-
             employment) from October 2010 to  November  2015.  The  letter
             states that his engagement was renewed annually  by  contract.
             The letter gave his approximate annual earnings.


        25.      It is  with  regret  that  I  cannot  follow  the  Judge's
             conclusion as to the  meaning  of  Smiths  News'  letter.  His
             conclusion as to what the letter meant is not  a  "finding  of
             fact". However, I  cannot  accept  the  Judge's  finding  that
             follows from his  interpretation  of  what  the  Smiths  News'
             letter meant. I feel compelled to depart from it.


        26.      As I have recorded above, the Judge  accepted  Mr.  Amoako
             worked for  Smiths  News  at  some  stage  during  the  period
             identified in its letter of 6 November 2015. I had an  invoice
             submitted by Mr. Amoako to Smiths News. His bank statements up
             to September 2016 showed that Smiths News were making payments
             to him.


        27.      Had Mr. Amoako only been contracted  to  Smiths  News  for
             part of the period 14 October 2010 to 6 November 2015, I would
             have expected the letter of 6 November 2015 to have made  that
             clear. As I say, the language used means that Mr.  Amoako  has
             been a delivery contractor for Smiths News  since  14  October
             2010 and that his engagement has  been  renewed  on  a  yearly
             basis since  that  date  and  his  yearly  salary  was  around
             �34,000.


        28.      As one of Smiths News' delivery  contractors,  Mr.  Amoako
             might well not have worked every day. The bank statements show
             sizeable payments being made to Mr.  Amoako  on  23  September
             2016 and 30 September 2016. All that he had to show  was  that
             he was economically active over the period in question. I find
             that Smiths News' unchallenged  letter  demonstrates,  on  the
             balance of probabilities, that  Mr.  Amoako  was  economically
             active on a self-employed basis over  the  period  14  October
             2010 to 6 November 2015. That,  in  itself,  is  a  period  in
             excess of 5 years. I reiterate that the Judge found Mr. Amoako
             had been a qualified person from 2010 to 26 October 2016  (the
             date of the last payment from Smiths  News  appearing  in  his
             bank statements), apart from over the period 20 July 2011 to 5
             April 2012.


        29.      IJ Woolley found [the  claimant]  and  Mr.  Amoako  to  be
             "unimpressive" witnesses. He based that conclusion essentially
             on doubts as to the addresses Mr. Amoako  had  given  and  the
             fact that [the claimant] knew little of Mr. Amoako's  economic
             activities generally. None of those doubts adversely  affected
             his positive finding as to Mr. Amoako's economic activity. The
             Judge also records that, when [the claimant] was asked whether
             she and Mr. Amoako were living together, she stated  that  she
             "had been through a lot of stress". That answer would indicate
             that she and Mr. Amoako had or  were  having  difficulties.  I
             have no knowledge of whether they were living together at  the
             time  of  the  hearing  before  IJ  Woolley.  There   was   no
             requirement in law that they should be  living  together.  The
             parties obtained a decree absolute on 2 October 2017, after IJ
             Woolley had heard [the claimant]'s appeal.


        30.      I therefore conclude that [the claimant] has demonstrated,
             to the requisite standard, that Mr.  Amoako  was  continuously
             active on a self-employed basis over  the  period  14  October
             2010 to 26 October 2016, the date found by IJ Woolley. I  find
             he was resident in the United Kingdom throughout that period."

Devaseelan

16. Since the Devaseelan principles were referred to in the grounds and  in
    submissions, this is a convenient point at which  to  quote  them.  The
    guidelines are at paras 37-42 which I quote in  full.  The  underlining
    and italicising is mine. Paras 37-42 of Devaseelan read:


        "d.  Our guidelines on procedure in second appeals


         37. We  consider  that  the  proper  approach  lies  between  that
             advocated by Mr Lewis and that advocated by  Miss  Giovanetti,
             but  considerably   nearer   to   the   latter.    The   first
             Adjudicator's  determination  stands  (unchallenged,  or   not
             successfully challenged) as an assessment  of  the  claim  the
             Appellant was then making, at the time of that  determination.
             It is not binding on the second Adjudicator; but, on the other
             hand, the second Adjudicator is not hearing an appeal  against
             it.  As an assessment of the  matters  that  were  before  the
             first  Adjudicator   it   should   simply   be   regarded   as
             unquestioned.  It may be built upon, and,  as  a  result,  the
             outcome of the hearing before the second  Adjudicator  may  be
             quite different from what might  have  been  expected  from  a
             reading of the first determination only.  But it  is  not  the
             second Adjudicator's role to consider  arguments  intended  to
             undermine the first Adjudicator's determination.


         38. The second Adjudicator must, however be careful  to  recognise
             that the issue before him is not the issue that was before the
             first Adjudicator.  In particular, time has  passed;  and  the
             situation  at   the   time   of   the   second   Adjudicator's
             determination may be shown to be  different  from  that  which
             obtained previously.  Appellants may want to  ask  the  second
             Adjudicator to consider arguments on issues that were not - or
             could not  be  -  raised  before  the  first  Adjudicator;  or
             evidence that was not - or could not have been - presented  to
             the first Adjudicator.


         39. In our view the second Adjudicator should treat  such  matters
             in the following way.


               1) The first Adjudicator's determination should always be the
                  starting-point.  It is the authoritative assessment of the
                  Appellant's status at the time it was made.  In  principle
                  issues  such  as  whether  the  Appellant   was   properly
                  represented, or whether he gave evidence,  are  irrelevant
                  to this.


               2)   Facts   happening   since   the   first    Adjudicator's
                  determination can always be  taken  into  account  by  the
                  second  Adjudicator.   If  those  facts  lead  the  second
                  Adjudicator to the conclusion that, at  the  date  of  his
                  determination  and  on  the  material  before   him,   the
                  appellant  makes  his  case,  so  be  it.   The   previous
                  decision, on the material before the first Adjudicator and
                  at that date, is not inconsistent.


               3)   Facts   happening   before   the   first   Adjudicator's
                  determination but having no relevance to the issues before
                  him can  always  be  taken  into  account  by  the  second
                  Adjudicator.  The first Adjudicator  will  not  have  been
                  concerned with such facts, and his determination is not an
                  assessment of them.


        40.      We now pass to matters that could  have  been  before  the
             first Adjudicator but were not.


               4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not  brought  to
                  the attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were
                  relevant to the issues before him, should  be  treated  by
                  the second Adjudicator with the  greatest  circumspection.
                  An Appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to add  to  the
                  available facts in an effort to obtain a  more  favourable
                  outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the point
                  of  view  of  credibility.   (Although  considerations  of
                  credibility will  not  be  relevant  in  cases  where  the
                  existence of the additional fact is beyond  dispute.)   It
                  must also be borne in mind that  the  first  Adjudicator's
                  determination was made at a  time  closer  to  the  events
                  alleged and in terms  of  both  fact-finding  and  general
                  credibility assessment would tend to have  the  advantage.
                  For this reason, the adduction of such  facts  should  not
                  usually lead to any  reconsideration  of  the  conclusions
                  reached by the first Adjudicator.


               5) Evidence of other facts - for example country  evidence  -
                  may not suffer from the same concerns as  to  credibility,
                  but  should  be  treated  with  caution.   The  reason  is
                  different from that in (4).  Evidence dating  from  before
                  the determination of the first Adjudicator might well have
                  been relevant if it had been tendered to him: but  it  was
                  not, and  he  made  his  determination  without  it.   The
                  situation in the Appellant's own country at  the  time  of
                  that determination is very  unlikely  to  be  relevant  in
                  deciding whether the Appellant's removal at  the  time  of
                  the second Adjudicator's determination  would  breach  his
                  human rights.  Those representing the Appellant  would  be
                  better advised to assemble  up-to-date  evidence  than  to
                  rely on material that is (ex hypothesi) now rather dated.


        41.      The final major category of case is  where  the  Appellant
             claims that his removal would breach Article 3  for  the  same
             reason that he claimed to be a refugee.


               6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant  relies  on
                  facts that are not materially different from those put  to
                  the first Adjudicator, and proposes to support  the  claim
                  by what is in essence the same evidence as that  available
                  to the Appellant at  that  time,  the  second  Adjudicator
                  should  regard  the  issues  as  settled  by   the   first
                  Adjudicator's determination and make his findings in  line
                  with that determination rather than allowing the matter to
                  be re-litigated.  We draw attention  to  the  phrase  'the
                  same evidence as that available to the Appellant'  at  the
                  time of the first  determination.   We  have  chosen  this
                  phrase not only in order to accommodate guidelines (4) and
                  (5) above, but also because, in respect of  evidence  that
                  was available to the Appellant, he must be taken  to  have
                  made his choices about how it  should  be  presented.   An
                  Appellant cannot be expected to present evidence of  which
                  he has no knowledge: but if (for example) he  chooses  not
                  to give oral evidence in his first appeal, that  does  not
                  mean that the issues or  the  available  evidence  in  the
                  second appeal are rendered any different by  his  proposal
                  to  give  oral  evidence  (of  the  same  facts)  on  this
                  occasion.


        42.       We  offer  two  further  comments,  which  are  not  less
             important than what precedes then.


             (7) The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines  (4)  and
                  (6) is greatly reduced if there is some very  good  reason
                  why the Appellant's failure to  adduce  relevant  evidence
                  before the first Adjudicator should not be,  as  it  were,
                  held against him.  We think such  reasons  will  be  rare.
                  There  is  an  increasing   tendency   to   suggest   that
                  unfavourable decisions by Adjudicators are  brought  about
                  by error or incompetence on the part  of  representatives.
                  New representatives blame old  representatives;  sometimes
                  representatives  blame  themselves  for   prolonging   the
                  litigation  by  their  inadequacy  (without,  of   course,
                  offering the public any compensation for  the  wrong  from
                  which  they   have   profited   by   fees).    Immigration
                  practitioners  come  within   the   supervision   of   the
                  Immigration Services Commissioner under part V of the 1999
                  Act.  He has power to register, investigate and cancel the
                  registration  of  any  practitioner,  and  solicitors  and
                  counsel  are,  in   addition,   subject   to   their   own
                  professional bodies.  An Adjudicator should be  very  slow
                  to conclude that an appeal before another Adjudicator  has
                  been materially affected by a  representative's  error  or
                  incompetence; and such a finding should always be reported
                  (through arrangements made by the  Chief  Adjudicator)  to
                  the Immigration Services Commissioner.


           Having said that, we do accept that there will be occasional
             cases where the circumstances of the first appeal were such
             that it would be right for the second Adjudicator to look at
             the matter as if the first determination had never been made.
             (We think it unlikely that the second Adjudicator would, in
             such a case, be able to build very meaningfully on the first
             Adjudicator's determination; but we emphasise that, even in
             such a case, the first determination stands as the
             determination of the first appeal.)


           (8)   We do not suggest that, in the foregoing, we have  covered
                  every possibility.  By covering the major categories  into
                  which second appeals  fall,  we  intend  to  indicate  the
                  principles for dealing with such appeals.  It will be  for
                  the second Adjudicator to decide which of them is  or  are
                  appropriate in any given case."

The grounds

17. The grounds contend that Judge Malone failed to apply Devaseelan and in
    doing so, he permitted the claimant to re-litigate her  appeal  on  the
    same arguments that were before Judge Woolley. Judge Malone should have
    decided that the matter had been settled unless  the  claimant  adduced
    new evidence. Judge Malone failed to  give  adequate  reasons  why  the
    claimant's attempt to re-litigate the same matter did not fall squarely
    within the circumstance identified at para 41(6) of  Devaseelan.  As  a
    result, Judge Malone had caused unfairness to the Secretary  of  State.
    Judge Malone should have approached the matter with "greatest scrutiny"
    especially in  view  of  the  claimant's  claims  that  Mr  Amoako  was
    attempting to hide his tax evasion from the HMRC. Judge  Malone  should
    have considered the matter as settled and not seek to go  behind  Judge
    Woolley's findings by substituting his own assessment of the SN Letter.



Submissions

18. Mr Akohene confirmed that the bank statements mentioned at paras 26 and
    28 of Judge Malone's decision  were  also  before  Judge  Woolley  and,
    further, that these bank statements do not cover the Gap Period.

19. I raised with the parties whether the relevant guidelines in Devaseelan
    were guidelines (1), (6) and  (7)  and  whether  Judge  Malone's  self-
    direction at para 16 of his decision was correct.

20. For the Secretary of State, Mr Avery submitted that  the  claimant  had
    done nothing to address Judge Woolley's concerns in the  appeal  before
    Judge Malone. Para 16 of Judge Malone's  decision,  where  he  directed
    himself  on  Devaseelan,  represented  a  serious  contraction  of  the
    guidelines in Devaseelan. Mr Avery drew my attention to  guideline  (7)
    of Devaseelan which concerns cases in which new evidence  is  submitted
    to the second judge, whereas there was in fact no new  evidence  before
    Judge Malone.  Mr Avery  submitted  that  para  16  of  Judge  Malone's
    decision appears to be his shorthand for the Devaseelan guidelines.

21. Pursuant to Devaseelan, Judge  Malone  had  to  treat  Judge  Woolley's
    findings as a starting point. The issues were the same.  There  was  no
    new evidence before Judge Malone. It was therefore difficult to see how
    Judge Malone could legitimately depart from Judge Woolley's findings.

22. Mr Avery submitted that, in any event, Judge Malone's assessment of the
    SN Letter was narrow. He failed to take into account that there was  no
    evidence of continuity of Mr Amoako's employment. The SN Letter is very
    short on specifics. Judge Woolley had considered the SN Letter  in  the
    round, taking into account all of the evidence  before  him,  including
    the oral evidence of the claimant and Mr Amoako.

23. Mr Akohene submitted that Judge Malone's self-direction at para  16  of
    his decision was correct. He submitted that it was  correct  for  Judge
    Malone to say that Judge  Woolley's  findings  were  a  starting  point
    unless there were good reasons justifying departing from them. The text
    underlined in the quote from para  37  of  Devaseelan  shows  that  the
    findings of Judge Woolley were not binding and that  Judge  Malone  was
    correct to say that he could depart from Judge  Woolley's  findings  if
    there were good reasons for doing so.

24. At para 22 of his decision, Judge Malone noted that the SN  Letter  had
    not been challenged by the Secretary of State. At  para  25,  he  said,
    correctly in Mr Akohene's submission, that Judge  Woolley's  conclusion
    as to what the SN Letter meant was  not  a  "finding  of  fact".  Judge
    Malone said that there were facts stated in the SN Letter that were not
    challenged by the Secretary of State or Judge Woolley.

25. Mr Akohene submitted that Judge  Malone  was  entitled  to  assess  the
    statements of fact in the SN Letter and reach his own finding of  fact.
    He found  that  there  were  good  reasons  for  departing  from  Judge
    Woolley's finding that the claimant had not established that Mr  Amoako
    exercised Treaty rights for the duration of the Gap Period.  Since  the
    SN Letter was a short letter, Judge Malone's reasoning did not need  to
    be elaborate. At para 24, he said that Judge  Woolley's  interpretation
    of the SN Letter was "impermissible" and at para 25, he  said  that  he
    could not  accept  Judge  Woolley's  finding  that  followed  from  his
    interpretation of the SN Letter and that he felt  compelled  to  depart
    from it.

26. In response, Mr Avery drew  my  attention  to  the  text  that  I  have
    italicised in my quote of para 37 of Devaseelan, which he submitted was
    the context in which the text that Mr Akohene relied  upon,  which  has
    been underlined, must be considered. In the instant case, the  claimant
    had not built upon the case that she advanced before Judge Woolley. The
    fact  that  Judge  Malone  did   not   agree   with   Judge   Woolley's
    interpretation of a specific piece of evidence was not  a  good  enough
    reason to depart from Judge Woolley's findings. He asked me to consider
    the public interest in finality of litigation.

27. I reserved my decision. I asked the parties what the position would  be
    if I decided that Judge Malone had materially erred in law  in  law.  I
    said that it seemed to me that, if I concluded that he  had  materially
    erred in law, it must follow that I would re-make the decision  on  the
    appeal and dismiss the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision without the need for a  further  hearing.  Mr  Akohene
    agreed that that was correct.  He did not  suggest  that  the  claimant
    would seek to adduce further documentary or oral evidence.



Assessment

28. Mr Akohene relied upon the words I have underlined in  the  quote  from
    para 37  of  Devaseelan.  He  therefore  submitted  that,  pursuant  to
    Devaseelan, Judge Woolley's finding concerning the Gap Period  was  not
    binding on Judge Malone. Not only does Mr Akohene's submission in  this
    regard ignore the fact that the underlined words should be read in  the
    context of words that I have italicised in my quote of 37 of Devaseelan
    (where the Tribunal said that an applicant may build upon a case, which
    does not apply in the instant case because the claimant did  not  build
    upon her case before Judge  Malone),  it  ignores  the  fact  that  the
    Tribunal then proceeded to formulate its principles, at para 39 onwards
    of its decision.

29. In Devaseelan, the Tribunal  formulated  seven  principles.  Principles
    (2), (3), (4) and (5) are plainly not applicable in  the  circumstances
    of the instant case for reasons which are obvious,  i.e.  the  claimant
    did not rely upon any facts  happening  since  the  decision  of  Judge
    Woolley; she did  not  rely  upon  any  facts  happening  before  Judge
    Woolley's decision which were not relevant to the issues  before  Judge
    Woolley; she did not rely upon facts personal  to  her  that  were  not
    brought to the attention of Judge Woolley and  that  were  relevant  to
    Judge Woolley's decision; and country guidance evidence was not  relied
    upon in either appeal.

30. Only principles (1), (6) and (7) potentially apply.

31. Plainly, Judge Malone was aware of principle (1) of Devaseelan since he
    said that Judge Woolley's findings were a starting point. However,  the
    fact that he departed from Judge Woolley's finding notwithstanding that
    he did not have any new evidence  demonstrates  that  he  misunderstood
    principles (1), (6) and (7). It is plain from principle  (6)  that,  if
    the facts relied upon  before  the  second  judge  are  not  materially
    different and an applicant proposes to reply upon what  is  in  essence
    the same evidence "as was available to the applicant at that time", the
    second judge should treat the issues as settled by  the  first  judge's
    decision and make his findings in line with that decision  rather  than
    allow the matter to be re-litigated.

32. Principle  (7),  which  refers  to  "some  very  good  reason  why  [an
    applicant's] failure to adduce  relevant  evidence  before  [the  first
    judge] should not be, as it were held against  him",  only  comes  into
    play if the second judge had before him relevant evidence that was  not
    before the first judge. However, as Judge Malone did  not  have  before
    him any new evidence at all, principle (7) was inapplicable.

33. Accordingly, on the material before Judge Malone, only  principles  (1)
    and (6) applied. These make no mention of  "good  reasons"  to  justify
    departing from the findings of  the  first  judge.  Accordingly,  Judge
    Malone's reference to "good reasons justifying my departing from [Judge
    Woolley's findings of  fact]"  was  based  upon  a  misapprehension  of
    principles (1), (6) and (7) of Devaseelan as a consequence of which  he
    misdirected himself in law.

34. I am therefore satisfied that Judge Malone did err in law. To  conclude
    otherwise would not only be unfair to the Secretary of State  it  would
    be  contrary  to  the  strong  public  interest  in  the  finality   of
    litigation.

35. Given that the material fact relied upon before Judge  Malone  was  the
    same as the material fact relied upon before  Judge  Woolley  (that  Mr
    Amoako had exercised Treaty rights for the duration of the Gap  Period)
    and that the claimant relied upon the same evidence as she relied  upon
    in the appeal before Judge Woolley (i.e. the SN Letter),  Judge  Malone
    was bound to make his findings  in  line  with  the  finding  of  Judge
    Woolley pursuant to principles (1) and (6) of  Devaseelan.  If  he  had
    done so, he would have been bound to find that  the  claimant  had  not
    established that Mr Amoako had exercised Treaty rights for the duration
    of the Gap Period and therefore he would have been bound to dismiss the
    appeal. The error of law was therefore material.

36. I therefore set aside Judge Malone's decision in its entirety.

37. It is not necessary for  me  to  consider  for  myself  Judge  Malone's
    assessment of the SN Letter and whether or not the Secretary  of  State
    had disputed the statements of fact in the SN Letter. If I were  to  do
    so, I would myself be departing  from  the  Devaseelan  principles  and
    permitting the claimant to re-litigate the appeal that she lost  before
    Judge Woolley.

38. As stated at para 27 above, Mr  Akohene  agreed  that,  if  I  were  to
    conclude that Judge Malone materially erred in law and  set  aside  his
    decision, I would proceed to re-make the  decision  on  the  claimant's
    appeal without the need for a further hearing. He did not suggest  that
    the claimant would seek to adduce further documentary or oral evidence.



39. I therefore proceed to re-make the decision on the claimant's appeal.

40. Principle (6) of Devaseelan applies given the following facts:

    i)      The claimant has not provided any new evidence. She relies upon
        the same evidence as was considered by Judge Woolley.

    ii)     The material issue before Judge Woolley and the material  issue
        before me is the same, i.e. whether Mr Amoako had exercised  Treaty
        rights for a qualifying period of 5 years. This turns upon  whether
        he had exercised Treaty rights for the duration of the Gap Period.

    iii)    Judge Woolley found that the claimant had not established  that
        Mr Amoako exercised Treaty rights  for  the  duration  of  the  Gap
        Period.

41. Accordingly, I treat the issue of whether Mr  Amoako  exercised  Treaty
    rights for the duration of the Gap Period as settled by the decision of
    Judge Woolley. I therefore make my finding, in line with the finding of
    Judge Woolley, that the claimant has not  established  that  Mr  Amoako
    exercised Treaty rights for the duration of the Gap Period.  I  do  not
    allow the matter to be re-litigated.

42. I therefore dismiss the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision.

      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Malone  involved  the
    making of an error of law sufficient to require it to be set  aside.  I
    set it aside in its entirety.
    I have re-made the  decision  on  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision.  I  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.


[pic]Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                     Date:  27 January 2019
