
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01762/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th March 2018                    |On 6th April 2018                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               MR. BLERIM DAKU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kerr, Counsel, instructed by Karis Solicitors
Limited.
For the respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

          1. The appellant is a national of Albania. On 9th September  2015
             he applied for a residence card as confirmation of  his  right
             to reside in the United Kingdom  further  to  European  Treaty
             provisions.

          2. The application was on the basis of his relationship with  Mrs
             Ioana Tudor, a Romanian national.

          3. His application was refused on 12 October 2015. As  they  were
             not married it was considered on the basis he was claiming  to
             be  in  the  extended  family  member  category  of  the  2006
             regulations.  In  order  to  maintain  parity  with   domestic
             regulations the respondent expected him  to  demonstrate  they
             had been living together in a durable  relationship  evidenced
             by two years cohabitation. The  respondent  concluded  he  had
             failed to provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate this.

          4. The appellant and Mrs Ioana Tudor married on 23 October  2015.
             On 1 December 2015 he had made a fresh application, this  time
             on the basis he was  a  family  member  rather  than  extended
             family member because of his marriage.  That  application  was
             also refused.

          5. His appeal against the original decision of  12  October  2015
             was listed on 26 October 2016 and adjourned so as to give  him
             an opportunity to vary his grounds of appeal  to  include  his
             new status. At the resumed hearing on  30  March  2017  before
             First-tier Tribunal Judge L Rahman the grounds of  appeal  had
             not been amended. This left only the original decision  of  12
             October 2015 based upon him being an  extended  family  member
             rather than an immediate family member.

          6. In a decision promulgated on 21  April  2017  the  appeal  was
             dismissed. The  judge  found  that  in  line  with  the  Upper
             Tribunal decision of Sala (EFM's: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT
             00411there was no appealable decision insofar as it related to
             him being an extended family member.

          7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted in
             light of the Court of Appeal decision of Khan -v- SSHD  [2017]
             EWCA Civ 1755 which held that the decision in Sala was wrong.

          8. At hearing, I was advised that the appellant had been detained
             and in October 2017 left the country voluntarily. Mr S.  Kerr,
             Counsel, advised that his instructions were to proceed.

    Conclusions

          9. First-tier Tribunal Judge L Rahman materially erred in law  as
             it is now understood. This is because of the Court  of  Appeal
             decision of Khan -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 which held that
             the decision in Sala  was  wrong.  The  Supreme  Court  in  SM
             (Algeria) -v- ECO [2018] UKSC 9 has reaffirmed Khan -v- SSHD.

         10. Given the factual issues which  will  have  to  be  decided  a
             remittal is called for.




    Decision


    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge L Rahman materially errs in
    law and is set aside. There are no material facts to preserve. The
    matter is remitted for a de novo hearing before the First tier
    Tribunal.




    Francis J Farrelly


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                   30th March 2018








    Directions.

          1. Relist for a  de  novo  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge L Rahman.

          2. The appellant's representatives are to confirm with the  First
             tier Tribunal Office that the appeal is  being  pursued  given
             the appellant has left the country.

          3. If the appeal is being  pursued  they  should  advise  if  the
             grounds of appeal have been amended to include his  status  as
             husband.

          4. They are to advise if an interpreter is required. It may be if
             the appellant and his wife are giving  evidence  Albanian  and
             Romanian  interpreters  will  be  required  but  is  for   the
             representatives to advise.

          5. The appellant's  representatives  are  to  prepare  an  appeal
             bundle demonstrating the necessary exercise of  Treaty  rights
             and documentation to  confirm  the  appellant's  marriage  and
             evidence  of  the  ongoing  relationship.  Paternity  of   any
             children of the union should be demonstrated.

          6. It is anticipated the hearing should last 1 - 1.30 hours.




    Francis J Farrelly


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge 30th March 2018


