
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01449/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 February 2018                            |On 1 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                           boubacar cherif diallo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, Solicitor, Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Guinea born on 16 August 1982 who  claims
    to have married a Dutch national on 13 June 2013 under Guinean law.

 2. On 13 July 2016 the appellant applied for a residence card to confirm a
    right of residence in the UK as a family member of an EEA national  who
    is a qualified person under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
    ("the 2006 Regulations").  On  2  February  2017  the  application  was
    refused by the respondent on the basis that the appellant had failed to
    provide sufficient evidence to show he entered into a marriage that was
    valid under the law of Guinea.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal  was
    considered on the papers by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fowell.
    In a decision promulgated on 8 May 2017 the judge dismissed the appeal.
     The appellant is now appealing against that decision.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Judge Fowell found that the appellant had not established that  he  was
    married to, and consequently a family member of, an EEA national  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.  His  primary  reason  for  so
    finding was that the evidence adduced by the appellant to show  he  was
    married was not admissible.  The appellant  had  submitted  a  marriage
    certificate written in the French language without a translation.   The
    judge observed that under Rule 12(5) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules, if a document is provided to the Tribunal that is  not
    in English it must be accompanied by an English translation.  The judge
    noted that the absence of a translation was raised by the respondent in
    the refusal letter,  making  it  surprising  that  no  translation  was
    submitted in the appeal.

 5. The judge also considered articles of the Guinean Civil Code concerning
    the  requirements  for  a  proxy  marriage  that  were  quoted  in  the
    respondent's  refusal  letter  and  had  not  been  challenged  by  the
    appellant. The judge evaluated these and concluded that  they  had  not
    been complied with by the appellant and sponsor.

 6. At paragraphs 7 and 8 of the decision the judge considered whether  the
    appellant could appeal the respondent's decision on the basis  that  he
    was an extended family member of an EEA national.  The judge found that
    there was no jurisdiction to hear such an appeal in light of the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in Sala (EFM - right of appeal) Albania  [2016]  UKUT
    411. No factual findings were made on issues relevant  to  whether  the
    appellant was an extended family member (such as if he was in a durable
    relationship with an EEA national).



Grounds of appeal and submissions

 7. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge made  an  error  of  law  by
    following Sala and failing to consider  whether  the  appellant  is  an
    extended family member of an  EEA  national.   The  grounds  also  make
    several criticisms of the judge's assessment of whether  the  appellant
    and his sponsor are family members under the 2006 Regulations.

 8. Before me, Mr Nwaekwu, on behalf of the appellant, made clear that  the
    only issue being taken with  the  decision  of  Judge  Fowell  was  the
    failure to consider whether the appellant and the sponsor were extended
    family members and that no challenge was  being  made  to  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant is not a family member of an EEA national.

 9. Mr Tarlow accepted that in light of the recent decision by the Court of
    Appeal in Khan  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    jurisdiction to consider whether the appellant was an  extended  family
    member and it was an error of law to find otherwise.



Analysis

10. Judge Fowell correctly followed the then binding decision of Sala  when
    finding that the First -tier Tribunal lacked jurisdiction  to  hear  an
    appeal  on  whether  the  appellant  was  an  extended  family  member.
    However, Sala has been overturned by the Court of Appeal in Khan  which
    made clear that the First-tier Tribunal in  fact  has  jurisdiction  to
    hear appeals under the 2006 Regulations on whether an appellant  is  an
    extended family member. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    respect of whether the appellant is an extended family member therefore
    cannot stand.

11. On the other hand, no error of law has been made in the  assessment  of
    whether the appellant is a family member of an EEA national.  In  order
    to establish that he was married to the sponsor, the  appellant  needed
    to submit, at the very minimum, his marriage certificate. The  Tribunal
    procedure rules make clear that an  English  translation  is  required.
    Moreover, the necessity of an English translation had been  highlighted
    by the respondent. In these circumstances, the judge  was  entitled  to
    exclude  the   untranslated   purported   marriage   certificate   from
    consideration and having  done  so  it  inevitably  followed  that  the
    appellant could not show he was a family member of an EEA national.  In
    any event, Mr Nwaekwu made  clear  at  the  hearing  that  the  judge's
    decision regarding the appellant not being a family member  of  an  EEA
    national was not being challenged.

12. Accordingly, the decision of Judge Fowell in  respect  of  whether  the
    appellant is a family member stands but his decision as to whether  the
    appellant is an extended family member will need to be remade. As there
    has been no consideration of the factual circumstances relevant to  the
    question of whether the appellant is an extended family member,  it  is
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so
    that appropriate findings of fact can be made.



Notice of Decision

13. The appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  regarding
    whether the appellant is an extended family member is allowed.

14. The appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  regarding
    whether the appellant is a family member is dismissed.

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  tribunal  in  order  for  the
    issue of whether the appellant is an extended family member of  an  EEA
    national under the 2006 Regulations be determined by a judge other than
    Judge Fowell.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  25 February 2018     |

