
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02514/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th June 2017                             |On 27th June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr samet vucaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phull, promulgated on 4th October 2016,  following  a  hearing  a
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 12th July 2016, in which the judge  allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant for the refusal of his  residence  card  as
    the extended family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights,
    with the appeal being determined under Regulation 26 of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Albania, who  was  born  on  29th
    February 1988.  He had been issued with a residence card on  the  basis
    that he was in a durable relationship with an EEA national, Ms  Dulama,
    and the judge heard the evidence from the witnesses before her,  before
    concluding that there was indeed a durable relationship, such that  the
    appeal stood to be allowed.

Grounds of Application

 3. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  erred  in  assuming
    jurisdiction in relation to the appeal of a person who wished to remain
    in the UK as an "extended family member of an EEA national" because the
    case of Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 established that
    there is no statutory right of  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State not to grant a residence card to a  person  claiming
    to be an extended family member.

 4. The judge here had materially erred in law in considering the appeal by
    way of a reference  to  Regulation  8.   When  the  Appellant  made  an
    application for a residence card on the basis that he was an  unmarried
    partner of an EEA national, the judge ought  to  have  found  that  the
    Appellant did not have the right to appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision, to issue a  residence  card  to  an  extended  family
    member.

 5. On 13th December 2016, permission to appeal was granted on this  basis,
    namely, that there was no jurisdiction in the Tribunal to entertain the
    appeal.

 6. Pursuant to the aforesaid, the Upper  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
    appeal with the observation that given the case of Sala, the First-tier
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the Appellant's appeal and  should
    have found that there was no valid appeal before her.

 7. There were arguable errors of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me on 13th June 2017, there was no appearance  on
    behalf of the Appellant by any legal representative,  even  though  the
    matter had been set down for an oral hearing.

 9. For her part, Ms Aboni, appearing  as  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, submitted that she would rely upon the Grounds of Appeal,  and
    observe only that the decision in Sala was given on 19th  August  2016,
    and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge ought to have been aware of this
    by the time that she had signed off her determination,  for  it  to  be
    promulgated on 4th October 2016.

Notice of Decision

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law because this is a  case  where
    the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal  of  a
    person applying for a residence card on the basis of being an  extended
    family member  of  an  EEA  national.   The  fact  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction meant that there was no valid  appeal  before  the  judge.
    Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11. There is no valid appeal in this matter.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th June 2017

