
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02211/2018
                                                               EA/02562/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th April 2019                   |On 03rd May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                  FOZIA [T]
                                    [P T]
                       (anonymity NOT direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. A Khan; instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Pakistan.  The second appellant is  the
    daughter of the first appellant. The  appellants  applied  for  an  EEA
    family permit to join Mr  [MB],  a  Belgian  national,  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The first appellant claims to be the wife of Mr [B]  and  the
    second appellant claims to be his step-daughter.  The applications were
    refused by the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") for the reasons set  out
    in the decisions dated 7th December 2017. The  ECO  was  not  satisfied
    that the first appellant has genuinely formed a  relationship  with  Mr
    [B], and was not therefore satisfied that  the  appellants  are  family
    members of an EEA national in  accordance  with  Regulation  7  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
    Regulations").  The ECO was not satisfied that the appellants meet  all
    the requirements of Regulation 12 of the 2016 Regulations.


 2. The appellants appeal against those decisions, was heard by  First-tier
    Tribunal  ("FtT")  Judge  A  W  Chambers.   The  Judge  dismissed   the
    appellants appeals against the  decisions  made  by  the  ECO  for  the
    reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 4th December 2018.  It  is
    that decision of the FtT Judge, that  is  the  subject  of  the  appeal
    before me.


 The decision of FtT Judge Chambers


 3. At paragraphs [2] to [5] of the  decision,  the  Judge  refers  to  the
    reasons given by the ECO for refusing the applications, and the reasons
    given by the Entry Clearance Manager for maintaining the decisions.  In
    addition to the matters relied upon previously, at the hearing  of  the
    appeal the Home Office Presenting Officer  raised  concerns  about  the
    evidence provided regarding the dissolution of  the  sponsor's  earlier
    marriage.


 4. At paragraphs [6] to [9] of  the  decision,  the  Judge  sets  out  the
    evidence and submissions heard  by  the  Tribunal.  On  behalf  of  the
    respondent  it  was  submitted  that  the  appellants  have  failed  to
    establish that the sponsor had gone through the correct  procedure  for
    divorce in Pakistan.  The Judge's findings and conclusions are set  out
    at paragraphs [10] to [13] of the decision.   At  paragraphs  [12]  and
    [13] of the decision, the Judge concluded as follows.


         "12. It is not shown to the degree requisite namely the balance  of
         probabilities, that the sponsor obtained a divorce in  the  correct
         manner; as a result of appropriate proceedings or  that  there  had
         been appropriate notification to the Chairman of the Union  Council
         under the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance.


         13.  It is not shown pursuant to Regulation 7(1) of the Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 that the first  appellant
         is the sponsor's spouse or that her daughter, the second appellant,
         is the sponsors and stepdaughter. The appeal is dismissed."


The appeal before me


 5. In the grounds of appeal, it is said that the FtT Judge  erred  in  his
    conclusion that the sponsor has not obtained a divorce in  the  correct
    manner under the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance.  Although it is  correct
    that the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance applies to all Muslim citizens of
    Pakistan wherever they may be, Ahmadis are not considered  Muslims  for
    the purposes of Pakistani laws. The appellants draw  attention  to  the
    country  guidance  decision  in  MN  and  Others  (Ahmadis  -   country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389  in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal noted  that  in  1973  the  Pakistan  Parliament  amended  the
    Constitution, effectively declaring Ahmadis (together with a number  of
    other minority religions) to be non-Muslims. The appellants also  refer
    to  the  respondent's  Country  of  Origin  Information  and  Guidance:
    Pakistan: Interfaith Marriage (Version 1) January 2016  which  confirms
    that marriages in Pakistan are registered and performed according to  a
    persons religious group.


 6.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  O'Callaghan
    on 1st March 2018.  The matter comes before me to consider whether  the
    decision of the FtT Judge involved the making of a  material  error  of
    law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


 7. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bates accepts that  the  conclusion  of
    the FtT Judge that the appellants sponsor had not obtained a divorce in
    the correct manner as  a  result  of  appropriate  proceedings,  or  by
    appropriate notification to the Chairman of the Union Council under the
    Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, is irrational. He  accepts  that,  as  an
    Ahmadi, the appellants sponsor is not considered to be a Muslim for the
    purposes of Pakistani laws, and that he would be treated  in  much  the
    same way as members of other faiths.  He concedes that the decision  of
    the FtT Judge is infected by a material mistake as to fact,  such  that
    there is an error of law, and the decision should be set aside.


 8. As to disposal, Mr Bates submits that the FtT Judge  failed  to  engage
    with the underlying concerns that had been expressed by the ECO in  the
    decisions of 7th December 2017, regarding the relationship between  the
    first appellant and the sponsor. The ECO was  not  satisfied  that  the
    first appellant has genuinely formed a relationship with  the  sponsor,
    and  that  their  marriage  is  subsisting.  Having  decided  that  the
    appellant's sponsor had not obtained a divorce in the  correct  manner,
    the FtT Judge  did  not  go  on  to  address  the  concerns  about  the
    relationship.  In the circumstances, the appropriate course is that the
    matter be remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh.


 9. Mr Khan on  behalf  of  appellant  submitted  that  the  focus  of  the
    Presenting Officer before the FtT, appears to have  been  upon  whether
    the appellant's sponsor had obtained a divorce in the  correct  manner.
    It is now accepted that the decision of the FtT Judge in that  respect,
    is erroneous.  Mr Khan accepted that the Judge had  failed  to  address
    the concerns about the relationship between the first appellant and the
    sponsor, the issue that was at the heart of the decisions made  by  the
    ECO.


10. As to the disposal of the appeal, both Mr Bates and Mr Khan submit that
    the appropriate course is therefore for the matter to  be  remitted  to
    the FtT for hearing afresh. I consider  that  where  a  first  instance
    decision is set aside on the basis of  an  error  of  law  involving  a
    mistake as to fact, the appropriate course is to remit the matter to  a
    newly constituted FtT for a fresh hearing.  I have taken  into  account
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th
    September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature  and
    extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


11. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing in due course.





 Notice of Decision


12. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Chambers  promulgated
    on 4th December 2018 is set aside.


13. The matter is remitted to the FtT for rehearing afresh with no findings
    preserved.


Signed                                  Date          30th April 2019

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


I have remitted the matter to the FtT and a decision  as  to  whether  there
should be a fee award will be made by the FtT.


Signed                                  Date          30th April 2019

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




