

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number
EA/02138/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
 Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 11th April 2018
     On 25th April 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                           REGINA OMENEBELLE OFEKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr V Ogunbusola (Counsel, instructed by Chancery
CS Solicitors)
For the Respondent:      Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied for a residence card as the dependent of her son,
   the Sponsor, who is a German citizen. The application was refused on the
   19th of October 2015. The Appellant's appeal was first heard by First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Hemborough who dismissed the appeal for the reasons
   given in a decision promulgated on the 13th of April 2016. That decision
   was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on the 20th of October 2016
   and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. On that basis the
   appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis at Hatton Cross on
   the 28th of June 2017, the appeal was allowed for the reasons given in
   the decision promulgated on the 4th of July 2017.

2. The Judge found that the Appellant, a family member of an EEA national
   in the UK exercising treaty rights, was not working in the UK and that
   she was dependent on the Sponsor for her basis needs.
3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
   in grounds of application of the 14th of July 2017. Concentrating on
   paragraph 34 of the decision which was set out in the grounds it was
   argued that the Judge had reversed the burden of proof to the Secretary
   of State to prove another source of funds. The failure of the Appellant
   to provide credible evidence to the appropriate standard meant that the
   Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof relying on MA(Somalia)
   [2010] UKSC 49 (IAC) at paragraphs 47-48. Initially rejected permission
   was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on the 15th of February 2018.

4. In paragraph 34 the Judge stated "Given the contrast between their
   witness statements and what emerged in cross-examination, there are
   reasons to consider that the Appellant and her son have not been entirely
   frank in their evidence. I have no evidence as to what the present status
   is of the Appellant's daughter, or of her involvement with her mother and
   her mother's needs. However, what I ultimately have to decide in this
   case is whether the Appellant is dependent for her basis needs on her EEA
   Sponsor in the United Kingdom. Whilst, as I say, there is reason to
   believe that the Appellant had another source of income in Nigeria, there
   is nothing of that nature in the United Kingdom, nor anything to suggest
   she is independently wealthy. She and her son have said that she is
   dependent on him in the United Kingdom, and while I have doubts about
   their evidence there is nothing in this case to suggest any other source
   of funds or to suggest that she is anything other than entirely dependent
   on her son for her basic needs in the United Kingdom. Accordingly, I am
   satisfied that she is dependent on her son, and the requirements of
   regulation 7 are met. The appeal must be allowed."


5. At the hearing the Home Office relied on the grounds of appeal and the
   grant of permission. In submissions it was maintained that paragraph 34
   was contaminated by error by shifting the burden. The Judge had doubted
   their evidence and the credibility and the error lay in the Judge looking
   for evidence of other funds. If the Judge found that the Appellant had
   not made out the claim then it followed that the Appellant had not
   discharged the burden of proof. The evidence had been found largely
   unreliable.


6. Not surprisingly the Appellant's representative maintained that the
   Judge had not erred. Although the Judge had doubts about some of the
   evidence he found that the Appellant was entirely reliant on the Sponsor.
   There was no alternative suggestion and no other evidence.


7. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I found that there was no
   error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and reserved my decision
   and reasons which now follow. There are criticisms to be made of the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal which could have been more
   effectively worded. It would have been helpful if the Judge had said
   exactly what his doubts were with regard to the evidence that would have
   helped to place the findings then made in context.


8. However the decision is sustainable as the Judge set out his findings in
   this form "there is nothing in this case to suggest any other source of
   funds or to suggest that she is anything other than entirely dependent on
   her son". The basic finding of the Judge was that the Appellant is
   dependent on her son, the Sponsor, that was justified on the evidence and
   it cannot be shown to be perverse or not otherwise open to the Judge on
   the evidence that was presented. The observations can be read that the
   Judge had regard to the overall picture presented by the evidence and not
   that the Home Office had any burden to discharge or that having failed to
   do so the Appellant won on that basis.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

The First-tier Tribunal order with regard to fees remains.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 23rd April 2018

