
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02586/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 November 2016                        |On 02 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                         KENNETH NEHIKHARE OSADOLOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Akindele, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 19 November 1980. On  27
    April 2015 he made an application for a residence card as  confirmation
    of a right of residence  as  the  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national, namely his sister, a citizen of Germany. That application was
    refused in a decision dated 29 October 2015.

 2. It seems that there had been an earlier application,  and  refusal,  of
    the same kind, that earlier decision having been dated 31 March 2015.

 3. The appellant's appeal against the later decision  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Duff ("the FtJ") on 21 January 2016.  He  dismissed
    the appeal under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the EEA Regulations"). Permission to appeal having been  granted
    in relation to that decision, the appeal came before me.

 4. The FtJ found that the  appellant  had  not  established  that  he  was
    dependent on the sponsor or a member of her household before he came to
    the UK and thus did not meet the requirements of regulation 8(2) of the
    EEA Regulations.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills  relied  on  the  decision  in  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) to the effect that  the
    appellant did not have a right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT"), and thus the FtJ had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 6. Mr Akindele was given time to consider that decision and the appeal was
    put back in the list to allow him to do so. I  then  heard  submissions
    from the parties on the issue of jurisdiction.

 7. Mr Akindele did not suggest that Sala was wrongly decided but contended
    that it illustrated that in certain circumstances there was a right  of
    appeal available to an extended family member who has  been  refused  a
    residence card. I was referred to [26] and  what  was  said  about  the
    rights of extended family members being derived  "from  the  procedural
    right  to  have  their  applications  determined  following   extensive
    examination of their personal circumstances."

 8. I was also referred to [86] where there is reference to  an  inadequate
    consideration by the Secretary of State of the reg 17(5) discretion  in
    examining that appellant's personal circumstances.

 9. As I understood the submissions on behalf of the appellant,  they  were
    to the effect that the respondent had not given adequate  consideration
    to the appellant's circumstances when considering the application for a
    residence card, and thus the appellant did in  fact  have  a  right  of
    appeal to the FtT. I was also referred  to  Yiadom  (Free  movement  of
    persons) [2000] EUECJ C-357/98, although no copy of it was provided. It
    was relied on for what it has to say about the availability  of  appeal
    rights.

10. Mr Mills submitted that the decision in Sala was clear, and the FtT had
    no jurisdiction to consider the appeal. At [46] of  that  decision,  it
    said the opposite of what is contended for on behalf of this appellant.
    The appellant  would  be  entitled  to  challenge  a  decision  of  the
    respondent on the refusal to issue a residence card by way of  judicial
    review.

    Conclusion

11. The decision in Sala seems to me to be clear and is  expressed  pithily
    in the headnote as follows: "There is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a Residence
    Card to a person claiming to be an Extended Family Member." There is no
    qualification to that conclusion along the lines suggested on behalf of
    the appellant before me, and indeed  Mr  Akindele's  submissions  would
    seem to run counter to the very basis of the decision in Sala.

12. Similarly, I cannot see that the decision in Yiadom has any bearing  on
    the matter, that being a case that was concerned with an  EEA  national
    (which this appellant is not), who was refused entry to the UK  on  the
    grounds of public policy, and whether such an individual is entitled to
    an in-country right of appeal.

13. The FtJ in this appeal referred to the appeal before him as  concerning
    the decision of the respondent dated 31 March  2015  whereas  there  is
    reason to believe that in fact the appeal concerned the later  decision
    dated 29 October 2015. The notice of appeal to the FtT  refers  to  the
    later decision. What appears to have been the FtJ's error here may have
    come about because  it  would  appear  that,  as  Mr  Mills  said,  the
    respondent's bundle only contained the earlier decision.

14. Be that as it may, whether in the case of  the  earlier  or  the  later
    decision, I am satisfied that the FtJ lacked jurisdiction to  hear  the
    appeal. I adopt and apply the reasoning  in  Sala.  Accordingly,  I  am
    satisfied that the FtJ erred in law in hearing the appeal at  all,  and
    his decision is set aside. Of course,  the  FtJ  could  not  have  been
    expected to have considered the jurisdiction point, since the  guidance
    in Sala was not available to him at the time he heard the appeal.

15. At the hearing I announced my  conclusion  to  the  above  effect,  and
    accordingly I did not invite submissions on the merits of the appeal.

    Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal  and  it
    erred in law in doing so.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal is set aside  and  a  decision  substituted  that
    there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            02 December 2016



