
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02348/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 September 2018                          |On 7 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                 IRYNA SYCH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees, Counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
                    Associates, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal of  the  appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing her a residence card as an extended  family  member
    of an EEA national.

 2. The grounds of appeal essentially make two points.  They  contend  that
    the First-tier Tribunal fundamentally misapplied the law  and  that  it
    conducted an unfair hearing.

 3. The second point, contending that the  proceedings  were  unfair,  adds
    nothing  to  the  case.  I  heard  full  argument  from  the   parties,
    particularly Mr Rees, about the law and how it should be applied. It is
    regrettable if there was any  unfairness  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing but it was immaterial because the case was argued fully  before
    me.

 4. The essential facts of the appeal are set out  helpfully  in  Mr  Rees'
    skeleton argument.

 5. This shows that the appellant is a citizen of Ukraine.  She  appeals  a
    decision dated 14  February  2017.   She  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    sometime in 2004 and in April 2007 started to cohabit  with  a  Latvian
    national, Mr A--- K---, who is, plainly, an EEA national. They  married
    on 6 January 2012  but  the  marriage  soon  became  unhappy  and  they
    divorced on 22 October 2013.  It follows that although they were living
    together as a couple for about six and a half years they  were  married
    for only (almost) one year and eleven months.

 6. When the appellant married she applied for and was  given  a  residence
    card as the wife of an EEA national.  The card was valid from  14  June
    2012 until 14 June 2017.  When her  marriage  broke  down  she  made  a
    further application for a residence card based on her alleged  retained
    rights of residence.  That application was refused on 24 June 2014  and
    the existing residence card was revoked.  On 28 July 2016  she  applied
    for permanent  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   That  application
    refused on 14 February 2017 and the decision to refuse that application
    is the decision that led to appeal before the First-tier Tribunal which
    is challenged before me.

 7.  The  Respondent  gave  only  brief  reasons  for  his  decision.   The
    explanatory letter noted that there was satisfactory evidence that  the
    marriage to the EEA national had  been  dissolved.   The  Secretary  of
    State then said, correctly, that to retain the right of residence under
    the rules the appellant would have to show evidence that  the  marriage
    had lasted for three years and that she had lived in the United Kingdom
    for one of those years.  The Secretary of State was satisfied that  the
    appellant could not satisfy the required Rule and refused  to  issue  a
    residence card.

 8. The decision was made  with  reference  to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016, and particularly  Regulation  15(1)(f)
    with reference to 10(5).  Regulation 10 is headed  "Family  member  who
    has retained  the  right  of  residence"  and  10(5)  identifies  as  a
    condition for retaining the right of residence at (5)(d)(i):

         "Prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the termination  of
         the  marriage  or  civil  partnership,  the   marriage   or   civil
         partnership had lasted for at least three years and the parties  to
         the marriage or civil partnership had resided in the United Kingdom
         for at least one year during its duration".

 9. There are other qualifying conditions but patently none of  them  apply
    here.

10.  It  is  settled  law  that  the  words  of  the  Directive  guide  the
    interpretation of the Regulations.  Article 13 of Directive  2004/38/EC
    of the European Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  29  April  2004,
    commonly called the "Citizens Free Movement Directive",  gives  Article
    13 the heading "Retention of the rights of residence by family  members
    in the event of  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of
    registered partnership".  There is a condition under 2(a) that:

         "prior to initiation of the divorce  or  annulment  proceedings  or
         termination of the registered partnership referred to in point 2(b)
         of Article 2, the marriage or  registered  partnership  has  lasted
         three years, including one year in the host Member State".

11. In short, the Regulations correctly embody the words of the  Directive.
    It is plain from the agreed facts identified by the appellant that  she
    does not qualify under the terms of the Directive or the  Rules  for  a
    residence card.

12. This much is unarguably correct.  The  appellant's  case  is  that  the
    position is more complex and the First-tier Tribunal erred  by  failing
    to engage with the complexities.

13. It is also right to acknowledge that the Directive and the  Regulations
    recognise the idea of "durable partnership"  which  is  a  relationship
    without the formalities of marriage.  It  is  not  defined  but  it  is
    essentially characterised by at least two years' cohabitation.

14. It was the appellant's contention that she should be treated as if  the
    durable partner and the spouse are the same and equal weight should  be
    given  to  the  respective  periods  of  cohabitation  and  she  should
    therefore be entitled to a Residence Card like a person  with  retained
    rights of residence after divorce.

15. Both the Regulations and the Directive provide for people to  retain  a
    right of residence in certain circumstances, including the divorce  but
    they do not provide expressly for the retention of rights of  a  former
    partner in a durable relationship.

16. The First-tier Tribunal understood that it was the appellant's argument
    that societal change required the law to re-frame  its  definitions  to
    give the kind of protection to durable partners that should be given to
    family members.

17. The appellant claimed to find support in the decision of  the  European
    Court of Justice in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Banger
    (Article 21(1) TFEU - Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C-89/17.

18. This was a decision of  the  European  Court  of  Justice  following  a
    referral from this Tribunal.  The essential point in that case is  that
    an EEA national (he happened to be a British citizen) had established a
    durable partnership in South Africa  with  a  South  African  national.
    They removed from South Africa to the  Netherlands  where  the  British
    national exercised treaty rights and obtained employment.  His  partner
    was given a residence card in the Netherlands confirming her  right  to
    reside there as an extended family member of a Union citizen.  It  then
    suited them to remove again, this time  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant's husband was entitled to enter the United  Kingdom  but  his
    wife was not, or at least was thought not to be.  It was clear law that
    he would have been able to bring his wife with him and  it  was  argued
    that his durable partner should be similarly allowed.

19. Contrary to the contention of the Appellant, I find that  her  case  is
    not assisted by the decision in Banger. There the Court of  Justice  of
    the European Union was concerned with a Union  Citizen  exercising  his
    right to enter the United Kingdom and for  his  partner  in  a  durable
    relationship to enter with him. Article 3 of Directive 2004/38 provides
    unequivocally at 2(b) that the partner of a Union citizen in a  durable
    relationship shall benefit from facilitated entry and residence.   This
    falls short of  creating  a  right  of  entry  for  people  in  durable
    relationships but it does provide  that  member  states  "undertake  an
    extensive examination of the personal circumstances and  shall  justify
    any denial of entry or residence to  these  people".  The  decision  in
    Banger was  about  giving  effect  to  that  obligation.  It  does  not
    illuminate the construction of the Regulations or the Directive as they
    define the retained rights of residence, if any, of a former partner in
    a durable relationship.

20. Mr Rees, no doubt anticipating this difficulty, argued that,  following
    Article 21(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the  European  Union,
    the Directive should be construed liberally. Article 21(1) states  that
    "Every citizen of the Union shall have the right  to  move  and  reside
    freely within the territory  of  the  Member  States,  subject  to  the
    limitations and conditions  laid  down  in  the  Treaties  and  by  the
    measures adopted to give them  effect."  This  is  uncontroversial  but
    circular. The right to free movement is limited by  the  Treaties.  The
    Directive provides for the rights  of  unmarried  partners  in  durable
    relationships and for the rights  of  former  partners  who  have  been
    divorce. It does not give rights to people  who  had  been  in  durable
    relationships.

21. In this case the application has been considered under the  appropriate
    provisions, that is the provisions relating to  a  spouse  in  a  short
    marriage.

22. At paragraph 3 of the grounds of appeal it is  said  that  the  "couple
    lived together in a durable relationship until they divorced". This  is
    wrong. The couple lived together in a durable relationship and then  in
    a marriage. A durable relationship is not descriptive of a marriage but
    of a looser relationship  that  does  not  have  to  be  created  in  a
    particular way and which cannot be dissolved formally.  The  contention
    that people who used to be in  a  durable  relationship  have  acquired
    rights is not an argument about the construction of the  Directive  but
    an argument for a change in policy which is not the proper function  of
    this Tribunal.

23. However, even if this analysis is wrong, there is a secondary  argument
    advanced  by  Mr   Whitwell   which   illustrates   that   pre-marriage
    cohabitation cannot be relied upon here. This was based on the decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Macastena v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  1558.  Even
    if a person appears to qualify for a residence card  on  the  basis  of
    being an extended family member such qualification  cannot  be  assumed
    because there is discretion to be exercised by the Secretary of  State.
    Here the appellant did not seek a Residence Card as an extended  family
    member. She should not be treated if she had applied  for  a  Residence
    Card successfully.

24. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal clearly  did  not  err  in  law
    materially.

Notice of Decision

25. This appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 May 2019                     |



