
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/02064/2016
                                                               EA/02066/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2018                             |On 17th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                        Frank Uwaila Robert Edokpolor
                            uyi anthony ighodaro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M Malhotra (instructed by Wilsons Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellants in this  case
    against  a  judgment  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   Judge   Cooper,
    promulgated on 2nd January 2018 after a hearing on 29th November  2017.
    The circumstances of the appeal are that there are two  Appellants  who
    are citizens  of  Nigeria  and  are  cousins.   They  had  applied  for
    permanent residence cards under the EEA Regulations on the  basis  that
    they had been exercising treaty rights for five years.   The  Secretary
    of State refused the appeals on the basis that they had not shown  that
    they had been either dependents or members of their Sponsor's household
    for a continuous period of five years in  order  to  qualify.   At  the
    appeal the Judge heard  evidence  from  the  Appellants  and  their  EU
    national Sponsor.  There was a conflict in the evidence as to how  long
    they had been dependents or members of their Sponsor's  household,  but
    being as generous as he could the Judge found that the latest they were
    was in 2014.

 2. The Appellants had initially been granted residence cards  as  extended
    family members on 16 September 2010.  The Judge, in considering whether
    or not they were entitled to succeed said that he had to look back from
    the date of application and they had to establish five years from then.
     In that he was wrong. The Appellants needed  only  to  establish  that
    they had been family members residing in the UK for a continuous period
    of 5 years.  That can be any period of five years. However, the Judge's
    overall decision to dismiss the appeal was correct and any error by him
    was therefore immaterial.  For the reasons for that one  must  look  at
    the EEA Regulations.  Regulation 15, which governs who is entitled to a
    permanent right of residence,  lists  those  people  as  being  an  EEA
    national who has been resident for a continuous period of five years in
    accordance with the Regulations, a family member of an EEA national who
    has been similarly resident in accordance with the  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years, and other persons who are not relevant
    for the purpose of this appeal.  Note that it is family members and EEA
    nationals; not extended family members.

 3. The definition of family members is contained in paragraph 7 and it  is
    accepted that these Appellants up until  the  time  they  were  granted
    residence cards were not family members but extended family members.

 4. Regulation 7(3) however provides that  a  person  who  is  an  extended
    family  member  and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family   permit,
    registration certificate or a residence card shall be  treated  as  the
    family member of the relevant EEA national for as long as he  continues
    to satisfy the conditions in Regulation 8(2), (3) or  (5).   Therefore,
    someone recognised and granted a residence card as an  extended  family
    member then becomes, for the purposes  of  the  Regulations,  a  family
    member.  However, there is a  requirement  that  they  must  have  been
    issued with such a document and unless and until they are, they are not
    treated as family members.  If they are not  family  members  they  are
    ineligible to apply for permanent residence.

 5. The Appellants in this case have only  therefore  been  family  members
    since the issue of the residence cards in 2010.  They  would  therefore
    have to show that  they  had  been  residing  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations, namely dependent upon or members of the household of their
    EEA national Sponsor  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  from
    September 2010.  That they  are  unable  to  do,  it  being  their  own
    evidence that they are no longer dependent  on  nor  members  of  their
    Sponsor's  household  and  have  not   been,   on   a   most   generous
    interpretation,  since  2014.   Accordingly  they  could  not  possibly
    succeed in relation to their application for permanent residence cards.



Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

 7. There has been no application for an anonymity  direction  nor  is  one
    appropriate under these circumstances and I make none.

 8. Similarly, as the appeals have been  dismissed  there  can  be  no  fee
    award.


Signed                              Date 12th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


