
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02051/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2018                          |On 21st February 2018         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                  haris ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Kelly promulgated on 20 June 2017,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse to issue him with an EEA Residence  Card
    dated 28 January 2017 was dismissed for want  of  jurisdiction  on  the
    basis of the Upper Tribunal's decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

 2. Permission to appeal was sought on the  basis  that  the  reasoning  in
    Sala, (which in substance was itself under further  challenge),  should
    not apply to the Appellant.  Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge
    Chamberlain on 23 November 2017  pursuant  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Khan v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1755.

 3. At the hearing, I indicated that the  appeal  should  be  allowed,  the
    decision set aside and the appeal remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for determination given the decision in Khan confirmed that the  First-
    tier Tribunal did have jurisdiction  to  hear  an  appeal  against  the
    refusal of an EEA Residence Card for an extended  family  member.   The
    Home Office Presenting Officer indicated  the  Respondent's  view  that
    Khan was wrongly decided and subject to an application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Supreme Court.

 4. Following the hearing, the Supreme Court handed down  judgement  in  SM
    (Algeria) v Entry Clearance Officer, UK  Visa  Section  [2018]  UKSC  9
    which expressly approved the decision in Khan.  There can be no further
    doubt that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to  determine
    appeals such as the present one  where the decision was made under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  and  it  was  an
    error of law for the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss  this  appeal  for
    want of jurisdiction.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]         Date         16th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

