
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number:  EA/02927/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 August 2020                  |On 26 August 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                             PETER OKORO OSAKWE

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria with date of birth given as  16.3.83,
   appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission against  the  decision  of
   the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  27.9.19,  dismissing  his  appeal
   against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 6.6.19,  to  refuse
   his application made on 11.4.19 for an EEA Residence Card as  the  family
   member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK, pursuant to
   the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, as amended.

2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
   20.2.20, finding it arguable that the judge failed to  consider  material
   evidence,  namely  a  letter,  dated  7.8.19,  from  Ebonyi  State  Local
   Government Council.

3. For the reasons set out in my error of law decision  promulgated  13.3.20
   and summarised below, I found an error  of  law  in  the  making  of  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal requiring it  to  be  set  aside  and
   remade at a resumed or continuation hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

4. I also issued directions for the appellant to  lodge  with  the  Tribunal
   and serve on the respondent clear copies of all documents he  now  wishes
   to rely on, together with a further  witness  statement  setting  out  in
   clear terms the process of proxy marriage and  registration  in  Nigeria.
   Those documents and his  statement  were  received  by  the  Tribunal  on
   23.3.20.

5. On 4.5.20  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued  my  directions,  dated  31.3.20,
   proposing in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic to remake the decision in
   the appeal  without  any  further  hearing,  pursuant  to  Rules  34  and
   15(1)(e), on the basis of the documents then before the  Upper  Tribunal.
   My directions provided a timetable  for  further  submissions  by  either
   party, if deemed appropriate, together with any further  evidence  to  be
   relied on. That timetable has now expired.

6. On 5.8.20, the Upper Tribunal received an email from the  appellant,  not
   legally represented, agreeing to the remaking of the decision without any
   further hearing. He indicated that he had no other  submissions  to  make
   and relied on his documents and statement received  by  the  Tribunal  on
   23.3.20.

7. There has been  no  response  to  the  directions  from  the  respondent.
   However, I have the respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated  30.1.20,  opposing
   the application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

8. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals'  Practice
   Direction, Pilot Practice  Direction:  Contingency  Arrangements  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal,  to  the  UTIAC  Presidential
   Guidance Note No 1 of 2020, Arrangements during  the  COVID-19  pandemic,
   and to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (as
   amended).

9. I have taken account of the view expressed by the parties as  to  whether
   to hold a hearing and the form of  such  a  hearing.  Neither  party  has
   opposed the error of law issue being resolved on  the  papers  without  a
   hearing. Both parties have submitted detailed  written  submissions  such
   that the Upper Tribunal is able to proceed with a full  understanding  of
   the arguments of each party. In the circumstances  and  for  the  reasons
   outlined, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to determine this  appeal
   without a hearing. I therefore proceed to  consider  and  determine  this
   appeal on the papers.

10. I have carefully considered the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
   dismissing  the  appeal  in  the  light  of  the   written   submissions,
   documentary evidence, and the grounds of appeal against the  respondent's
   refusal reasons.

11. This case concerns an application  for  an  EEA  Residence  Card,  which
   turns on the  validity  of  a  proxy  marriage  in  Nigeria  between  the
   appellant and a French national, both of  whom  remain  in  the  UK.  The
   respondent's refusal decision  erroneously  maintained  that  such  proxy
   marriages are unlawful in Nigeria. The appeal  against  the  respondent's
   refusal to issue an EEA Residence Card was dismissed  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

12. The appellant claimed marriage  to  an  EEA  (French)  national,  Karina
   Boutouil, in Nigeria on 15.10.18. The appellant admits  that  neither  he
   nor his purported spouse were in Nigeria  at  the  time  of  the  alleged
   marriage, but rely on the marriage having been  executed  by  proxy.  The
   respondent considered the Nigerian Marriage Act 1914, which requires  the
   parties to a marriage to be present to sign the certificate in  front  of
   the Registrar. In consequence, the application was refused.

13.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  there  were  a  number   of
   'irregularities' in the documentation and that the  appellant  failed  to
   provide sufficiently probative evidence that the  purported  marriage  is
   valid in law in Nigeria. The appeal was therefore dismissed.

14. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  asserted  that  the  judge
   erred in law in not considering the letter of 7.8.19, referred to  above,
   and relied on Awuku v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  178  for  authority  that
   marriages conducted under customary  rights  by  proxy  are  lawful.  The
   letter, at page 31  of  the  appellant's  bundle  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, purports to emanate from  the  Ebonyi  State  Local  Government
   Council,  confirming  that  the  "traditional  marriage   ceremony"   was
   successfully registered on 15.10.18. It adds, "In the absence of marriage
   certificate for marriages performed under the  native  laws  customs  and
   traditions of Akaeze in Ivo Local Government Area of Ebonyi State Nigeria
   we do issue  "form  E"  as  confirmation  that  marriage  has  been  duly
   registered." It adds that form E was issued to Peter  Okoro  Osakwe  Snr,
   representing the appellant. Form E appears  to  be  the  document  headed
   Marriage Certificate and has a reference to form E at the top right.

15. The First-tier Tribunal considered Awuku but concluded that  because  of
   irregularities on the face of the marriage certificate  the  marriage  is
   not valid. It was suggested that it was open to  the  appellant  to  have
   obtained sufficiently probative evidence such as confirmation in  writing
   from the Nigerian authorities that the marriage is valid. "That  has  not
   happened and I am not satisfied that he has  shown  that  he  is  validly
   married to his sponsor under Nigerian law," the judge stated.

16. However, the FTT decision contained no specific reference to the  letter
   from the Ebonyi State  Local  Government  Council,  which  explained  the
   process  of  proxy  marriage  and  the  issue  of  the   certificate   on
   registration.

17. The  respondent's  Rule  24  response,  dated  30.1.20,  asserted  that,
   although the August letter was not specifically mentioned,  it  is  clear
   from the decision as a whole that it was  considered  and  found  not  to
   assist the appellant. It was pointed out that even if a letter  from  the
   Nigerian High Commission has been put in  evidence,  it  would  not  have
   negated  the  several  inconsistencies  identified  by   the   First-tier
   Tribunal. It should be noted that the Rule 24 reply did not maintain  the
   stance taken in the refusal decision that Nigerian  proxy  marriages  are
   not valid in the UK.

18. In my error  of  law  decision,  I  found  that  Nigeria  permits  proxy
   marriages, contrary to the assertion in the refusal decision.  In  Kareem
   (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 23 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal  made
   a number of findings in relation to the  constituent  requirements  of  a
   proxy marriage in Nigeria. Although the requirement in this decision that
   the marriage must be valid by the marriage laws of the EEA national's own
   Member State was found by the later decision of Awuku to be in error, the
   Court of Appeal decision in Kareem did not undermine the Upper Tribunal's
   findings as to the mechanics of a valid proxy marriage in Nigeria.

19. It follows that, in principle,  provided  the  lawful  requirements  are
   complied with, a Nigerian proxy marriage can and will be regarded by this
   country as valid even though the parties to the marriage were in  the  UK
   at all relevant times.

20. However, at [36] onwards of Kareem the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  evidence
   from the High Commission that proxy marriages can  only  be  accepted  as
   valid in Nigerian law if conducted according to  customary  law;  that  a
   Nigerian citizen can marry a foreigner by proxy under customary law in  a
   ceremony that is held in  Nigeria;  that  the  validity  of  a  customary
   marriage in Nigeria does not depend on  it  being  registered  within  60
   days; and that  no  certificates  are  issued  in  respect  of  customary
   marriages by any recognised official body and  no  official  records  are
   kept.

21. The Upper Tribunal also noted evidence in the Nigerian  Births,  Deaths,
   etc (Compulsory Registration) Act 1992. Part V of the 1992 Act relates to
   the registration of customary marriages  or  divorces.  This  legislation
   appears to have been amended and supplemented by a  Statutory  Instrument
   in 1996. Part VII of the 1996  legislation  indicates  that  there  is  a
   requirement that a customary marriage should be registered  within  sixty
   days and that certain details are to be  provided  and  included  in  any
   certificate issued. The details required for registration are  the  names
   of the bride and groom, their marital status,  their  occupations,  their
   ages, their States of  origin,  the  address  of  their  usual  place  of
   residence, their nationalities, the name of the persons who consented  to
   the marriage and the respective relationship  of  those  persons  to  the
   bride and groom. The certificate should include "most of  these  details"
   together with the registration number, the date of marriage, the date  of
   registration and  the  signature  of  the  court  registrar.   The  Upper
   Tribunal in Kareem did not know the reasons for the conflict in  evidence
   but concluded that the  certificate  before  them  did  not  include  the
   necessary evidence in any event and, in so far as it was registered,  had
   not been registered in the 60 day period.  In addition the tribunal  said
   "... we are aware that the same Nigerian laws make  provision  about  who
   can be a registrar. We have no evidence that the person  who  signed  the
   certificate or the court order  was  a  registrar."   The  Tribunal  then
   dismissed the appeal.

22. It is clear from the above that the decision of the respondent  refusing
   the application was in error  in  stating  that  Nigerian  law  does  not
   recognise proxy marriages. It was also clear to me that the Ebonyi  State
   Local Government Council letter of 7.8.19 was not considered by the  FTT.
   Further, after hearing the appellant's explanation at the  error  of  law
   appeal hearing before me, I concluded that the FTT had misunderstood  the
   process by which a proxy or customary marriage is made. However,  it  was
   also clear that the appellant in his submissions to me  at  that  hearing
   was relying on documentation that did not appear to have been put  before
   the First-tier Tribunal, including a power of attorney from  his  partner
   and her family authorising a named person to sign at the registration  of
   the marriage in her place.

23. Whilst the judge found that the marriage certificate at page 29  of  the
   appellant's bundle had a number of inconsistencies on the face of it, the
   appellant explained another document in the bundle which I  found  to  be
   highly relevant. In essence, as explained  by  the  appellant,  once  the
   customary marriage is performed, it is registered in two ways. The  first
   is by Form C, which records the tax paid on the bride price  dowry.  This
   document in the bundle and is dated the same day as the  proxy  marriage.
   The appellant then referred me to a green booklet, which is rather  badly
   copied in the appellant's bundle. The appellant went  to  on  to  explain
   that when the marriage is registered both the booklet  and  the  marriage
   certificate (form E) are issued. When the original was examined, I  could
   see that the booklet explains four different types of marriage covered by
   registration, and that included customary marriage, referred to  as  CUS.
   It appeared to me that whichever form of marriage has been entered  into,
   the registrar can issue only  one  marriage  certificate.  The  necessary
   details to meet the legal formalities for a valid marriage are entered in
   the green booklet,  including  certain  information  which  the  marriage
   certificate format does not provide for. I find that  this  explains  the
   inconsistencies or discrepancies identified by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge.

24. As a result of the submissions before  me,  I  was  satisfied  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal had misunderstood the various documents  provided  by
   the appellant and that this failure amounted to a material error of  law.
   Therefore, I set the decision aside and proposed to remake the  decision.
   However, it transpired that the appellant wished to rely on some  further
   documents to further explain the registration process, which documents he
   did not have with him, but said he had sent to Manchester  Civil  Justice
   Centre. I therefore adjourned the remaking of the decision to  a  further
   date for those documents to be provided and for the appellant to  make  a
   witness statement setting out in clear terms the process of  registration
   of proxy marriage for which he contends.

25. As stated above, those documents have now been  received.  I  note  that
   they are date stamped by Manchester CJC on 26.2.20 and by Field House  on
   23.3.20. This explains why they were not available to  me  at  the  Upper
   Tribunal error of law appeal hearing on 13.3.20. Other  documents  appear
   to have been received  at  Field  House  on  18.3.20.  I  have  carefully
   considered all these documents, as well as the appellant's  statement  of
   13.2.20 and the subsequent but undated statement received on 18.3.20.

26. These documents include a power of attorney  to  allow  the  appellant's
   partner to be represented at the proxy marriage in  Nigeria.  Her  mother
   also consented to the marriage and had nominated  someone  at  the  proxy
   marriage to represent the family. This  person  has  sworn  an  affidavit
   accepted the role of representative of the appellant's  partner  and  her
   family. The ceremony itself was performed  on  28.9.18.  The  appellant's
   explanation of the procedure, which I requested from him not  only  makes
   sense but  appears  consistent  with  the  legal  requirements.  This  is
   supported by a document from the Traditional Prime Minister of the Umoihe
   Autonomous Community, dated 28.9.18, setting  out  the  process  step-by-
   step. This is summarised again in clear terms  in  the  appellant's  most
   recent witness statement.

27. Following the proxy  marriage  ceremony,  on  15.10.18  the  appellant's
   father went to register the marriage, as required. As  a  result  he  was
   issued by the Registrar with Form E, which is the  marriage  certificate,
   together with a green booklet  which,  as  stated  above,  sets  out  the
   different forms of marriage accepted. I am satisfied that this  procedure
   is accurately described and that Form E is the  only  certificate  issued
   once the marriage has been formally registered. Form C, as explained,  is
   issued by the local council for the purpose of  paying  the  tax  on  the
   bride price or dowry. This is confirmed by the Nigerian  lawyer's  letter
   dated 26.11.19. I am  satisfied  that  the  endorsement  in  the  Form  E
   certificate 'CUS' referred  to  the  customary  marriage.  The  appellant
   subsequently had the marriage verified by the Nigerian High Commission in
   London, confirmed by the letter dated 17.2.20.

28. Considering  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  even  though  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge may have had legitimate concerns about the reliability  of
   some of the documentation, including the  supposed  verification  of  the
   marriage by  the  Nigeria  High  Commission,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
   explanation made by the appellant is consistent  with  the  documentation
   now available to the Tribunal and which all makes sense. He  has,  in  my
   view, adequately explained all the matters of concern to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal,  including  omissions  or  apparent  incomplete  parts  of  the
   marriage certificate. I am satisfied that the appellant has done  all  he
   could reasonably be expected to do to demonstrate that the proxy marriage
   was lawfully entered into in Nigeria and is, therefore, to be  recognised
   as valid in the UK.

29. It follows that the appellant's status as a  family  member  of  an  EEA
   national has been established on the balance of probabilities, so that he
   is entitled to the Residence Card sought.

Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law;

      I set aside the decision;

      I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it;

      I make no order for costs;

      I make no anonymity direction.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       24 August 2020



        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email




