
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02976/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22 February 2021                 |On 03 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               shumaila khalid
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face  to  face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  all  issues  could
be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant, a national of Pakistan born on 2 October 1985, appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  her
appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue her with an  EEA
Family Permit under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2016 ("the  EEA  Regulations"),  as  the  parent  of  her  British  sons  in
accordance with the Zambrano principles.

The appellant stated in her application that she intended to  accompany  her
son Najeeb, a British citizen, to the UK. She had another  son,  Ahmed,  who
was also a British citizen. She claimed that she was the  primary  carer  of
her sons and provided a letter from their father stating that the only  role
he had in their lives was to provide financial support.

The respondent refused the application on 8 June 2019. The respondent  noted
that in November 2018 the appellant had applied for  a  visit  visa  for  16
days and had stated at that  time  that  they  would  be  staying  with  her
children's  father.  The  respondent  also  noted  that  the  appellant  had
previously stated that  she  resided  on  agricultural  land  owned  by  her
children's father, which she maintained as his second wife.  The  respondent
considered that that suggested that the children's father  therefore  had  a
more active role in  the  children's  lives  than  claimed.  The  respondent
considered that, contrary to  the  requirements  of  regulation  16(5),  the
appellant and her sons currently resided in Pakistan and  had  not  provided
any evidence of ever residing in the UK and that, as the  children's  father
was residing in the UK and had a settled family life  there,  there  was  no
evidence to suggest that the children would be unable to reside  in  the  UK
if the appellant were to leave for an  indefinite  period.  Accordingly  the
respondent considered that the requirements of  regulation  16(5)  were  not
met and the application was refused.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Monaghan on 14 January 2020. It was argued before  the  judge
that the decision denied the children their rights  under  Article  20  TFEU
and stopped them enjoying their rights as EU citizens, as the appellant  was
their primary carer and they had lived with her since birth  and  could  not
come to the UK without her. They could not live in the UK with their  father
as he would not accommodate them. They would be staying with the  children's
paternal uncle initially before obtaining their own  residence  in  the  UK.
The judge noted that the evidence was  that  the  children's  father  had  a
partner in the UK with whom he had  been  living  for  12  years,  that  the
appellant was his other partner in Pakistan with whom  his  children  lived,
that he had no active role in the  children's  lives  aside  from  financial
support  and  that  his  partner  in  the  UK  was  not  willing   to   take
responsibility for the children and he had to keep the appellant  and  their
children away from her.

The judge found that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
regulation 16(5) because the children did not  reside  in  the  UK  and  had
always lived in Pakistan and the appeal failed  on  that  basis.  The  judge
also found there to be insufficient  evidence  to  enable  her  to  reach  a
finding that the appellant was the primary carer  of  the  children,  noting
that the evidence of both the appellant and the  children's  father  in  the
visa application was unreliable, as it had been stated then that they  would
all  be  staying  with  the  children's  father  if  the   application   was
successful. The judge agreed with the respondent that the  evidence  pointed
to a far greater involvement of the children's father in the  lives  of  the
appellant and the children than claimed.  The  judge  accordingly  dismissed
the appeal.

Permission to appeal that decision was initially refused by  the  First-tier
Tribunal. A renewed application was  made  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the respondent and the judge had failed to consider  regulation
11(5)(e),  according  to  which  the  appellant  should  have  been  granted
admission to the UK.

Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 9 August 2019 as follows:

         "...There is arguable  merit  in  the  assertion  in  the  original
         grounds that the judge erred by finding that the appellant was  not
         the  primary  carer  of  her  two  children  for  the  purposes  of
         regulation 16(5)(a). It is also arguable, in  light  of  regulation
         11(5)(e), that the judge erred by finding that the appellant  could
         not meet the requirements of regulation 16(5) because the  children
         were not already residing in the  UK.  Arguably  neither  of  these
         would be material if the judge had given proper reasons for finding
         that the requirements in regulation 16(5)(c) were not met.  However
         it is arguable that the reason given  at  [22]  was  not  a  proper
         reason and that, despite the findings at [26] to  [28],  the  judge
         arguably failed to make any finding  as  to  whether  the  children
         would be able to  reside  in  the  UK  with  their  father  if  the
         appellant was not able to reside here and thus whether or not  they
         would be deprived of  their  rights  as  British  citizens  if  the
         appellant was denied entry to the UK..."


The respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 2 October  2020,  accepting  that
the judge had erred in law in finding  that  the  appellant  was  unable  to
satisfy the requirements of the EEA Regulations 2016 by reason  of  her  and
her children not being in the UK. However  the  respondent  considered  that
the error was only material if the judge had found that the  requirement  of
being a primary carer under the EEA Regulations  was  satisfied,  which  she
had not. There had been no challenge  to  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
findings in that respect. The judge's decision should therefore be upheld.

The matter then came before me.

The EEA Regulations 2016

The relevant regulations state as follows:

         "Right of admission to the United Kingdom


         11.- (5) The criteria in this paragraph are that a person ("P")-


                ...    (e) is accompanying a British citizen to, or joining
                a British citizen in, the United Kingdom and P would be
                entitled to reside in the United Kingdom under regulation
                16(5) were P and the British citizen both in the United
                Kingdom."


         "Derivative right to reside


         16.- (1) A person has a derivative right to reside during any
            period in which the person-


                (a)    is not an exempt person; and


                (b)    satisfies each of the criteria in one or more of
                paragraphs (2) to (6).


            (5)   The criteria in this paragraph are that-


                (a)    the person is the primary carer of a British citizen
                ("BC");


                (b)    BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and


                (c)    BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or
                in another EEA State if the person left the United Kingdom
                for an indefinite period."

At the hearing, there was no (remote) appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the
appellant. I noted that her representatives, Lincoln Law Chambers, had  been
sent a Notice of Hearing with relevant join-in details for a  Skype  hearing
and also noted that their registered office appeared to be the  "Punjab  Bar
Council", with no  telephone  number  provided  for  a  UK  office.  In  the
circumstances  there  seemed  to  me  no  reason  not  to  proceed  in   the
appellant's absence.

Ms Everett accepted that there was an error of law in the judge's  decision,
as found in the Rule 24 response. The only issue, therefore, was whether  or
not the appellant was the primary carer of the two children. I put it to  Ms
Everett that, although the judge had raised credibility concerns  which  had
not been challenged, on the basis of her findings, I could not see  how  the
appellant could not be considered to be the primary carer of  the  children,
and how the children could remain in the UK  without  the  appellant,  given
her findings at [19] and [20], that there was no evidence  to  suggest  that
the children were residing in the UK or  had  ever  done  so  and  that  the
children lived with the  appellant  in  Pakistan.  It  seemed  to  me  that,
whether or not the children's father had a far greater  involvement  in  the
lives of the appellant and  their  children  than  was  being  claimed,  the
evidence still demonstrated that the appellant was  the  primary  carer,  on
the facts which were accepted by the judge. As such, when  regulation  16(5)
was considered  together  with  regulation  11(5)(e),  the  requirements  of
regulation 16(5) were met.

Ms Everett agreed with that  understanding  and  agreed  that  the  decision
should be re-made by allowing the  appeal.  She  had  no  objection  to  the
matter being determined on that  basis,  without  the  need  for  a  further
hearing. Accordingly I set aside Judge Monaghan's decision and  re-made  the
decision  by  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  that   the
requirements of the EEA Regulations had been met and that the appellant  had
a derivative right of residence in the UK under regulation 16(5).


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and is  re-made  by
allowing the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016.


Signed:   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 22 January
2021
