
                                    [pic]

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Upper Tribunal   Appeal Number: EA/02669/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 October 2016                   |On 24 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                          JOSE ALBERTO FICHMAN GOES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. On 12 June 2015 the appellant, who is a citizen of Brazil, applied for
      a residence card confirming a permanent  right  of  residence  as  the
      family member of Ms [BZ],  an  Italian  national  said  to  have  been
      exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
      of five years.  The application was refused, by a decision made  on  5
      November 2015, because the applicant had not  provided  evidence  that
      the EEA national concerned had been employed for a  continuous  period
      of five years.  The respondent said:


           "In order for permanent residence to be granted we require proof
           in the form of  employer  letters,  P60's,  wage  slips  etc  to
           demonstrate that your EEA sponsor  has  been  exercising  treaty
           rights for five continuous years."


   2. The appellant's appeal against that  refusal  came  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Keith who determined it on the papers on 14 March 2016.
      At paragraph 12 the judge neatly summarised the issue to be addressed:


           "The respondent does not take any  issue  with  the  appellant's
           continuous residence (or any break in it) for  the  purposes  of
           his right to claim permanent residence as a family  member.  The
           respondent also takes no issue about the fact that the appellant
           and the sponsor have been married for the continuous period,  or
           that the marriage is genuine. The  sole  issue  is  whether  the
           sponsor has exercised her treaty  rights  continuously  for  the
           five-year period upto the present date."


   3. The judge then carried out an examination of the evidence  offered  of
      the sponsor's employment for the five-year period with  which  we  are
      concerned. There were pay slips and P60s for the whole period  save  a
      period of some nine months between April 2013  and  January  2014.  In
      respect of that  period,  although  no  payslips  were  produced,  the
      applicant had provided a letter from  the  sponsor's  employers  which
      said:


           "This letter confirms that the above mentioned was  employed  at
           The London Marriott Hotel Grosvenor Square, London, W1K 6JP.


           She was employed by Marriott International  from  1  April  2010
           until 8th January 2014. Her last job title was  Guest  Relations
           Supervisor.


           If you require any more information please feel free to  contact
           me on 0207 514 1521."


      This letter, on headed notepaper  from  Marriot  Hotels  Limited,  was
      signed by Ms Sarah Moss, Human Resources Manager.


   4. The judge dismissed the appeal because he did  not  accept  that  this
      letter constituted sufficient evidence that the sponsor was in fact in
      employment, as stated by that letter, during the nine-month period  in
      respect of which pay slips had not been produced. He said:


           "I noted  that  the  absence  of  these  records  has  not  been
           explained, when the documents should be readily available and  I
           attach less weight to the  letter  from  Marriott  Hotels  as  a
           consequence. In summary, I find that the sponsor  has  not  been
           continuously employed for a  relevant  period  from  2010  until
           2015, on the basis of the 9-month gap  between  April  2013  and
           January 2014 and there is insufficient  evidence  that  she  has
           registered as a job seeker in the intervening gap."


   5. It is simply impossible to sustain that reasoning. The  appellant  had
      produced evidence of a type precisely indicated by the  respondent  to
      be sufficient, that being a letter from the sponsor's employer.  There
      was no reason at all to doubt the truth of the content of that letter.
      It appeared from the refusal letter that this evidence would have been
      acceptable as sufficient had it been produced to the  decision  maker.
      Pays slips and P60's are not specified documents, required in order to
      establish the fact of employment. Therefore,  it  was  not  reasonably
      open to the judge to dismiss the appeal on the basis that evidence  of
      a type the respondent had said would be sufficient was not  sufficient
      if relied upon at appeal.


   6. For the respondent, Mr Walker indicated, realistically,  that  he  did
      not feel able to defend the decision and made no attempt to do so.


   7. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the conclusion reached  by  the
      judge was one that was not reasonably open to him on the evidence. The
      only rational conclusion open on the evidence was that  the  appellant
      had discharged the burden of proof facing him in establishing that the
      sponsor had indeed been continuously employed throughout the requisite
      period. This means that the judge has made a material error of law and
      his decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside. I substitute a  fresh
      decision to allow the appeal.

Summary of decision:

   8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith made a material error of law error  of
      law and his decision, promulgated on 4 April 2016 shall be set aside.

   9.  I substitute a fresh decision to allow the appeal
                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 21 October 2016

