
[pic]

Upper Tribunal a
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/02255/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 April 2018                       |On 23 April 2018                  |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                           ABIGAIL AMOAKOA ASIAMAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr K Siaw of R Spio & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Higgins promulgated on 27 July 2017  ("the  Decision").  By  the
      Decision the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision dated 20 October 2015 refusing  her  application
      for a residence permit as the  spouse  of  an  EEA  (French)  national
      spouse ("the Sponsor") who it is said is exercising Treaty  rights  in
      the UK.

2.    The Appellant's case is that she and the Sponsor married in  Ghana  in
      person.  However, for reasons set out at [22] to [25] of the  Decision
      to which I refer below, the Judge came  to  the  conclusion  that  the
      marriage certificate on which the Appellant  relied  should  be  given
      little weight because that recorded that the marriage was a  customary
      one, in other words, one conducted by proxy  in  the  absence  of  the
      parties.

3.    The Judge went on to note the evidence concerning the  legal  validity
      of the marriage in French law and concluded at [26] that the  marriage
      would  not  be  recognised  as  valid  in  that  country.   The  Judge
      thereafter relied on the case of Kareem (proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)
      [2014] UKUT 00024  (IAC)  ("Kareem")  as  reason  not  to  accept  the
      marriage as valid because it would not be  accepted  as  such  in  the
      Sponsor's home country.

4.    The Judge also did not go on to consider whether the  Appellant  could
      qualify for a permit as the extended family member  (durable  partner)
      of the Sponsor because, at that time, the case of Sala (EFMs: Right of
      Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) ("Sala") determined that there was  no
      right of appeal in such a case (see [28] of the Decision).

5.    The case of Kareem was held by the  Court  of  Appeal  to  be  wrongly
      decided in Awuku v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
      EWCA Civ 178 ("Awuku").  The case of  Sala  was  held  to  be  wrongly
      decided by the Court of Appeal in Khan v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 as confirmed by the Supreme Court
      in SM (Algeria) v Entry Clearance Officer, UK Visa Section [2018] UKSC
      9.  Accordingly, neither Kareem nor Sala now represent the law.

6.    The Appellant appealed the Decision on the sole ground that the  Judge
      had erred by following the case of Kareem.

7.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
      Davies on 19 January 2018 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-



           "... [2]    It is arguable that the Judge made an error  of  law
           when she considered the case of Kareem  referring  only  to  the
           Upper Tribunal decision and making no reference to the fact that
           the Court of Appeal overturned the Upper Tribunal's decision.

           [3]   The grounds and the decision do disclose an arguable error
      of law."

8.    The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Discussion and conclusions

9.    In light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in  Awuku,  the  Respondent
      concedes that the Decision does disclose an error of  law.   Mrs  Kiss
      indicated that, in light of that concession, the  Respondent  proposed
      that  the  appeal  be  remitted  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal   for
      redetermination.  She asked however that I preserve  the  findings  at
      [22] to [25] of the Decision where, she submitted, the Judge  had  not
      accepted that the documents evidencing the marriage are genuine.   She
      pointed out that the Appellant has not challenged those findings.

10.   Mr Siaw agreed that the appropriate course is for  the  appeal  to  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, not only because  the  Judge  has
      erred in relying on Kareem but also because no findings had been  made
      on the genuineness of the relationship  and  whether  the  Sponsor  is
      exercising Treaty  rights  because  the  Judge  did  not  consider  it
      necessary to go on to consider the position  if  the  couple  are  not
      legally married and are instead durable partners.  That is because the
      Judge considered himself bound by Sala (as indeed he was at the  time)
      to find that there is no valid right of appeal as a durable partner.

11.   The Judge was wrong to rely on the case of Kareem as he  did  at  [27]
      of the Decision in support of his finding that  the  marriage  is  not
      legally valid because it would not be valid in France.  As  the  Court
      of Appeal held in Awuku, the question of formal validity of a marriage
      in the law of England and Wales is governed by the law of the  country
      where the marriage was celebrated ([15]).  Accordingly, the issue here
      is whether the marriage between  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  is
      legally valid in Ghana and not as a matter of French law.

12.   In Ghana, customary marriages conducted in the absence of the  parties
      are accepted as legally valid where certain conditions are  met.   The
      Judge did not consider whether those conditions were met here  because
      he considered himself bound to consider that question based on  French
      law.  That was an error and a material one.  For that  reason,  it  is
      appropriate to set aside the Decision.

13.    There  is  an  additional  complicating  factor  here  in  that   the
      Appellant's case is that she and the  Sponsor  were  both  present  in
      Ghana for the wedding.  They were unable to prove  this  because  they
      said that their passports were lost after  their  return  from  Ghana,
      there was no evidence of them having exited the UK, travelled to Ghana
      and returned to the UK and, as Mr Siaw pointed out,  no  exit  records
      held by the authorities in the UK.  There was evidence in the form  of
      statutory  declarations  from  two  persons  who  were  said  to  have
      witnessed the ceremony but the Judge rejected that evidence as holding
      little weight at [24] of the Decision.  The Appellant and the  Sponsor
      said that there were photographs taken but they had  lost  those  also
      and the photographer could not provide copies.

14.   As Mrs Kiss pointed out,  the  Judge  disbelieved  (or  rather  placed
      little weight) on the Appellant's evidence to have married the Sponsor
      in Ghana.  Those are the findings which appear at [22] to [25] of  the
      Decision.  He  did  so  because  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the
      evidence of the Appellant and the Sponsor and, for example,  that  the
      marriage certificate stated that it was one conducted "under customary
      law" whereas the Appellant's case is that  it  was  not  because  both
      parties were present.

15.   The Respondent is right to point out that  the  findings  at  [22]  to
      [25] of the Decision were not  challenged.   However,  I  accept  that
      since the Appellant saw the Kareem issue as  a  "knock-out"  point,  a
      decision might have been taken that there was no  need  to  raise  any
      additional issues.  Further, although the Judge found  that  he  could
      not place weight on the documents for the reasons given, there  is  no
      express finding that the marriage did not take place at all.

16.   There is a further error of  law  relating  to  the  position  if  the
      parties are not married as a Judge may have to go on to decide whether
      the Appellant should be entitled to a residence permit as the extended
      family member of the Sponsor.  Of course, if a Judge again finds  that
      the documents evidencing the  marriage  cannot  be  given  weight  and
      reaches the conclusion that the marriage  did  not  take  place,  this
      would  raise  serious  questions  about   the   genuineness   of   the
      relationship.  I cannot though discount the possibility that  a  Judge
      could accept that the marriage took place but that  the  documents  do
      not confirm the validity of it in which case it would be necessary for
      the Judge to go on to consider the genuineness of the relationship.

17.   For those reasons, the question of whether the marriage is  one  which
      took place as the Appellant claims, by proxy or at all and whether  it
      is legally valid on the basis it took place is  one  which  will  form
      part  and  parcel  of  consideration  of  the   genuineness   of   the
      relationship. Depending on the Judge's findings on  those  issues,  it
      may also be necessary for the  Judge  to  make  findings  whether  the
      Sponsor is in the UK exercising Treaty rights.  I say that because  at
      the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal as at  the  hearing  before
      me, the Sponsor did not attend.  Judge  Higgins  did  not  accept  the
      reason  given  for  the  Sponsor's  absence  ([11]  and  [21]  of  the
      Decision).

18.   I agree with the parties that  this  is  an  appeal  which  should  be
      remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.   There  have  been  no  factual
      findings made about the genuineness of the relationship because of the
      Judge's reliance on the legal invalidity of the marriage  and  because
      he was bound to accept (per Sala) that he could not determine  whether
      the Appellant is the extended family member of the  Sponsor.   Factual
      findings will also now be required both as to the genuineness  of  the
      documents relied upon in support  of  the  marriage  and  whether  the
      documents show that the Ghanaian authorities accept  the  marriage  as
      legally valid.  Depending on the findings about the relationship,  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge  may  also  need  to  consider  whether  the
      evidence confirms that the Sponsor is  in  the  UK  exercising  Treaty
      rights.  For the reasons given above, I have not preserved any of  the
      findings made by Judge Higgins.

DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Higgins
promulgated on 27 July 2017 is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.
Signed           [pic] Dated:  20 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
