

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
EA/02506/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision Promulgated:     |
|On 20 September 2018                        |On 5 October 2018         |
|                                            |                          |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                     FO
                           (anonymity order made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                           Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S Bassiri-Dezfouli, of Counsel, instructed by  SLA
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer



                          Determination and Reasons

Background

   1.       The appellant is a national of Burkina Faso born on  4  November
      1983. She challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rayner
      to dismiss her appeal against the refusal of the respondent  to  grant
      her a permanent residence card on the  basis  of  retained  rights  of
      residence following her  divorce  from  an  EEA  national  on  the  19
      December 2014. There are three children of the marriage born in the UK
      in November 2005, March  2011  and  March  2013;  the  older  two  are
      autistic. The eldest appears to be a British  national.  There  is  no
      evidence or information in respect of the others.   The respondent was
      not satisfied that the appellant  had  retained  rights  of  residence
      following the divorce because she had not shown that she had exercised
      treaty rights as  if  she  were  an  EEA  national.  Accordingly,  the
      application was refused on 21 February 2017.

   2.       The appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rayner  at
      Taylor House on 21 May 2018. The judge heard oral  evidence  from  the
      appellant who claimed to have last worked in 2007. She maintained that
      she had back problems but that it was mainly her need to care for  her
      children that prevented her from working. The  judge  found  that  the
      appellant had failed to demonstrate that she was a worker  within  the
      meaning of reg 6(1)(b) and 10(6). The appeal was dismissed.

   3.       Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Hollingworth  on  1
      August 2018.

   4.       The matter then came before me.

The hearing

   5.       I heard submissions from both parties in  the  presence  of  the
      appellant.

   6.       For the appellant, it was argued that the judge had applied  the
      wrong test. He  should  have  considered  whether  the  appellant  was
      temporarily or permanently out of work due to her back pain which  was
      confirmed by a doctor in March 2016. Reliance was placed on  FMB  (EEA
      reg 6(2)(a) - temporarily unable  to  work)  Uganda  [2010]  UKUT  447
      (IAC).   It was argued that the  appellant  had  an  illness  and  was
      therefore unable to work. She had not worked since  the  divorce  and,
      indeed, had last worked in  early  2008.  On  being  referred  to  the
      appellant's witness statement where she claimed she was unable to work
      because she was a lone parent, Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli submitted that  she
      was also prevented from taking employment due to  her  back  condition
      and this  was  referred  to  in  her  statement.  Ms  Bassiri-Dezfouli
      submitted that many women developed back problems after childbirth and
      the appellant's complaints of pain in 2013 coincided with the birth of
      her third child. The appellant received carer's allowance  in  respect
      of her  children.  Ms  Bassiri-Dezfouli  submitted  that  the  judge's
      reasoning had been short and insensitive. She submitted that  being  a
      carer amounted to employment in the same way as  motherhood  generally
      and housework were jobs. The decision should be  set  aside,  and  the
      appeal should be allowed.

   7.       Ms Everett responded. She maintained that the case was being re-
      argued and no error of law had been shown. The  judge  properly  found
      that the appellant had not worked after 2007.  He  accepted  that  her
      former husband had worked. There may be article 8 issues but that  was
      not a reason to find an error of law as this was not  a  human  rights
      application. The appellant could make a fresh application on the basis
      of looking  after  her  British  children.  The  appellant  had  given
      conflicting evidence as to why she could not work. The doctor's letter
      was inadequate. There may be types of employment the  appellant  could
      undertake. Whilst Ms Everett expressed sympathy for the arguments made
      about carers, she maintained that there was no error of law.

   8.       In response, Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli stated the children were French
      and not British. She relied on  Teixeira  [2010]  ECJ  C-480/2008  and
      Ibrahim [2010] ECJ C310/2008. She submitted that if there  were  other
      Regulations the appellant could succeed under, she should not have  to
      make another application. She conceded that the argument about being a
      carer had not been made to the judge. She submitted that the appellant
      could not work because of back pain and because of her children.

   9.       That completed submissions. I  then  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give with reasons.

Findings and conclusions

  10.       I have carefully considered all the evidence before me  and  the
      submissions that have been made by both parties.

  11.       It is accepted that the  appellant's  former  husband  exercised
      treaty rights until the commencement of the  divorce  proceedings.  In
      order  to  succeed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant,
      therefore, had to show that since her divorce she had been  exercising
      treaty rights as though she were an EEA  national  (reg  15(1)(f)  and
      10(6)). Her case as argued before the judge was  that  she  should  be
      categorised as a worker because she had worked in 2007 and because she
      was temporarily unable to work due to illness. This was the submission
      of her representative even though her own oral evidence had been  that
      she was primarily unable to work because  she  had  to  care  for  her
      children.

  12.       The judge took account of FB but found  that  it  had  not  been
      established that the appellant was unable to work due  to  illness  or
      accident and noted that she was plainly able to function  as  a  carer
      for her children  and  to  obtain  carer's  allowance.  Whilst  he  is
      criticized for being insensitive in making that finding,  it  was  one
      which was open to him on the evidence. The appellant ceased working in
      2007. It is not suggested that she had back trouble then and,  as  the
      judge noted, no reason was given for  why  she  stopped  working.  The
      doctor's letter on which reliance was placed pre-dated the hearing  by
      more than two years and does not amount to evidence that the appellant
      continued to be unable to work. Indeed,  it  only  confirms  that  the
      appellant had complained to the surgery about back pain. There  is  no
      diagnosis or prognosis and certainly nothing to suggest there was  any
      problem  related  to  childbirth.  The  appointment  letter   for   an
      assessment at the musculoskeletal assessment clinic is dated 18  April
      2016 and there is no evidence of whether  the  appointment  was  kept,
      what transpired at that appointment or what the assessment was. Nor is
      there any follow up to the  letter  of  11  April  2016  inviting  the
      appellant to contact the Physiotherapy department and  no  information
      as to whether she did so or whether she received  any  treatment.   In
      any event, as I suggested to Counsel, the claim to be  prevented  from
      taking employment because of illness is irrelevant given the fact that
      the appellant would not be able to work even if  she  was  fully  fit.
      Whilst I accept she mentions back pain as one reason for not  working,
      all her evidence makes it quite clear that she cannot work because she
      is a lone parent with three children and  that  that  is  the  primary
      reason for her lack of employment.

  13.       I have considered the judgments referred to. Texeira and Ibrahim
      concern applications for housing assistance by parents  who  were  the
      primary carers of settled children and entirely  dependent  on  social
      assistance. The court found that the children were entitled to  reside
      in the member state in order  to  attend  educational  courses  there,
      pursuant to Article 12 of Regulation No 1612/68.  The  fact  that  the
      parents had divorced and the fact that the parent who exercised rights
      of residence as a migrant worker was no longer economically active  in
      the host Member State  was  irrelevant  in  this  regard.  Article  12
      provides:
      'The children of a national of a Member State  who  is  or  has  been
    employed in the    territory of another Member State shall be  admitted
    to  that  State's   general         educational,   apprenticeship   and
    vocational training  courses  under  the  same      conditions  as  the
    nationals  of  that  State,  if  such  children  are  residing  in  its
    territory.

      Member States shall encourage all efforts to enable such children  to
    attend these       courses under the best possible conditions.'

      Whilst the appellant may well have a case under Article 12,  such  an
    application has not been made and Article 12 was not argued before  the
    First- tier Tribunal.

  14.       In the context of all the evidence, therefore, it  was  open  to
      the judge to find that the appellant was not a worker and that she was
      not exercising treaty rights since her divorce as if she were  an  EEA
      national. It follows that she failed to make  out  her  case  and  the
      judge did not err in dismissing her appeal.

  15.       The appellant may well have a good article 8  case  or  even  an
      argument on derivative rights but those were not  live  issues  before
      the judge. As conceded by Counsel the argument about whether  a  carer
      is a worker was never previously made nor is there any suggestion that
      the appellant argued that she had rights as the primary carer  of  her
      children. The judge cannot be criticized for failing  to  consider  an
      argument that was never put to him.  It  may  be  that  the  appellant
      should have made a more appropriate application  instead  of  pursuing
      these proceedings. Of course, it is still open to her to do so.

Decision

  16.       There are no errors of law in the determination  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

Anonymity order

  17.       There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
      but as there are children involved I have made one.

      Signed:


      [pic]
      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      1 October 2018
