
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: EA/02577/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2018                           |On 29 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                               Shahrukh bilal
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and no representation
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Maciel promulgated on 6 March 2017.


2.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge declined to engage  with  the  facts  and
    issues in the appeal in reliance upon the case of Sala (EFMs: right  of
    appeal) Albania [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).


3.   The decision in Sala has since been overturned in the Court  of  Appeal
    in the case of MK v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1755.  The effect is that it is now conceded by the Respondent
    by way of a Rule 24 response dated 14 November 2017 that  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside for error of law and the
    appeal be re-made by way of a hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with all issues under the EEA Regulations at large. (It does seem to me
    that the appeal can indeed be heard by any Judge including Judge Maciel
    who, not having engaged in any of the facts and issues, is not  in  any
    way disqualified from now looking at the case afresh.   Notwithstanding
    this observation, it may well be that  Listing  may  wish  to  consider
    putting the case in front of a different Judge.)


4.   I should add for completeness that on  the  facts  of  this  particular
    case the application for permission to appeal was lodged  very  shortly
    out of time.  The grant of permission to appeal does not identify this,
    and indeed records that the application for permission to appeal was in
    time.  An explanation was offered in the  grounds  of  appeal  for  the
    slight delay by reference to a misunderstanding as to whether the  time
    for lodging the appeal was 14 days or  28  days.   In  the  event,  the
    appeal was lodged well within the 28 day period that the Appellant  had
    mistakenly understood applied to him.  The Secretary of State takes  no
    point in this regard before me, and in  all  of  the  circumstances  it
    seems to me that it is entirely appropriate that  time  be  treated  as
    extended.   Accordingly,  the  matter  is  disposed  of  in  the  terms
    indicated.


Notice of Decision

5.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated for error of law.


6.   The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge with all issues at large.


7.   No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript if ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 26 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

