
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02817/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 April 2019                           |On 11 April 2019                 |

                                   Before:
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |Miss C A                                          |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


                                  Anonymity


I make a direction under r.14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
I make this  direction  because  there  are  allegations  of  abuse  by  the
appellant's ex-husband.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Apraku, of Adam Bernard Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision served on the parties on  29  January  2019  following  a
    hearing on 16 January 2019, I set aside the decision of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Bird which dismissed the appeal  of  the  appellant
    against a decision of the respondent of 5 March 2018 to refuse to issue
    her with a permanent residence card as  confirmation  that  she  had  a
    retained right of residence as the former spouse  of  Mr  DMG,  an  EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. Having set  the  judge's  decision  aside,  I  gave  directions,  which
    included a direction to the respondent to undertake such enquires as he
    could reasonably undertake in order to establish  whether  Mr  DMG  was
    exercising Treaty rights from 22 June 2011 to 22 June 2016.

 3. I also directed that  the  appeal  be  listed  before  me  for  a  case
    management review.

 4. The case management review hearing was listed  before  me  on  9  April
    2019.

 5.  At  the  hearing,  Mr.  Clarke  advised  me  of  the  outcome  of  the
    respondent's enquires with the HMRC. He  also  confirmed  that  he  had
    received the documentary evidence submitted by  the  appellant  of  her
    employment. He informed me that he was satisfied that the appellant had
    established that the period for which  Mr  DMG  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom (from April 2014 to 22 June 2016) combined
    with the period of the appellant's employment  from  the  date  of  her
    divorce (22 June 2016) to  the  date  of  the  case  management  review
    hearing in April 2019 amounted to a period of  5  years.  He  therefore
    asked me to allow the appeal.

 6. I allow the appeal for the reasons given above.

      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of
    an error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside. Her  decision
    was set aside.


    I re-make the decision on the appellant's appeal by allowing her appeal
    against the respondent's decision.





[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 9 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill



