
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal Number: EA/02834/2017,        |
|                                     |EA/02840/2017, EA/02843/2017,        |
|                                     |EA/02849/2017 & EA/02851/2017        |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 28 May 2019                       |On 08 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|               |LILOMA SULEIMANKHAIL                      |First Appellant |
|               |SHAFIULLAH SULEIMANKHAIL                  |Second Appellant|
|               |RAHMATULLAH SULEIMANKHAIL                 |Third Appellant |
|               |ZABIULLAH SULEIMANKHAIL                   |Fourth Appellant|
|               |ABDULLAH SULEIMANKHAIL                    |Fifth Appellant |


                         (anonymity order not made)

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ahmed, Counsel instructed by AUUA Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by  five  members  of  the  same  family  against  a
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against a
      decision of the Respondent on 24 February 2017 refusing them Residence
      Cards as confirmation of their right to reside in the  United  Kingdom
      as the family members of  a  person  who  was  previously  working  in
      another Member State.

   2. The First Appellant is the mother of the other appellants,  all  sons,
      who were born in 1998, 2000, 1996 and 1994 respectively.

   3. It is a feature of United Kingdom immigration control that the  family
      members of EEA  nationals  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
      Kingdom are subject to less arduous restrictions on their admission to
      the United Kingdom than are the family members  of  British  citizens.
      Where a British citizens has enjoyed  family  life  whilst  exercising
      treaty rights he (in his case) can, in the event of his return to  the
      United Kingdom, be treated as if he was an EEA national so the  family
      members  may  join  him  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  satisfying  the
      requirements of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
      2016. Each of these Appellants applied under  the  Regulations  for  a
      Residence Card but their applications were unsuccessful.

   4. There were two main reasons for the applications being refused.

   5. First, where an application depends on a British citizen being treated
      as an EEA national, it has to be shown that he would be  a  "qualified
      person" if he were an EEA national. In this case this means  that  the
      British citizen must be working but the Respondent was  not  satisfied
      that the British citizen was working because he claimed to be paid  in
      cash so there were no bank records to prove that his employers paid  a
      wage regularly, and there was an obvious spelling mistake in the title
      of the business in what purported to be a supporting letter  from  the
      alleged employer. This  point  was  not  resolved  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal because the judge had unequivocally decided the second  point
      in the Respondent's favour.

   6. Second, the residence in the EEA state must be "genuine" in the  sense
      that the centre of the British citizen's life had transferred  to  the
      EEA state. Residence in the EEA state is not "genuine" if it  was  for
      the purpose of circumventing immigration control. The  Respondent  was
      not satisfied that the  centre  of  the  British  citizen's  life  had
      transferred to the EEA state, mainly because the length  of  residence
      was short and the evidence of integration was skimpy.

   7. The First-tier Tribunal  essentially  agreed  independently  with  the
      Respondent's approach and conclusions.

   8. I consider below the grounds of appeal but permission to appeal to the
      Upper Tribunal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker because:

  "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to  take  into
  consideration the fact of having been granted EEA  residence  permits  in
  Ireland when considering the length of time there and the work undertaken
  and involvement in Ireland given the age of the children."

   9. The Respondent accepted that the Appellants  lived  in  Ireland  as  a
      family from 4 November 2014 until 19 May 2016.  It  follows  that  the
      stay lasted for about 18 months. At the start  of  the  residence  the
      Second Appellant was aged 16 years and the Third Appellant was aged 14
      years. The other Appellants were adults.

  10. It is a matter of record that the First  Appellant  gave  birth  to  a
      daughter on 2 January 2016. She is an Irish citizen.

  11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge summarized the  law.  In  particular  he
      distilled the ratio of O and B v The Netherlands C-456/12t  as  "there
      is no specific test laid down and no requirement [in jurisprudence  or
      the Directive] that the centre  of  life  has  shifted,  the  test  is
      whether family life has been  created  or  strengthened  in  the  host
      state. He then quoted extensively from a  decision  of  the  Court  of
      Session in AA v SSHD [2017] CSIH 38 stating that  the  Upper  Tribunal
      was

  "required to carry out a qualitative assessment of the  evidence  bearing
  on the residence in Germany of the appellant and his  wife  to  determine
  whether  it  constituted  genuine  residence  for  the  purpose  of   the
  regulation".

  12. The Judge noted evidence that the minor appellants attended school and
      had registered with the library in Limerick but found no  evidence  of
      participation in events outside the family.  It  was  the  Appellants'
      case that they could not integrate because the host community was  not
      familiar with Afghan culture.

  13. The Judge acknowledged that there was  evidence  that  the  Appellants
      lived in Ireland but concluded at  paragraph  31  "Taken  overall  the
      evidence does not show that the family were centred in Ireland with  a
      genuine intention to settle there". He found that the  appellants  had
      not shown that the met the requirements of Regulation and he dismissed
      the appeals.

  14. There  were  five  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
      observations I make on the grounds  reflect  the  submissions  of  the
      parties before me.

  15. Ground 1 complained of a "Failure to  consider  evidence  of  daughter
      born in Ireland (family ties created and strengthened)".

  16. There is nothing in this point. The Judge was  clearly  aware  that  a
      child had been born in Ireland. The Judge refers at  paragraph  28  to
      the Appellant and Sponsor "having  a  daughter"  but  there  does  not
      appear to have been much evidence of  the  daughter's  birth  being  a
      means of integration into the community. There is  not,  for  example,
      anything in the First Appellant's witness  statement  suggesting,  for
      example, attendance at pre-natal classes or mother and baby groups, or
      any thing else that might be seen as a way of the First Appellant  and
      her  baby  establishing  themselves  in  Ireland  rather  than  simply
      addressing their immediate health needs.

  17. I do not agree that obtaining an Irish  passport  is  evidence  of  an
      intention to remain in Ireland as  alleged  in  the  grounds.  Indeed,
      strictly it might be thought of as evidence of an intention  to  leave
      Ireland, if only temporarily. Less flippantly there are  many  reasons
      for obtaining proof of nationality. It is not compelling evidence of a
      person's reasons for residing in a particular country, still less  the
      reason for her parents residing there.

  18. Ground 2 complains of a "Failure to consider evidence (Granting of EEA
      family permits on 2 occasions"). I see nothing in  this  point.  Entry
      clearance was needed for  the  Appellants  to  travel  to  the  United
      Kingdom. That they were found to satisfy the  requirements  for  entry
      clearance does not illuminate a later decision made when they  clearly
      do not want to return to Ireland.

  19.  Ground  3  complains  of  a  "Failure  to  consider  the  documentary
      evidence". Particular reference is  made  to  a  failure  to  consider
      (specifically) at letter from the Century Snooker  Club  in  Limerick.
      This identifies three of the Appellants as  "patrons  of  the  snooker
      club". It does not explain what that involves and, perhaps still  more
      tellingly, neither did the statements. There is nothing to  show  that
      this is a material error.

  20. Ground 4 complains of a "Failure to consider the oral evidence in  the
      determination - finding as to employment".

  21. The Judge explained that he did not need to  make  a  finding  on  the
      Sponsor's employment because he had decided to dismiss the appeals  on
      other grounds. It would  have  been  better  if  the  Judge  had  made
      findings on this point. There is invariably  a  risk  that  the  other
      findings might not be sound but the omission  is  not,  of  itself,  a
      material  error  of  law  and,  arguably,  could  only  advantage  the
      Appellants. A favourable finding on this point would not  have  helped
      them and an  unfavourable  finding  on  slender  evidence  could  have
      created a further hurdle for them.

  22. It is unfair to criticise the Judge for  finding  that  there  was  no
      explanation for the name of the employing  business  being  misspelled
      and, allegedly contradictorily, finding that there was  oral  evidence
      for the deficiency, namely an alleged typing error.  That  is  an  odd
      explanation because the spelling mistake was in the letter  head  but,
      in any event, it was plain on fair reading of  paragraphs  13  and  31
      that the "absence of evidence by way of explanation" that troubled the
      judge was not absence of  any  explanation  but  the  absence  of  the
      promised letter from the employer confirming the error.

  23. Ground 5 complains of a  "Failing  to  make  a  finding  on  an  issue
      pertinent to the appeal" but  the  issue  was  not  pertinent  to  the
      appeal. It was dismissed for quite separate reasons.

  24. Before me Mr Ahmed emphasised that there was 18  months  residence  in
      Ireland. It was dominated for  the  First  Appellant  by  a  difficult
      pregnancy. There was undisputed evidence  that  the  minor  appellants
      went to school and the  documentary  evidence  showed  involvement  in
      society.

  25. None of this meets the Judge's observation at  paragraph  29  that  it
      "does not seem to  have  taken  much  for  the  family  to  move  from
      Ireland".

  26. Appeals such as this rarely  turn  on  a  "killer  point"  but  on  an
      evaluation of the evidence as a whole. There  is  no  doubt  that  the
      Appellants lived lawfully in Ireland for about  18  months.  With  the
      help of  the  representatives  I  have  gone  through  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision carefully. I am satisfied that the Judge  directed
      himself correctly in law and reached a  permissible  decision  on  the
      evidence.

Notice of Decision

  27. The appeal of each Appellant is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 July 2019                    |

