
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02174/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2019                            |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                             Mr Amarildo Isufaj
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                  DECISION ON THE RE-HEARING OF THE APPEAL


 1. The appellant, Amarildo Isufaj, is a citizen of  Albania,  born  on  21
    February 1993.  He appeals against a decision of the respondent dated 4
    February 2017 to refuse to admit him  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    family member of an EEA national, on the grounds that he was a party to
    a marriage of convenience ("the refusal notice").

 2. In a reported decision promulgated on 12 August 2019, a  panel  of  the
    Upper Tribunal (Mr Justice Lane, President, Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill)
    found that a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  22
    November 2017 involved the making of an error of law, and set it aside,
    directing that the matter be reheard in the Upper Tribunal: see  Isufaj
    (PTA decisions/reasons; EEA reg. 37 appeals)  [2019]  UKUT  283  (IAC).
    The First-tier Tribunal had dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the refusal notice as it was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that the marriage was not one of convenience.  That was an
    error because it reversed the burden of proof.

 3. Isufaj (PTA decisions/reasons; EEA reg. 37 appeals)  was  reported  for
    reasons connected to the grant of permission to appeal from the  First-
    tier Tribunal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  a  jurisdictional  issue
    relating to whether the  appellant's  appeal  against  his  refusal  of
    admission could be continued while he was in the United  Kingdom.    It
    may be found in the Annex to this decision.

Factual background

 4. The appellant previously entered the United Kingdom clandestinely,  and
    later claimed  asylum  after  being  arrested  for  suspected  cannabis
    cultivation and the theft of a car.   He  was  found  to  have  in  his
    possession a false Italian identity document, a Lloyds Bank  Visa  card
    and a Construction Industry Scheme card in the name of another  person.
    He was never charged with any offences  but  was  served  with  removal
    papers as a person without leave.  His claim for asylum was refused and
    certified as "clearly unfounded".  The appellant was removed to Albania
    in early November 2016.

 5. On 28 December 2016, the appellant married Diana Miksa,  a  citizen  of
    Lithuania born 26  May  1992  ("the  sponsor"),  in  Lithuania.   On  4
    February 2017, they attempted to enter  the  United  Kingdom  at  Luton
    Airport, in reliance on their ability to do so as the citizen of an EEA
    state and her husband respectively. They were interviewed,  separately,
    by immigration officers, and entry to each was refused on  the  grounds
    that  their  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.  The  respondent  was
    concerned that there were a number of discrepancies across the  answers
    each provided to questions put to them.  Coupled with  the  appellant's
    poor immigration history, and his apparent motive to evade  immigration
    control, the respondent concluded that the relationship between the two
    was one of convenience.  They were both subsequently refused  admission
    at Calais  in  June  2017,  although  those  decisions  are  not  under
    challenge in these proceedings.  The sponsor has since been admitted to
    the United  Kingdom  to  visit  family  here,  travelling  without  the
    appellant, although she claims to have encountered difficulties at  the
    border.  The pair now live in Malta.  The appellant works as a chef and
    the sponsor works as a sales assistant in a shopping centre.

 6. It is the appellant's case that he has been in a  genuine  relationship
    with the sponsor since September 2012, when  they  met  in  Italy.  The
    appellant was on holiday, and the sponsor had been working there.  They
    began cohabiting five months later, in February  2013,  in  Rome.  They
    lived there until August  2015.  It  was  around  this  time  that  the
    appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom  clandestinely.  He
    maintains that throughout this period, he was in a genuine relationship
    with the sponsor. The sponsor joined him here in December 2015, staying
    until around  June  or  July  2016.   The  appellant  was  arrested  by
    Immigration Enforcement officers on 21 July 2016  and  was  removed  to
    Albania in November.  He claims to have remained in Albania for  around
    two weeks, before joining the sponsor in Lithuania. The couple  married
    around a month later, on 28 December 2016.

Legal framework

 7. Although the refusal notice purported to refuse to admit the  appellant
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  those
    Regulations had been revoked three days earlier, and  replaced  by  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
    Regulations").  As  such,  our  analysis  will  be   under   the   2016
    Regulations; nothing turns on the respondent's  incorrect  citation  of
    the 2006 Regulations.

 8. The 2016 Regulations confer a right of entry on EEA nationals and their
    non-EEA family members: see regulation 11.  Admission can be refused to
    those who do not meet the definition of "family member" on the  grounds
    that they are a party  to  a  marriage  of  convenience,  and  also  on
    specific grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public  health
    (regulation 23(1)), and on the basis that their admission would lead to
    the misuse of a right to reside (regulations 23(3) and 26).

 9. "Family member" is defined by regulation 7(1)(a) to include the  spouse
    of an EEA national.  A "spouse" does not include a party to a "marriage
    of convenience" (see regulation 2(1)).  Regulation 2(1) also states:

           "'marriage of convenience' includes a marriage entered into  for
           the purpose of using  these  Regulations,  or  any  other  right
           conferred by the EU Treaties, as a means to circumvent-

                 (a)  immigration rules applying to non-EEA nationals  (such
                 as any applicable requirement under the 1971  Act  to  have
                 leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or

                 (b)  any other criteria that the party to the  marriage  of
                 convenience would otherwise have to meet in order to  enjoy
                 a right  to  reside  under  these  Regulations  or  the  EU
                 Treaties..."

    The key issue to be identified when considering whether a  marriage  is
    one of convenience is the purpose for which the marriage  was  entered,
    at the time it was  contracted.   Was  the  sole  purpose  (as  in  the
    predominant purpose, rather than the unique or exclusive  purpose:  see
    Recital  (28)  to  Directive  2004/38/EC,   see   also   the   European
    Commission's Handbook on addressing the issues of alleged marriages  of
    convenience, 24 September 2014, (COM (2014) 604 final), at page 9,  and
    Sadovksa v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 54 at
    [29], per Lady Hale PSC) in order to  enjoy  free  movement  rights  to
    which the individual would not otherwise be entitled? The intention  of
    the parties at the time of the marriage is relevant.   Their  knowledge
    about each other, or the extent to which the marriage  is  genuine  and
    subsisting at the date of assessment are  not  determinative,  although
    are likely to be relevant evidential factors to consider  when  looking
    back at the purposes for which the marriage was entered into.

Burden and standard of proof

10. Where the respondent alleges that a marriage is one of convenience, the
    legal burden rests on her to demonstrate that the marriage  falls  into
    that category: see Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038(IAC), Agho v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1198  at,  e.g.,  [13],  and  Sadovska  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department at, e.g., [28].   The  legal
    burden is  not  discharged  merely  by  demonstrating  there  to  be  a
    "reasonable suspicion" that the marriage is not  genuine,  although  if
    the respondent  does  provide  such  grounds,  the  appellant  will  be
    expected to respond to the allegation: see Rosa v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14 at [24] to [27] .  In  those
    circumstances, the initial evidential burden borne  by  the  respondent
    shifts to the appellant to provide an "innocent explanation".   If  the
    appellant provides an "innocent explanation", the  effect  will  be  to
    return the evidential pendulum to the respondent to refute the  claimed
    innocent explanation.   Throughout,  the  legal  burden  rests  on  the
    Secretary of State; the basic rule is this: "he who asserts must prove"
    (Sadovska at [28], per Lady Hale).   There  is  only  one  standard  of
    proof, and that is the civil standard: the balance of probabilities.

Documentary evidence

11. The appellant provided two bundles featuring his statement and that  of
    the sponsor, statements from supporting witnesses,  documents  relating
    to the sponsor's employment history in  this  country,  their  marriage
    certificate and their birth certificates.  We also had the  benefit  of
    detailed written  submissions  prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing by Ms Masood, counsel previously instructed by the appellant.

12. The respondent's bundle  consisted  primarily  of  the  refusal  notice
    issued at the border, plus the written submissions  relied  on  by  the
    respondent  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and   helpful   written
    submissions prepared by Mr Melvin for the hearing before us.

The hearing

13. As with the earlier hearing, the  appellant  represented  himself.  The
    respondent granted the appellant temporary admission on that  occasion,
    and for the re-making hearing, in order for him to present his case  in
    person.  We are grateful  to  Mr  Melvin  for  the  steps  he  took  to
    facilitate the appellant's admission, pursuant to directions issued  by
    the President ahead of the error of law  hearing,  and  ahead  of  this
    remaking decision hearing.

14. The appellant and  sponsor  gave  evidence,  and  participated  in  the
    proceedings, through an Albanian and Italian interpreter  respectively.
    At the outset, we  ensured  that  each  were  able  to  understand  and
    communicate  through  their  interpreters.   Although  the  sponsor  is
    Lithuanian, she explained that, as she had lived in Italy for a  number
    of years, she was more comfortable speaking in Italian than Lithuanian,
    especially when describing matters relating to  her  relationship  with
    the appellant, which was formed in Italy, and - on the appellant's case
    - had subsisted in Italy longer than anywhere else.

15. We took the appellant and  sponsor  through  their  written  statements
    (which  appear  to  have  been  prepared  with  the  benefit  of  legal
    assistance, consistent with the  appellant  being  legally  represented
    before the First-tier Tribunal), providing them with the opportunity to
    expand  upon  their  evidence  orally.     They   were   cross-examined
    extensively by Mr Melvin.

16. Full notes of the oral evidence and submissions may  be  found  on  the
    Tribunal's file.  We will outline  the  salient  aspects  of  the  oral
    evidence and the submissions, to the extent necessary to  give  reasons
    for our findings.

Discussion

17. We reached the  following  findings  of  fact,  having  considered  the
    entirety of the evidence in the  case,  and  the  submissions,  in  the
    round.

18. The decision refusing admission  to  the  appellant  gave  on  a  brief
    explanation of why the marriage was thought to be one  of  convenience,
    which did not feature any detail.  It stated:

         "From  the  interview  notes  I  am  satisfied  that  due  to   the
         inconsistencies that have transpired  regarding  your  relationship
         with each other that  your  marriage  with  [the  sponsor]  is  not
         genuine  or  subsisting.  Your  answers   in   interview   do   not
         commensurate [sic] with a person that knows about their wedding and
         relationship with their wife and your account is different than the
         one she gave."

    The  refusal  notice  continued  to  state  that  the  actions  of  the
    appellant, "represent a  genuine  threat  to  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society." It is not clear why the  "fundamental  interests
    of society", a concept which is relevant only  to  decisions  taken  on
    grounds of public policy,  public  security  and  public  health  under
    regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations, was cited in the decision.

19. In isolation, the refusal notice  would  be  unlikely  to  satisfy  the
    initial evidential burden to which the respondent is subject.  However,
    the materials provided for the purposes of  these  proceedings  feature
    the interview notes and file notes generated at the airport in relation
    to the appellant and the sponsor when they were refused  admission.  We
    consider that these  documents  provide  additional  detail  which,  on
    balance, demonstrate that the respondent has satisfied  the  evidential
    burden for the purposes of demonstrating there  to  be  a  marriage  of
    convenience. In relation to the appellant, he could not remember  where
    he met the sponsor, nor could he remember when he proposed to  her.  He
    could not remember her favourite food. A search of his baggage revealed
    a number of bank statements  and  financial  documents  attested  by  a
    Notary Public. A transaction for E2000 featured in his bank  statements
    from November 2016, the month  before  his  marriage  took  place.  The
    appellant had only recently  been  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom,
    having entered unlawfully, and had made an asylum claim which had  been
    certified  as  "clearly  unfounded."  Thus,  the  appellant  had  every
    incentive to enter into a marriage of convenience and had  been  unsure
    when asked about essential and basic features of his relationship  with
    his wife upon being questioned.

20. As such, the evidential burden transfers to the appellant to provide an
    innocent explanation to the respondent's allegations that the  marriage
    is one of convenience.

21. We recall that the test  whether  a  marriage  is  one  of  convenience
    relates to the intentions of the parties, at the time they entered into
    the marriage. Whether a relationship is, at the present  time,  genuine
    and subsisting is a different, but often intrinsically linked, issue.

22. We have no hesitation in finding that the  appellant  and  sponsor  are
    presently in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  We note  that,  at
    the very least, there has been a degree of longevity and persistence to
    their contemporary relationship.  The initial  refusal  of  entry  took
    place in February 2017.   The  sponsor  attended  the  original  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal, on 3 November 2017; that  hearing  took
    place in the absence of the appellant, as he was not in the country  at
    the time.  They both attended the error of law hearing on 17 May  2019,
    and the remaking hearing before us.  Their relationship  has  persisted
    for at least the time since their initial refusal  of  admission  until
    now, which is a period of over two and a half years.  The appellant and
    sponsor  gave  consistent   evidence   about   their   current   living
    arrangements  and  occupations  in  Malta,  and  each  spoke   of   the
    frustration experienced by the other  arising  from  the  situation  in
    which they now find themselves.  The sponsor said in her evidence  that
    if the relationship between the two  were  not,  and  had  never  been,
    genuine, she would not have stuck with him for this length of time.

23. The appellant's bundle features an extensive range  of  photographs  of
    the appellant and sponsor clearly captured on  a  number  of  different
    occasions, over a significant period of time, in the  company  of  many
    different individuals. Some are holiday photographs taken in  beach  or
    coastal locations, others are during winter weather when the  appellant
    and sponsor are wearing warm clothing, along  with  other  visible  but
    apparently unconnected individuals in  the  background  of  photographs
    taken in public places. Other images are  "selfies"  taken  within  the
    parameters of ordinary life; from the  passenger  seat  of  a  car,  in
    restaurants  with  friends,  with  old  and  young  family,  on  sofas,
    travelling  on  coaches,  celebrating  with  friends,  and   in   other
    activities of daily life.  Although  the  images  are  not  dated,  the
    appellant and sponsor accept that they all post-date the  wedding.   It
    is clear that the images were taken over a period of time  due  to  the
    changing  weather  and  surroundings  in  the  images.   The   slightly
    differing appearances of the appellant and sponsor from  one  batch  of
    images to another (for example,  the  appellant  wears  an  established
    beard in some images, and appears simply recently unshaven  in  others)
    underline the different occasions on which the images are taken.  While
    we are mindful of the risk of attempting to infer  too  much  from  the
    demeanour of those who feature  in  the  images,  we  do  ascribe  some
    significance to the fact that, of the many different people  -  of  all
    ages - who feature in the images, none has the appearance  of  feigning
    participation, or having otherwise staged the image.

24. We make these observations having had the benefit of  seeing  both  the
    appellant and sponsor give oral evidence.  We will  return  to  analyse
    the content of their answers concerning the  disputed  issues  shortly,
    but as far as their evidence related to their current relationship,  it
    was consistent and credible.   For  example,  the  sponsor  spoke  with
    unhesitating spontaneity about their current life  together  in  Malta,
    and the frustration they have experienced as a couple arising from  the
    disruption triggered by the respondent's decision over 30  months  ago.
    The sponsor spoke in moving terms of the impact of her  own  subsequent
    difficulties at the border, even upon admission to this country in  the
    absence of the appellant, to see her family.   We  have  no  reason  to
    doubt the sincerity of her account of the distress she experiences upon
    seeking admission to the United Kingdom, having  been  flagged  by  the
    respondent at the border.  The genuineness with which the sponsor spoke
    of those  experiences  equalled  that  with  which  she  spoke  of  the
    frustration she  and  the  appellant  have  experienced  following  the
    respondent's decision. Taken together, these aspects of the evidence of
    the sponsor and the appellant combine to lead to the conclusion that it
    is more likely than not that the appellant and sponsor are presently in
    a genuine relationship.

25. Of course, the issue for  our  consideration  is  not  whether  at  the
    present time the parties are in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    of marriage. We must  consider  whether  the  purposes  for  which  the
    parties entered the marriage in the first place was  for  the  sole  or
    predominant purpose of avoiding the requirements of immigration control
    to which the appellant would  otherwise  be  subject.  It  is  entirely
    possible that a couple who  entered  a  relationship  of  marriage  for
    reasons of convenience, intending for the sole or  predominant  purpose
    of the union to be the evasion of  immigration  controls,  could  later
    develop genuine love and affection for one  another,  such  that  their
    relationship evolves and becomes a genuine by-product of  an  initially
    sham relationship. It is our task to ascertain  whether  the  appellant
    and the sponsor fall into that category (for the  relationship  clearly
    is currently genuine), or whether the sole or  predominant  purpose  of
    their marriage was not for the appellant to acquire a right  to  reside
    in this country in circumstances in which he  would  not  otherwise  be
    entitled to enjoy one, but was  for  reasons  of  love,  affection  and
    commitment from the outset.

26. In cross examination, the appellant and sponsor gave largely consistent
    accounts of  the  circumstances  of  their  separate  arrival  in  this
    country, and  their  subsequent  cohabitation.  The  sponsor  was  able
    accurately to describe the appellant's work in Italy  between  2012  to
    2015, namely in the construction industry. They both  described  living
    together in Bromley upon their initial cohabitation  in  this  country.
    They gave consistent accounts of when  the  initially  began  to  speak
    about getting married, and why they want to do so. They described their
    lives together in Malta in consistent terms.

27. However, the following features of the appellant's  proffered  innocent
    explanation give rise to some credibility concerns with his account  as
    a whole, which we take into account.

28. Plainly, the appellant has a poor immigration history.  He  was  cross-
    examined about his asylum claim, which was based upon  a  fear  of  his
    family and his claimed fear at the hands  of  those  who  had,  in  his
    words, trafficked him  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to  produce
    cannabis. We accept the submissions of Mr  Melvin  that  the  appellant
    lacks credibility, although, for reasons we shall outline, this is only
    in certain respects. The appellant claimed to the  respondent  that  he
    had a well-founded fear of being persecuted in Albania  on  account  of
    threats made by his family. Not only has the  appellant  been  able  to
    return to Albania without  experiencing  any  of  the  difficulties  he
    previously represented to the respondent he would face, but it is clear
    from the narrative that he has presented as part of  these  proceedings
    that part of his  earlier  asylum  claim  was  fabricated.  Indeed,  he
    accepted as much in cross-examination.  He  accepted  that  he  falsely
    stated in his asylum claim that he arrived here in 2012.  By  contrast,
    he now maintains before  us  that  in  2012  he  moved  to  Italy,  and
    commenced his relationship  with  the  sponsor,  before  entering  this
    country clandestinely in 2015.

29. Although there is extensive photographic and text-message  evidence  of
    the current, or contemporary, relationship between  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor, there is no documentary or photographic evidence of  their
    relationship prior to their marriage. That is striking; it appears from
    the  range  of  different  situations  and  occasions  upon  which  the
    photographs which feature in the bundle were taken, that the  appellant
    and the sponsor are a couple who,  like  many  others,  document  their
    relationship by means of regular photographs and selfies.   That  there
    are no such images from earlier stages in  their  claimed  relationship
    presents some concerns.

30. Both the appellant and sponsor were asked about  the  absence  of  such
    evidence in cross-examination.  The  answers  they  provided  were  not
    consistent. The appellant said that they did take  photographs  of  the
    pre-marriage stages of their  relationship,  but  they  were  all  held
    digitally, and they were deleted following an argument between the two.
    The appellant's evidence in  this  respect  did  feature  a  degree  of
    credibility when he  said  that,  as  a  couple,  they  had  had  their
    difficulties, and that accordingly they had destroyed  the  photographs
    they had previously taken of themselves. It was at about that time that
    the appellant came to this country.

31. By contrast, the sponsor said that she had changed  her  telephone,  on
    which all the images were stored, a number of times.  Earlier  handsets
    had broken, she said. This had been before her images  were  stored  on
    the cloud. She had changed handsets "ten times".  In cross-examination,
    she initially said that she had not argued with the appellant, and that
    they had not had a period of separation.  There had been no reason  for
    her to delete the images herself.  She later  accepted  that  they  did
    argue ("Of course we argue, everybody argues...").  Mr  Melvin  submits
    that these discrepancies give rise to significant concerns  as  to  the
    claimed purposes for  which  the  parties  entered  their  marriage  in
    December 2016. We will return to this issue.

32. There is no documentary evidence arising from the claimed  three  years
    of cohabitation in Italy. The appellant and sponsor each said that they
    had not retained any paperwork from this period,  adding  that  it  was
    some time ago.  We bear in mind the relative youth of the appellant and
    sponsor at this stage;  each  would  have  been  in  their  early  20s,
    starting life together, in different  countries  to  their  own,  in  a
    haphazard fashion. Although there is superficial force in  Mr  Melvin's
    submission that the absence of documentary evidence is evidence of  the
    absence of a genuine relationship, we accept the  explanation  provided
    by the appellant and sponsor that they did  not  retain  any  paperwork
    from this era, as they did not know they would have to. We bear in mind
    that the description of life together in Rome was in a rented  room  in
    shared accommodation, and are realistic about the extent to  which  any
    documents could be expected to be  generated  from  such  arrangements,
    still less the prospect of such documents being available for scrutiny,
    in a different country, some four to seven years later.

33. The appellant's bank statements revealed a payment of  E2000  into  his
    bank account, in cash, in his local branch in Albania,  on  7  November
    2016. The payment slips required the appellant to specify  the  "source
    of funds", which the appellant stated  was  "EMIGRACIONI".   Mr  Melvin
    contends that that means "emigration"in Albanian, and the appellant has
    not sought to ascribe a different  meaning  to  the  word.   Mr  Melvin
    submits that the "source of funds" could also  be  taken  to  mean  the
    "purpose of funds",  with  the  effect  that,  at  the  very  time  the
    appellant proposed to the sponsor, a large cash deposit was  made  into
    his account, with a description which bore some resemblance to  matters
    of  migration.  It  was,  therefore,  payment  for  the   marriage   of
    convenience, submits Mr Melvin.  In  cross-examination,  the  appellant
    explained that this transaction was related to the costs that he  would
    need to meet in order to move to Lithuania, where he was to  marry  the
    sponsor. Both said in their evidence that, although  the  proposal  did
    not take place until late November 2016, marriage is something they had
    been talking about for some time and was therefore a  subject  of  some
    familiarity between them.

34. We accept that large cash deposits of this magnitude shortly  before  a
    claimed marriage of convenience could give rise to the suggestion  that
    a transaction was being made  in  order  to  "pay"  for  the  marriage.
    However, there is a flaw in this submission on the facts of this  case.
    It is the respondent's case that the appellant was the one to gain from
    a marriage of  convenience,  rather  than  the  sponsor.  There  is  no
    evidence of this transaction being  used  to  make  a  payment  to  the
    sponsor, such that we may regard it as "payment" for the  marriage.  As
    set out in a skeleton argument prepared  by  the  appellant's  previous
    counsel, Ms Masood, there are a number of reasons why the appellant may
    have chosen to record the source of funds in this way.  The  source  of
    funds could have been from the work he did,  albeit  illegally,  whilst
    living  in  this  country.  The  appellant's  own  account  in   cross-
    examination was that the deposit was  for  the  purposes  of  his  then
    forthcoming move to Lithuania, and the subsequent marriage.

35. We consider  that  a  more  straightforward  explanation  is  possible.
    Getting married and moving  country  is  an  expensive  business;  many
    legitimate couples will have a  range  of  transactions  going  through
    their bank accounts during this time of their lives; even  against  the
    background of the remaining concerns highlighted by the respondent,  we
    do not consider that this feature of the evidence militates one way  or
    the other in relation to whether the marriage was one of convenience.

36. We also recall the initial discrepancies,  outlined  in  paragraph  19,
    above, in the interviews conducted with the appellant and  the  sponsor
    at the airport. Although we were satisfied, for  the  purposes  of  the
    initial evidential burden being discharged, that  those  discrepancies,
    combined with the clear incentive the appellant had to enter a marriage
    of convenience, were sufficient  to  prompt  an  explanation  from  the
    appellant,  we  consider  that  the  discrepancies  were  at  the  less
    significant end of the scale.  The respondent's case was not set out in
    any detail in the refusal  notice,  and  the  detail  provided  in  the
    contemporaneous notes made by the respondent's officials is light.  The
    appellant struggled to remember the proposal, but the other details  he
    could not provide - his wife's favourite food, for example  -  are  not
    the sort of omissions which lead to the  conclusion  that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience.

37. We return to the issue  of  the  differing  accounts  provided  of  the
    absence of photographs of the relationship prior  to  the  ceremony  of
    marriage. For the reasons we have already set out, the answers provided
    by  the  appellant  and   sponsor   on   this   point   featured   some
    inconsistencies. On conventional credibility grounds, this  discrepancy
    could, in  principle,  give  rise  to  credibility  concerns  with  the
    entirety of the evidence of both parties to the marriage.  It  is  also
    significant that the discrepancy arose in relation to  the  explanation
    for the absence of what many would consider to be essential features of
    a relationship which was to lead to a genuine marriage.

38. We have concerns about the appellant's  poor  immigration  history  and
    previous deployment of a false asylum claim.  He has  readily  accepted
    that he worked in the "grey economy" in Italy.  He accepted  in  cross-
    examination that, shortly after his arrival here, he obtained false  ID
    documentation and a fraudulent bank card.  We have significant concerns
    about his credibility on that account.  We take these into account.

39. Against that  background,  we  also  remind  ourselves  that  the  rich
    tapestry  of  life  with  which  the  Tribunal  is  familiar   features
    relationships, living arrangements, life decisions and family life that
    to some may seem odd or chaotic, but to others, to be normal.  We  must
    also bear in mind that the parties to a genuine  marriage,  seeking  to
    defend their union, may  seek  to  gloss  over  difficulties  in  their
    relationship, or  otherwise  present  an  unrealistically  blemish-free
    picture of an at times difficult relationship.  It is  trite  law  that
    witnesses whose evidence is based on a truthful core may exaggerate  or
    overlook certain aspects of the truth, out  of  an  understandable  but
    wrong desire to ensure the best possible treatment of their case.

40. We consider it more likely than not that the sponsor sought to minimise
    the past difficulties in  their  relationship  in  her  evidence.   Her
    explanation for not having  cloud-based  storage  for  previously  lost
    images is plausible.  Her evidence was that she did not put  photos  of
    her boyfriend - as the appellant then was - on social media.   However,
    we doubt that, in the time period under consideration, she had utilised
    ten smartphone handsets, one breaking after another, in  light  of  the
    conflicting but realistic account given by the appellant.  She may have
    been overstating matters at this stage. She may have  simply  meant  "a
    lot", or even more than one or  two.   We  accept,  however,  that  her
    computer, which also stored images, was  stolen;  this  aspect  of  her
    evidence was not challenged  in  cross-examination.   We  consider  the
    truth on the photographs point to be located in a  combination  of  her
    evidence and the appellant's.

41. Bearing in mind the fact that the appellant and sponsor are - and  have
    been for some time  -  in  a  genuine  relationship,  we  consider  the
    appellant's suggestion that they experienced relationship  difficulties
    to be credible.  Something must have happened for him to  have  decided
    to leave Italy and enter the United Kingdom  clandestinely  during  the
    currency of the relationship.  The sponsor's initial evidence that they
    had never experienced difficulties was difficult  to  accept.   Indeed,
    she  later  corrected  herself,  accepting  that  they  had  had   some
    arguments.  We accept the appellant's evidence  that  photographs  from
    earlier in their relationship were deleted  due  to  difficulties  they
    experienced at the time, and we accept the sponsor's evidence that  the
    images were not stored on the cloud at that point.

42. Drawing this analysis together, we return  to  our  core  task,  namely
    determining whether the parties  to  the  marriage  have  provided  the
    required "innocent explanation"  to  deflect  the  evidential  pendulum
    which has swung to them.  We accept their explanation.   The  sponsor's
    determination and sincerity as the wife of the appellant  was  apparent
    at the hearing.  There was no indication, of the sort with which we are
    sadly familiar from our experience in  the  Tribunal,  of  a  reluctant
    partner, or someone living a lie.  Over the course of an hour's  cross-
    examination, she  provided  consistent,  forthright  responses  to  all
    questions asked.  When she could not remember the answer to a question,
    which was infrequent, she said so.  On  one  occasion,  she  could  not
    remember whether she had returned to Italy or Lithuania in  July  2016.
    Little turns on that distinction, as the appellant had been arrested in
    this country by that point, and the couple  were  subject  to  enforced
    separation at the time.

43. We readily accept that the way in which the appellant and sponsor  have
    conducted their relationship may seem at odds with  the  approach  that
    many may  take.   Their  lives  have  had  a  chaotic  dimension.   The
    appellant has engaged  in  activity  -  his  false  asylum  claim,  his
    possession  of  false  documents  -  which  calls  into  question   his
    credibility.  He has much to  gain  from  a  marriage  of  convenience.
    However, we consider that the current,  genuine,  relationship  between
    the appellant and sponsor provides a lens through which their intention
    upon entering their marriage may be ascertained, when  taken  with  the
    remainder of the evidence in the case.  We consider  it  to  be  highly
    unlikely that the appellant and  sponsor  would  have  established  and
    maintained the  relationship  they  currently  enjoy  if  the  sole  or
    predominant purpose  of  their  union  was  initially  to  provide  the
    appellant a means  by  which  he  could  avoid  being  subject  to  the
    requirements of immigration control.

44. We accept, therefore, that  the  appellant  has  provided  an  innocent
    explanation to the respondent's case  that  he  is  in  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  That has the effect of swinging the  evidential  pendulum
    back to the respondent.  Mr Melvin's submissions in response sought  to
    rely on the same materials relied upon in  order  to  substantiate  his
    case that this is a marriage of convenience, and what was  revealed  in
    cross-examination. For the reasons we have set out  above,  we  do  not
    accept  that  the  respondent's  case  is  capable  of   refuting   the
    appellant's innocent explanation to the extent that  we  are  bound  to
    find that the marriage was one of convenience. We have paid  particular
    regard to the position and evidence of the sponsor. We  do  not  accept
    that  she  is  knowingly  a  party  to  a  marriage   of   convenience,
    notwithstanding the clear incentive the appellant  had  to  enter  into
    such a union.  The mere fact that the appellant stood to gain much from
    the marriage in immigration terms  is  insufficient:  see  Sadovska  at
    [29]:

         "...it is  not  enough  that  the  marriage  may  bring  incidental
         immigration and other benefits  if  this  is  not  its  predominant
         purpose."

45. It is necessary for the respondent,  in  the  discharge  of  her  legal
    burden, to demonstrate that both parties to the marriage entered it for
    the sole, or predominant, purpose of evading  immigration  control.  As
    Lady Hale noted in Sadovska, also at [29]:

         "...except in cases of deceit by the non-EU national, this must  be
         the purpose of them both. Clearly, a non-EU national may be  guilty
         of abuse when the EU national is not, because she believes that  it
         is a genuine relationship."

    It has been no part of the respondent's case  that  the  appellant  has
    deceived  the  sponsor.  Indeed,  they  were  both  initially   refused
    admission to the United Kingdom, and the  sponsor  has  spoken  of  the
    continued difficulties she  experiences  at  the  border,  having  been
    flagged as a potential party  to  a  marriage  of  convenience  by  the
    respondent's systems. It is our task to consider the case  as  advanced
    by the respondent, and not to substitute alternative  theories  of  the
    factual matrix, such  as  the  potential  for  the  appellant  to  have
    deceived the sponsor.

Conclusion

46. In light of the above  analysis,  therefore,  the  respondent  has  not
    discharged the legal burden upon her of demonstrating that the marriage
    was one of convenience.  It follows that the exclusionary definition of
    the term "spouse" in regulation 2(1) of the 2016 Regulations  does  not
    exclude the appellant from being categorised as a "spouse", for  he  is
    not a party to a marriage of convenience.  It  also  follows  that  the
    sponsor was not a party to a marriage of convenience, either.

47. For those reasons, the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  admit  the
    appellant on the basis that he was a party to a marriage of convenience
    was unlawful.  This appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is  allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 14 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
 The respondent discharged the  initial  evidential  burden  to  demonstrate
that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.   The  respondent's  initial
decision was entirely within the range of decisions  properly  open  to  the
respondent to take, on the basis of the material before her.

Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 14 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Isufaj (PTA decisions/reasons; EEA reg. 37 appeals) [2019] UKUT 00283 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 May 2019                                |                              |
|Further submissions                           |                              |
|made on 31 May 2019                           |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                               Amarildo isufaj
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     in person, accompanied by the sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


    (1) Judges deciding applications for permission to appeal should ensure
    that, as a general matter, there is no apparent  contradiction  between
    the decision on the application and what is said in  the  "reasons  for
    decision" section of the document that records  the  decision  and  the
    reasons for it. As was said in Safi and others  (permission  to  appeal
    decisions)  [2018]  UKUT  388  (IAC),  a  decision  on   a   permission
    application must be capable  of  being  understood  by  the  Tribunal's
    administrative staff, the parties and by the court or tribunal to which
    the appeal lies. In the event of  such  an  apparent  contradiction  or
    other uncertainty, the parties can expect the Upper Tribunal  to  treat
    the decision as the crucial element.

    (2) Although regulation 37(1) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 provides that a  person  may  not  appeal  under
    regulation 36 whilst he or she is in  the  United  Kingdom,  where  the
    decision in question falls within regulation 37(1)(a) to (g), once  the
    appeal is instituted by  a  person  who  is  then  outside  the  United
    Kingdom, there is no statutory prohibition on the appeal continuing  if
    the person concerned thereafter is physically  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It will, however, be for the  Secretary  of  State  to  decide
    whether to give that person temporary  admission  for  the  purpose  of
    attending an appeal hearing, since regulation 41 does not apply to such
    cases.


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW
        AND SETTING ASIDE OF THE DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born in 1993,  who  having  been
    refused asylum in the United Kingdom in 2016, was  removed  to  Albania
    later that year.

 2. The appellant attempted to enter the United Kingdom on 4 February 2017,
    in the company of his wife, the sponsor, who is a citizen of Lithuania.
     Both the appellant and his wife were refused admission  on  the  basis
    that the Immigration Officer was satisfied that their  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience and that refusal of entry  was  appropriate  on
    the grounds of public policy and public security.

 3. The notice of decision, given to the appellant, told him that he had  a
    right of appeal  under  regulation  36  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 against the decision but that, pursuant
    to regulation 37(1)(a), he could exercise that right  "only  after  you
    have left the United Kingdom".

 4. The appellant did so.  His appeal  was  heard  at  Taylor  House  on  3
    November 2017 by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 November 2017, dismissed it.   At  the  hearing,  the
    judge heard oral evidence from the  sponsor.   The  appellant  remained
    outside the United Kingdom.

 5. Ms Masood of Counsel drafted grounds of application for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the judge's  decision.   Ground  1
    contended that the judge had wrongly treated the appellant  as  bearing
    the burden of showing that his marriage to the sponsor was not  one  of
    convenience.  It is trite law that, although there can be a shifting of
    the  evidential  burden,  the  legal  burden  lies  throughout  on  the
    respondent to show that the marriage  in  question  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience (and, thus, not a relationship that affords a non-EU  party
    to that marriage any relevant rights under EU law).

 6. There was, plainly, great force in ground 1.  As Ms Masood pointed out,
    at paragraph 52 of his decision, the judge said:-

         "On the evidence before me the Appellant has fallen  far  short  of
         showing that, on balance his marriage to the sponsor was genuine."

 7. That incorrect articulation of the burden of proof governed the way  in
    which the judge approached the oral and documentary evidence.   So  far
    as the documentary evidence was concerned, the judge said:-

         "49. There is no documentary evidence that the couple cohabited  in
             Rome.  Indeed, one of the striking things about this  case  is
             the lack  of  evidence  about  the  relationship  in  general,
             including communications, photographs and the sorts of  things
             one would expect to see where a  relationship  has  apparently
             been ongoing for 4 or 5 years."

 8. In her grounds, Ms Masood pointed out that  the  materials  before  the
    judge included over 100 photographs of  the  couple  taken  in  various
    locations at various times, including on their  wedding  day  and  with
    various  family  members,  such  as  the  sponsor's  son;  and  written
    evidence, such as booking documentation, showing that the  sponsor  had
    visited the appellant in Albania  a  number  of  times  in  2017.   The
    grounds submitted that none of that  evidence  was  challenged  by  the
    respondent.

 9. Unsurprisingly, First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett  granted  permission
    on Ms Masood's grounds.  Judge  Grimmett's  decision,  dated  26  April
    2018, stated in terms "The application is granted".

10. Paragraph 1 of Judge Grimmett's "Reasons for decision", however,  noted
    that the application was fourteen days out of time and that  there  was
    no explanation for the delay.  Judge Grimmett said that, as a result "I
    do not extend time".

11. Paragraph 2 of the reasons went on to state that: "It is arguable  that
    the Judge erred in requiring the appellant to show  that  there  was  a
    genuine marriage when the initial burden was on the respondent to  show
    it was a marriage of convenience".

12. When the appellant's appeal came before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Renton at Field House on 2 July 2018, Ms Masood appeared on  behalf  of
    the appellant.   Deputy  Judge  Renton  took  what  he  regarded  as  a
    jurisdictional point  on  the  decision  produced  by  Judge  Grimmett.
    Having heard submissions from Ms Masood and Ms  Pal,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Deputy Judge Renton found as follows:-

         "4.  My decision is that  there  is  no  valid  appeal  before  me.
             Although Judge Grimmett eventually granted  leave  to  appeal,
             the first decision was  that  the  application  for  leave  to
             appeal was made out of time and that there was no  reason  for
             her to extend time.  This is the first decision in  the  grant
             and therefore in my view takes  precedence.   What  the  Judge
             subsequently decided in paragraph 2 of the grant is  therefore
             irrelevant.  I took the  view  that  it  was  not  for  me  to
             overturn in some way the decision of  Judge  Grimmett  not  to
             extend time.  I decided not  to  consider  a  possible  review
             under Rules 34 and 35 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014  as
             there would be no compliance with  Rule  35(3).   I  found  it
             significant that Judge Grimmett had not decided to review  the
             decision in the appeal under the provisions of Rule 34."

13. Having reached that conclusion, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton held
    that there was "No valid appeal before  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which is therefore not set aside".

14. Ms Masood applied on behalf of the appellant for permission  to  appeal
    to the Court of Appeal against Deputy Judge Renton's decision.  In that
    application, she drew a distinction between  what  Judge  Grimmett  had
    said was her "decision" and what she had expressed as her "reasons  for
    decision".

15. Upon receiving the application for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill considered (as she was  permitted  to
    do by rule 45(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2018)
    whether to undertake a review of Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Renton's
    decision.  Upper Tribunal Judge Gill decided to do so.  She noted  that
    the Upper Tribunal decision in Safi and Others  (Permission  to  appeal
    decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC) had been reported.  The headnote  of
    Safi and Others reads as follows:-

         "(1) It is essential for a judge  who  is  granting  permission  to
             appeal only on limited grounds to say so,  in  terms,  in  the
             section of  the  standard  form  document  that  contains  the
             decision, as opposed to the reasons for the decision.

         (2)  It is likely to be only in very exceptional circumstances that
             the Upper Tribunal will be persuaded to entertain a submission
             that a decision which,  on  its  face,  grants  permission  to
             appeal without  express  limitation  is  to  be  construed  as
             anything other than a  grant  of  permission  on  all  of  the
             grounds   accompanying   the   application   for   permission,
             regardless of what might be said in the reasons  for  decision
             section of the document."

16. Judge Gill considered that, if Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton  had
    had the benefit of the judgment in  Safi  and  Others,  he  might  have
    appreciated,  by  analogy  with  the  reasoning  in  that   case,   the
    significance of the fact that the section of the standard form document
    that contained the decision of Judge Grimmett stated  "The  application
    is granted" as opposed to "Extension of time is refused".

17. Accordingly, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  decided  to  set  aside  the
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton, pursuant to rule 46  of
    the Upper Tribunal Rules.  In so doing, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  made
    it  plain  that  the  significance  of  the  distinction  between   the
    "decision" and the "reasons for decision" sections in the standard form
    document does not merely provide an answer to the  problem  that  faced
    the Upper Tribunal in Safi and Others of whether a grant of  permission
    is general or restricted, but that it is the general means whereby  the
    significance of  other  deficiencies  in  the  "reasons"  part  of  the
    document ought to  be  addressed.  In  the  present  case,  what  Judge
    Grimmett said about extending time had to be read in the light  of  the
    main or overarching decision that, "In the matter of an application for
    permission to appeal ... The application is granted". Her decision  was
    to grant permission  to  appeal.  Since  that  meant  time  had  to  be
    extended, paragraph 1 of the "REASONS  FOR  DECISION"  section  of  the
    document had to be construed in that light.

18. Judges deciding applications for permission to appeal should  therefore
    ensure that, as a general matter, there is  no  apparent  contradiction
    between the decision on  the  application  and  what  is  said  in  the
    "reasons for decision" section of the document. As was said in Safi and
    others, a decision on a permission application must be capable of being
    understood by the Tribunal's administrative staff, the parties  and  by
    the court or tribunal to which the appeal lies. In the event of such an
    apparent contradiction or other uncertainty, the parties can expect the
    Upper Tribunal to treat the decision as the crucial element.

19. As a result of Upper Tribunal Judge Gill's  "set-aside"  decision,  the
    appellant's appeal was listed for hearing on  17  May  2019.   At  that
    hearing, the appellant appeared in person, accompanied by the  sponsor.
    The appellant had,  apparently,  entered  the  United  Kingdom  shortly
    beforehand, with the  aim  of  attending  the  hearing.   He  had  been
    detained by the respondent but then released  on  temporary  admission,
    with directions being set for his removal, shortly after  the  hearing,
    to Malta, which is where the appellant and the  sponsor  are  currently
    living.

20. The Upper Tribunal invited submissions from the parties on whether  the
    appellant could pursue his  appeal  from  within  the  United  Kingdom,
    having instituted the appeal whilst outside it.  Written submissions on
    this matter were received from Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer, dated 31 May 2019.  No submissions have been received from the
    appellant.

21. Mr Deller states that the respondent's position is that no  prohibition
    on pursuing such an appeal can be derived from  the  2016  Regulations.
    Schedule 2 to the Regulations does not  import,  for  an  appeal  under
    regulation 36 (Appeal rights), any provision of section 92  or  104  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which determines  the
    place from which an appeal under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act  may  be
    brought or continued.  Accordingly, the respondent submits  that  there
    is no legislative bar to  the  appellant's  appeal  continuing  if  the
    appellant is physically present in the United Kingdom whilst the appeal
    is pending.

22. We see no basis for taking issue with Mr Deller's submissions  on  this
    matter. Provided that the appeal is instituted when  the  appellant  is
    outside the United Kingdom,  his  subsequent  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom does  not  cause  the  appeal  to  lapse  or  otherwise  become
    ineffective.

23.  We would, however, emphasise that the present appeal is not an  appeal
    under the 2016 Regulations against a decision to remove  the  appellant
    under regulation 23(6)(b).  As a result, the appellant does not have  a
    right to require the  respondent  under  regulation  41  to  admit  him
    temporarily to the United Kingdom  in  order  to  make  submissions  in
    person in his appeal (except where such appearance may  cause  "serious
    troubles to public policy or public security": regulation  41(3)).   In
    an appeal of the kind with which  we  are  concerned,  it  is  for  the
    Secretary of State to decide whether to grant temporary admission.

24. Regrettably, on 17 May 2019, no Albanian interpreter was  available  to
    enable the appellant to speak  to  us  in  his  native  language.   His
    knowledge of English was extremely limited.  The sponsor  was  able  to
    communicate with the appellant in  Italian  and,  to  some  extent,  to
    communicate to the Tribunal what the appellant was attempting  to  say.
    However, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted when the  sponsor  gave
    evidence before him, the sponsor's own knowledge of English is somewhat
    limited (albeit better than that of the appellant).

25. In the circumstances, we indicated that, subject to the  jurisdictional
    issue, we would decide whether  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, such that that decision should  be
    set aside.

26. For the reasons we have given, we are fully  satisfied  that  there  is
    such an error in the decision.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  wrongly
    placed the burden of proof on the  appellant  and,  as  a  result,  his
    analysis of the evidence and findings thereon cannot stand.  The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge also ignored a wealth of material that  was  before
    him, including extensive photographic evidence.

27. We accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   We
    shall re-make the decision in the Upper Tribunal.   To  that  end,  the
    respondent has indicated that  she  would  be  prepared  to  grant  the
    appellant temporary admission for the purposes of attending the resumed
    hearing.





                      Signed                     Date






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber


