
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02051/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 February 2019                     |On 03rd April 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                  HARIS ALI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Philip Nathan, Counsel instructed by Hubers Law
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                       DECISION OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF
             THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse him a residence card as the extended  family  member  of  his
    uncle, a French citizen and therefore an EEA national, who is  said  to
    be exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The sponsor did not attend the First-tier Tribunal hearing, nor was the
    appellant present or represented at that hearing.  The First-tier Judge
    proceeded in the absence of the appellant and sponsor and dismissed the
    appeal.  The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, stating that  he
    had made an adjournment request by fax before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing which had not been taken  into  account  when  the  appeal  was
    considered.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that such an adjournment  request  had  been  sent  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but not linked to the file considered by the First-tier Judge,
    leading to procedural unfairness.

 4. At the hearing today, it was common ground that the First-tier Tribunal
    did materially err in law in dealing with the appeal on the basis  that
    the appellant had chosen not  to  appear  or  be  represented,  without
    explanation.

 5. No fault attaches to the First-tier Judge who was  not  aware  that  an
    adjournment request had  been  received,  but  there  was  nevertheless
    procedural unfairness such that the parties agree that this is  a  case
    where the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set  aside,  and
    that no written reasons are required.

 6. The  requirements  of  sub-paragraphs  40(3)(a)  and  40(3)(b)  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 [as amended] are met.  I
    am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal can  properly
    be set aside without a reasoned decision notice.

Decision

 7. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The decision in this appeal will be remade afresh in the First-tier
    Tribunal, with no findings of fact or credibility preserved.



Signed:  Judith A J  C  Gleeson                     Date:          20  March
2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



