
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02702/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 June 2020                    |On 23 June 2020                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                            FARRAKH SULTAN ABBASI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation by way of written submissions:
For the Appellant:     Lawfare Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 11  December  2019  in
         respect the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howorth,
         promulgated on 12 September 2019 following a hearing at  Birmingham
         on 3 September 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 23 November 1986.  He
         entered the UK as a student in September 2010 and had extensions of
         leave until March 2015. a subsequent appeal against a  decision  to
         cancel his leave was allowed in May 2016. It is  unclear  from  the
         evidence  what  happened  then  but  at  some  point  he   made   a
         private/family life application which was refused  on  21  December
         2017.  A  judicial  review  challenge  was  unsuccessful   and   an
         application for reconsideration was refused on 31 May 2018.  On  11
         April 2019, the appellant then applied for a residence card as  the
         extended family member of an  EEA  (Romanian)  national.  That  was
         refused on 23 May 2019.

      3. At the hearing in September 2019, the judge heard evidence from the
         appellant and the sponsor. She accepted that the  relationship  was
         genuine but considered it was too early on in the  relationship  to
         decide that it was durable and  that  although  the  appellant  had
         claimed that they had undergone a religions ceremony and  that  the
         sponsor had converted to Islam, which were matters that might  have
         supported the claim of durability, no documentary evidence of those
         events had been adduced. She proceeded to dismiss the appeal.

      4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis  that  there
         was no requirement for a relationship to be lengthy in order to  be
         considered durable. It was also argued that the judge did not  seek
         any explanation from  the  appellant  as  to  the  absence  of  the
         evidence she said would have been helpful and that that was unfair.
         It was maintained that adequate reasons had not been provided.

    Covid-19 crisis

      5. The matter was listed at Field House for 23 March 2020 but  had  to
         be adjourned when the UK went into lockdown due to the corona virus
         pandemic. In the light of the need to take precautions against  the
         spread of Covid-19, appropriate directions were sent to the parties
         on 22 April 2020. The parties were invited to make  submissions  on
         the error of law issue and to put forward any reasons for why  they
         considered the matter could not be decided without a hearing.

      6. The appellant replied to the directions  on  6  May  2020  and  the
         respondent on 7 May 2020. No objections were raised as to the issue
         being decided on the papers and I  now  proceed  to  determine  the
         matter.

    Discussion and Conclusions

      7. I have considered all the evidence and the submissions made.

      8. The issue is a narrow one. It is this:  having  accepted  that  the
         appellant and sponsor enjoyed a genuine relationship, did the judge
         err in law by concluding that it had not been shown to  be  durable
         (as per reg. 8(1)(5)) and had  she  been  unfair  to  rely  on  the
         absence of evidence without putting that to the appellant.

      9. The appellant met the sponsor on 11 February  2019;  they  began  a
         relationship on 19 February and on 1 April  2019  they  started  to
         cohabit. She was born in September 1975 and has an adult son  by  a
         previous marriage. On 8 April  2019,  the  appellant  completed  an
         application form for a residence card which was  forwarded  to  the
         respondent on 10 April 2019 with an accompanying  letter  from  his
         representatives. Very little  documentary  evidence  was  submitted
         with the application and the representations from  the  appellant's
         solicitors were almost entirely in general terms. More evidence was
         made available at the hearing.

     10. The judge heard from the appellant and the sponsor and  submissions
         were made by both representatives. She found  that  although  there
         were some inconsistencies, the oral evidence was largely consistent
         and she, therefore, concluded that the relationship was  a  genuine
         one. She then considered the issue  of  durability,  noting,  quite
         properly, that it  could  not  been  described  as  such  when  the
         application was made, as it had been made only 10  days  after  the
         appellant moved in with the sponsor (in fact the  application  form
         was completed even earlier).  She then considered  whether  at  the
         date of the hearing the relationship could be seen as durable.  She
         considered  the  evidence  of  shared  residence  of  five  months,
         considered the bank statements and the witness statement  from  the
         appellant and the sponsor. However due to the short duration of the
         relationship, she found that it had not been shown to be durable.

     11. I accept that there is no definition of durable in the Regulations.
           One  must  be  guided  therefore  by  materials  that  give  some
         indication of how this should be approached.

     12. The Home Office guidance of 27 March 2019 says the following  about
         such relationships:

             'If an applicant wishes to apply as  the  durable  (unmarried)
             partner of an EEA national  sponsor,  they  must  satisfy  the
             following requirements:

             .    the applicant and the  EEA  national  sponsor  have  been
             living together in a relationship similar  to  marriage  which
             has continued for at least 2 years:

                 - you must always consider the individual circumstances  of
                 the application

                 - the couple may have been in a relationship for less  than
                 2 years but they have a child together

                 - you can use your discretion if there is enough  evidence,
                 for example, if they provided a birth  certificate  showing
                 shared parentage with evidence of living together

             .    the applicant and the EEA national sponsor:

                 - intend to live together permanently

             .    are not involved in a 'consanguineous' relationship  with
             one another (they are not blood relatives)

             .    any previous marriage or similar relationship  by  either
             party has permanently broken down.

             The 2016 regulations now make it clear that  durable  partners
             do not include parties to durable partnerships of  convenience
             as defined in regulation 2 ...'

     13. Case law confirms that the above guidance 'should not be  taken  as
         necessarily correct in every particular'. In YB (EEA  reg  17(4)  -
         proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062, the Tribunal  held
         that 'durable relationship' is a Community law term and to seek  to
         reduce it to the criteria contained within  the  Immigration  Rules
         would run contrary to Community law. However, It also held that the
         Secretary of State is entitled to have some  regard  to  comparable
         provisions of the Immigration Rules when deciding whether to  issue
         a residence card. Thus  the  length  of  residence  is  a  relevant
         consideration although the two year  period  is  not  essential  or
         determinative. The head note in YB thus states:

             "1.   Neither  the   Citizens   Directive   (2004/38/EC)   nor
             regulation 17(4) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2006 confers on an "extended family member" of  an
             EEA national exercising Treaty rights a right to  a  residence
             card; consistent  with  the  Directive,  reg  17(4)  makes  it
             discretionary.

             2.   In deciding whether to  issue  a  residence  card  to  an
             extended family member of an EEA national under reg 17(4)  the
             decision-maker should adopt a three-stage approach so  as  to:
             firstly, determine whether the person concerned  qualifies  as
             an extended family member under reg 8. Next  have  regard,  as
             rules of thumb only, to the criteria  set  out  in  comparable
             provisions of the Immigration Rules. Finally, ensure there has
             been an extensive examination of the personal circumstances of
             the applicant".

     14. The issue of the length  of  the  relationship  was,  therefore,  a
         factor the judge was fully entitled to have  regard  to.  This  is,
         indeed, further confirmed by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Dauhoo  (EEA
         Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC):

             "Although Mr Subramanian  did  not  raise  the  point,  it  is
             accepted by the Tribunal in reported  decisions  that  despite
             the reference in UKBA European Casework Instructions to  proof
             of  a  durable  relationship  requiring  evidence   that   the
             relationship has lasted two years, the concept  of  a  durable
             relationship is a term of EU law  and  as  such  it  does  not
             impose a fixed time period: see YB. Having said that,  on  the
             judge's findings the  relationship  had  only  been  shown  to
             exist, if at all, very recently and  on  the  appellant's  own
             evidence his partner  was  economically  self  sufficient.  Mr
             Subramanian sensibly did not seek to argue that the  appellant
             was entitled to succeed in showing that the  relationship  was
             durable  if  only  a  very  recent   relationship   could   be
             established. For the avoidance of doubt I would  add  that  on
             the basis of the evidence  before  the  FTT  judge  a  durable
             relationship had not been established (at 21; added emphasis).

     15. It cannot be the case that all genuine relationships must  also  be
         found to be durable particularly if they are in the early stages of
         existence  such  as  in  the  present   case.   Of   course,   most
         relationships would be genuine when they start out otherwise  there
         would be no point to them (unless there is  some  other  underlying
         motive) but it cannot be said that durability  is  demonstrated  by
         all. The term itself implies something that is long lasting and the
         judge was entitled to find that a five month period of cohabitation
         (indeed just a few days at the time of  the  application)  had  not
         demonstrated that.

     16. Much is made of the fact that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also
         relied on an absence of evidence  to  dismiss  the  appeal  without
         putting the point to the appellant. The judge was referring to  the
         absence of any evidence relating to  the  Nikah  marriage  and  the
         sponsor's alleged conversion to Islam. The  appellant  had  already
         dealt with the absence of the Nikah certificate in evidence so that
         was a point he was already aware of. The same principle applies  to
         the conversion. It is an obvious point that a conversion to  Islam,
         if it genuinely occurred, would have been  an  important  piece  of
         evidence to show long term commitment to the  relationship  and  no
         evidence of this was adduced. There was no need for  the  judge  to
         ask the appellant about the absence of the  evidence;  it  was  his
         duty to adduce all relevant evidence. This was  something  that  he
         could have been expected to  easily  produce  and  its  absence  is
         indeed puzzling. I do not find there was unfairness on the part  of
         the judge to question the  appellant  about  the  absence  of  this
         evidence. He was legally represented at the hearing  and  with  his
         representative would have been aware of the importance of providing
         supporting evidence. However, in any event, the  judge  arrived  at
         her conclusion on durability before commenting on the lack of  this
         evidence so even if there were an error in her approach, it is  not
         material to the outcome.

     17. The appellant has the option of making a fresh application with all
         the evidence including any evidence of a civil marriage  if  indeed
         it took place in December 2019 as it was claimed it  would  in  the
         oral evidence.  In the absence of  a  Nikah  certificate  he  could
         adduce confirmation from the Imam as to why a certificate  was  not
         adduced and statements from witnesses and/or guests who would  have
         been present.

     18. For the above reasons, I conclude that the determination  does  not
         contain any errors of law.

    Decision

     19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any errors
         of law. The decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.

    Anonymity

     20. There has been no request for an order for anonymity at  any  stage
         and I see no reason to make one.




    Signed


         R. Keki?


         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 12 June 2020


