
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: EA/02769/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2018                |On 24 January 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     M E
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                               Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Estonia, born on [ ] 1962. She arrived in
the UK on 20.11.10 and was a self-sufficient jobseeker until she commenced
employment on 6.11.11. She ceased employment on 29.4.12 due to ill-health.
On 16.12.16 she applied for confirmation of her right to permanent
residence as an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK, pursuant
to regulation 15 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016. This
application was refused on 28.2.17 and an appeal was lodged against that
decision on 12.3.17.

2. The appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Miles for consideration
on the papers on 27.4.17. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 2.5.17
he dismissed the appeal, finding inter alia as follows at [14]:

      "In my judgment a person who asserts that they are temporarily unable
to    work demonstrates that the period is a temporary one by returning to
work  and the notion that they are only temporarily unable to work for a
period      which is followed immediately by permanent incapacity simply
does not    accord with the meaning of the regulations in that regard."

He was thus not satisfied that the Appellant had established on the balance
of probabilities that she is entitled to confirmation of the right to
reside permanently in the UK as an EEA national under the 2016 Regulations
[15].

3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
by the Appellant herself, in time, on the basis that in light of the
decision in FMB (EEA Regulations - reg 6(2)(a) - temporarily unable to
work) Uganda [2010] UKUT 447 (IAC) it is not clear when temporary
incapacity ends and permanent incapacity begins and that the FtTJ erred in
regarding her incapacity as permanent rather than temporary. Consequently,
she should have been considered as a worker under regulation 6(2)(a) rather
than 5(2) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

4. In a decision dated 7.11.17 permission to appeal was granted by DJ
McCarthy in the following terms:

      "6. Given the findings in [14] where Judge Miles clearly identifies
there is no      medical or other evidence to confirm the appellant is
permanently      incapacitated, it is arguable that he should have
considered whether she       continued to benefit from regulation 6(2)(a).
If she did, and has been since 29       April 2012, it is also arguable
that she will have resided for the requisite       period of five years to
entitle her to a permanent residence card."

      7. Because these issues have not been determined, the application is
arguable    and permission is granted."

Hearing

5. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
Appellant. In light of the fact that the appeal had previously been heard
on the papers and that the Appellant had been notified of the grant of
permission to appeal and the hearing date and had written to the Upper
Tribunal on 29.12.17 stating that her health may not permit her to attend
in which case she wished for a decision to be made in her absence, I
proceeded to hear the appeal in her absence, pursuant to rule 38 of the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

6. Mr Harrison, on behalf of the Respondent, helpfully accepted that there
had been a material error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal
Judge Miles, for the reasons identified in the grounds of appeal and grant
of permission to appeal.

Decision

7. In light of Mr Harrison's helpful concession I find a material error of
law in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Miles, on the basis that
he failed to consider whether the Appellant was temporarily incapacitated
and thus remained a worker pursuant to regulation 6(2)(a) of the EEA
Regulations 2006. I proceed to re-make the decision.

8. In FMB (EEA Regulations - reg 6(2)(a) - temporarily unable to work)
Uganda [2010] UKUT 447 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held inter alia as follows:

      "20.     For the Secretary of State, Mr Gulvin submitted that a
temporary   period of incapacity could not be as significant in length as
four years,      although he was not able to refer to any authority on the
point. He   acknowledged that if a person's incapacity was neither
temporary nor    permanent, then it was difficult to define it further.

      21.     For the claimant, Mr Richardson submitted that if incapacity
was not     permanent, then in terms of the ordinary meaning of language,
it was      temporary. He put to us two further arguments. The first of
these relied upon      certain regulations where requirements were
expressed as a finite period. In  this regard he referred us by way of an
example to reg 5(3)(b), which requires  that the person who has ceased
activity as a result of permanent incapacity to    work has resided in the
United Kingdom continuously for more than two      years prior to the
termination. Mr Richardson submitted that by contrast no      period of
time was specified in reg 6(2)(a) in relation to temporary inability to
work. This omission should be regarded as deliberate.

      22.     Secondly, Mr Richardson argued that when the EEA Regulations
were  read as a whole, reg 6(2)(a), relating to temporary inability to
work, and reg    5(3)(b), relating to permanent cessation of activity, dove-
tailed together in a   manner implying that a person not permanently
incapable of work was to be  regarded as temporarily incapable of work.

      23.     For our part we consider that there is considerable merit in
the   argument advanced on behalf of the claimant as to the meaning of the
words       "temporary" and "permanent", in the sense that if a person's
inability or     incapacity is not permanent, then it should be regarded as
temporary. The   definition of "permanent" in Collins English Dictionary
(1991) is given as "1.       Existing or intending to exist for an
indefinite period" and "2. Not expected to   change for an indefinite time;
not temporary". The definition of "temporary"      is given as "1. Not
permanent; provisional" and then "2. Lasting only a short     time;
transitory". These definitions give strong support for the argument that  a
state of affairs which is not permanent is temporary although, reflecting
Mr    Gulvin's submission, temporary is also regarded as lasting only a
short time.      We note that reg 5(3)(a) refers to "permanent incapacity
to work" while reg     6(2)(a) refers to a person who is "temporarily
unable to work" but we do not     consider that in this appeal anything
material hinges on any distinction      between being incapable of work or
unable to work."


9. Regulation 5(3) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 provides:





"Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"

  5.-(1) In these Regulations, "worker  or  self-employed  person  who  has
ceased activity" means an EEA national who  satisfies  the  conditions  in
paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5)...
  (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-
(a) he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a worker or self-
employed person as a result of a permanent incapacity to work; and
(b) either-
(i) he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than two years
prior to the termination; ...

10. Regulation 6(2)(a) of the aforementioned Regulations provides:


"Qualified person"

  6.-(1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means  a  person  who  is
an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-
(a)a jobseeker;
(b)a worker;
(c)a self-employed person;
(d)a self-sufficient person; or
(e)a student.
  (2) A person who is no longer working shall not cease to be treated as  a
worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-
(a) he is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness or
accident ..."

11. The Appellant's case as put before the First tier Tribunal is that she
was temporarily incapable of work from 29 April 2012 to 29 May 2013 when
she became permanently incapacitated. Judge Miles was not satisfied that
the Appellant was permanently incapacitated as the medical evidence did not
state as such in terms.

12. The Appellant has sent a letter dated 29.12.17 to the Tribunal,
attaching a letter from Dr T. Elkin, her GP at the Mere Lane Group Practice
dated 2.6.17 in which he states:

      "I am [ME]'s GP. I can confirm that she suffers from chronic
disabling   pain and limb weakness, chronic back pain and depression with
suicidal    ideation. Given the persistence of [ME]'s chronic problems,
both physical and      mental health issues and failure of attempted
treatments to improve her    symptoms, I would consider it likely her
illnesses are permanent. There is little     optimism that her symptoms are
to improve in any foreseeable timeframe."

10. In her letter of 29.12.17 the Appellant states that the medical
evidence previously submitted made reference to her illness being chronic
and that "chronic" and "permanent" essentially have the same meaning in
this context. Thus it is clear that both the Appellant and her GP now
consider that her medical condition is permanent and I so find.

11. However, the key question requiring determination is at what point did
the Appellant become permanently as opposed to temporarily incapacitated? I
have considered the evidence on this issue, in particular:

(i) a report from Ms Delia Byng, an approved disability analyst, dated
20.3.13 which concluded that "the overall evidence indicates that
significant disability related to physical and mental function is unlikely"
and that work could be considered within 3 months;

(ii) a letter from Job Centre Plus in respect of the Appellant's
entitlement to EASA (Employment & Support Allowance) dated 30.5.13
informing her that she is not entitled to EASA and had been assessed as
capable of working at that time;

(iii) A letter from Dr Elson, associated specialist in Neurology dated
28.7.14  where he records that the Appellant has reported a gradual
deterioration of her symptoms particularly over the last year and more
specifically over the past week, which made food preparation difficult. The
letter provides no conclusive diagnosis but does confirm that there was no
evidence of demyelinating CNS disease such as MS;

(iv) a certificate from her GP dated 17.10.14 certifying her as not fit to
work.

12. Whilst it is not clear from the evidence at what exact point in time
the Appellant became permanently rather than temporarily incapacitated, it
is tolerably clear it was still considered in May 2013 that the Appellant
would be able to work or was capable of work at that time. Thus I find that
the Appellant could be considered as temporarily incapacitated and thus
fell within the definition of a qualified person, set out at regulation
6(2)(a) from October 2010 when she was a job-seeker to at least May 2013
when she was still considered to be temporarily incapacitated.

13. It follows that the Appellant is entitled to permanent residence as she
resided for more than 2 years prior to the termination of her employment on
the basis that she was permanently incapacitated, pursuant to regulation
5(3) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

Decision

14. I find an error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge
Mills. I re-make the decision allowing the appeal.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

22 January 2018
