
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02737/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2020                       |On 29 May 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             Ibrahima Ismael Bah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 I make this decision without a hearing.

 2. I have already presided at a hearing to determine if there was an error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  When the appellant
    applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal he indicated in
    grounds settled by Counsel that in the event of an error of law being
    established he requested the Tribunal to "rehear the evidence and
    remake the decision".  As far as I can see, the respondent has not
    asked for an oral hearing at any stage although she did attend before
    me when an error of law was established.  After that hearing I sent out
    my "Reasons for Finding Error of Law and Directions" and made it plain
    at paragraphs 15 and 16 that I required the appellant to produce a full
    up-to-date bundle and the respondent to state after receipt of that
    bundle if she agreed the facts that the appellant sought to establish.



 3. The bundle was sent and in response to an enquiry from me by letter
    dated 10 March 2020 the appellant's representatives confirmed that the
    supplementary bundle was served on the respondent on 29 January 2020 by
    recorded delivery.  I made plain in my directions that in the event of
    non-compliance I would consider determining the appeal without a
    hearing and that is what I have decided to do.

 4. This is an appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State on 21
    March 2018 to refuse the appellant's application for a permanent
    residence card.  The appellant said he was entitled to such a card
    because he was the former family member of an EEA national exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State identified
    three problems in the application.

 5. First, he had not satisfied the Secretary of State that his former
    partner was an EEA national.  As indicated when I found an error of
    law, this point has already been resolved in the appellant's favour.
    It is dealt with at paragraph 29 of the First-tier Tribunal's Decision
    and Reasons.  It was the judge's view that the appellant must have
    established his then wife's citizenship in an earlier application and
    could rely on having established it in the past for the purposes of the
    application leading to this appeal unless there was some intervening
    evidence pointing to the unlikely conclusion that she had ceased to be
    an EEA national and there was not.

 6. Second, the appellant had to establish that this former wife was
    exercising treaty rights when she was present in the United Kingdom. I
    should have made it clear in my Reasons for Finding Error of Law that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted the appellant's evidence on this
    point.

 7. Third, the Secretary of State concluded, uncontroversially, that the
    appellant had not produced evidence that his former partner had
    remained a worker at the material time.  The Secretary of State,
    rightly, asked herself if the appellant was a worker but concluded that
    he was not.  That is the point of contention between the parties.  It
    is the appellant's case that although not employed at the material time
    he was a worker within the broader meaning of the Directive because he
    was available for work and anxious to work.  It is his case that he was
    not working because the Secretary of State had decided that he was not
    entitled to work and had notified his former employers that that was
    the case.

 8. It is the appellant's case, set out in his application form, that he
    married on 17 February 2010 and that marriage was ended by decree
    absolute on 5 April 2017.  The appellant had an EEA family permit
    issued on 13 September 2010 and that expired on 13 September 2015.  The
    Secretary of State has not chosen to expand on the Reasons for Refusal
    and so must rely on the relevant part of the decision letter of 21
    March 2018.

 9. The Secretary of State said (fourth paragraph on page 2 of 3):

         "Further, as evidence that you have been exercising Treaty rights
         since the date of divorce, you have submitted a letter from Verve
         People dated 18 September 2017, that states you have been employed
         by them since 25 November 2014.  However, the last payslip you have
         provided is dated 24 July 2016.  Additionally, the letter from your
         representatives states that you have not worked since you were
         unable to extend your visa.  The decision to refuse your first
         application for a permanent residence was made 9 February 2016.
         These discrepancies cast doubt on the information provided in the
         letter from Verve People and therefore this office is unable to
         confirm that you have been exercising Treaty rights since the dates
         of your divorce".

10. I remind myself that the date of divorce is 5 April 2017, proceedings
    having been initiated sometime in February 2017.

11. In his additional witness statement dated 28 January 2020 the appellant
    said that he had made a mistake in his previous statement.  He said:

         "It was not July 2016 that I was refused an EEA residence card, it
         was actually 2 March 2017.  After this, the Home Office called my
         workplace and said that I cannot work."

12. This mistake should not have happened.  It is quite important and the
    Secretary of State is entitled to assume that people get things
    correct.  However, this is not a matter of judicial review.  For these
    purposes I am a primary decision maker and the appellant has given
    weight to his claim to have made an error by producing apparently
    authentic copies of payslips showing his work for Verve People.  These
    show that he worked in January, March, April, May, June, July, August,
    September 2016 and February, March 2017 and again in July 2018 and for
    some time after that.  The last payment in 2017 is dated 3 March 2017.
    This fits in with his claim to have been unceremoniously and summarily
    stopped from working following intervention by the Secretary of State
    on 2 March 2017.

13. The appellant said in his statement that the Verve agency contacted him
    to say that they were no longer allowed to employ him until he had
    resolved his immigration situation.  He explained that he had said on a
    previous occasion he had tried to get confirmation from Verve but they
    denied having records extending to 2017.  Nevertheless he said they
    would "keep him on the books" and indeed he did resume work with them
    when that was possible.

14. I remind myself I am dealing with probabilities.  This case is not
    proved perfectly.  I find it surprising that the company Verve could
    not produce more helpful documentation or some confirmation of the
    reasons for his employment being stopped but if it was following oral
    representations it is perhaps not entirely surprising.  Documentation
    supports his case.  He has to live somehow and he is a man who has
    shown a willingness to work if, and I do not say this disrespectfully,
    generally only able to obtain casual work but frequently.  I accept his
    explanation that he would have worked had the Secretary of State not
    stopped him.

15. I make it plain I am not saying that the Secretary of State had done
    anything improper.  It is appropriate for the Secretary of State to be
    zealous in policing immigration control because if it is not policed it
    may as well not exist.  However, the appellant's claim and dates have
    been put forward clearly in a signed statement and the Secretary of
    State has had an opportunity of responding and has not taken it.  I
    assume that is because there is nothing to say to the contrary rather
    than indifference or inertia, so there is no proper basis for
    undermining what the appellant has said, which is, I find, inherently
    reasonable.  I also find as a matter of law it is sufficient to show
    that he was a "worker".  He had not left the job market.  He had been
    stopped from working.  It follows therefore on a balance of
    probabilities he has proved his case and I allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

16. This appeal is allowed.




Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 May 2020                    |

