

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
EA/02844/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 August 2019                       |On 9 December 2019                    |
|                                        |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                           VINNETTE SANDRA FULLER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms A. Jones, instructed by Chris & Co.
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 07  March  2018
    to refuse to issue a residence card recognising a right of residence as
    the family member of an EEA national.

2.    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Geraint  Jones  dismissed  the  appeal  in
    decisions promulgated on 09 November 2018 and 17 April 2019.

3.    The Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decisions
    involved the making of errors of law and set them aside in  a  decision
    promulgated on 30 October 2019 (annexed). The respondent  was  directed
    to serve a position statement within 14 days if new issues were  to  be
    relied upon. The appellant was given a further 14 days to respond. Both
    parties were asked to confirm whether the matter could be determined on
    the papers or whether a further hearing  was  required  to  remake  the
    decision.

4.    The Upper Tribunal has no record of a  response  to  these  directions
    from either party. I am satisfied that I  can  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision on the papers.

5.    The only reason given  for  refusing  the  application  was  that  the
    appellant failed to show that the EEA sponsor was  a  'worker  who  has
    ceased activity' within the meaning of regulation 5 of The  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. The reasons for refusal were
    set out in the error of law decision at [2].

6.    Regulation 5 of the EEA Regulations 2016 states:

      "5.(1)      In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person who
               has ceased activity" means an EEA national who satisfies a
               condition in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
         (2)               The condition in this paragraph is that the
person-
                    (a)           terminates activity as a worker or self-
           employed person and-
                       (i)   had reached the age of entitlement to a state
                            pension on terminating that activity; or
                       (ii)  in the case of a worker, ceases working to take
                            early retirement;
               (b)     pursued activity as a worker or self-employed person
                       in the United Kingdom for at least 12 months prior to
                       the termination; and
               (c)     resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more
                       than three years prior to the termination."

7.    Article 17 of the Citizens Directive provides:

           17(1) By way of derogation from Article 16, the right of
                 permanent residence in the host Member State shall be
                 enjoyed before completion of a continuous period of five
                 years of residence by:
                    a) workers or self-employed persons who, at the time
                       they stope working, have reached the age laid down by
                       the law of that Member State for entitlement to an
                       old age pension or workers who cease paid employment
                       to take early retirement, provided that they have
                       been working in that Member State for at least the
                       preceding twelve months and have resided there
                       continuously for more than three years.


                       If the law of the host Member State does not grant
                       the right to an old age pension to certain categories
                       of self-employed person, the age condition shall be
                       deemed to have been met once the person concerned has
                       reached the age of 60;.."

8.    The First-tier Tribunal judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's
      husband and made the following findings, which were preserved.

           "8.   The respondent refused the present application as  it  was
                 not satisfied that the appellant's sponsor husband had been
                 exercising Treaty Rights; had  not  demonstrated  that  her
                 sponsor husband had reached the age  of  entitlement  to  a
                 state pension; and had not  established  that  her  sponsor
                 husband had been a worker or self-employed  person  in  the
                 United Kingdom for at least 12 months prior to retirement.


           9.     The  appellant  has  still  adduced  little  by  way   of
                 documentary evidence to  establish  the  foregoing,  except
                 that she has now demonstrated that her sponsor  husband  is
                 in receipt of a state retirement pension.


           10.   The appellant's sponsor husband gave oral evidence  which,
                 whilst lacking in detail and specificity, was sufficient to
                 persuade me that it is more probable that not that he was a
                 worker in this country  prior  to  his  retirement,  for  a
                 period of not less than 12 months."

9.    Having heard evidence from the sponsor, the First-tier Tribunal  judge
    was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the EEA sponsor  was
    a worker for a period of at least 12 months prior to the termination of
    his  employment.  The  evidence  contained  in  the  sponsor's  witness
    statement indicates that he came to the UK in the 1960s and that he  is
    a long-term resident in the UK. This fact  did  not  appear  to  be  in
    dispute. I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities  that  the  EEA
    sponsor was also  likely  to  have  been  resident  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of more than three years prior to his retirement. For
    these reasons the sponsor meets the requirements of regulation 5 of the
    EEA Regulations 2016 as a worker who has ceased activity.

10.   The decision letter did not dispute that the  appellant  is  a  family
    member of the EEA sponsor. The couple  were  married  and  the  genuine
    nature of their relationship  was  accepted  by  an  earlier  Tribunal.
    Although the respondent's representative  initially  sought  to  defend
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones'  assertion  that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience, the respondent has not sought to raise  it  as
    an issue in  response  to  directions.  The  burden  would  be  on  the
    respondent to prove that it was such a marriage. For these reasons I am
    satisfied that the appellant has a right to reside in  the  UK  as  the
    'family member' of an EEA national.

11.   However, the appellant has not  yet  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
    residence for the purpose of regulation 15. A family  member  can  only
    acquire a right of permanent residence if  they  have  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom with the EEA national in accordance with the regulations
    for a period of five years. Although the appellant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with the EEA sponsor before she  married,  she  was  never
    granted a residence card on that basis and could not benefit  from  the
    operation of regulation 7(3). The couple married on 22  November  2017.
    It was only at this point that the appellant became a  'family  member'
    for the purpose of regulation 7 or  regulation  15.  At  the  date  the
    decision is remade by this Tribunal the appellant  is  unable  to  show
    that she had been a 'family member' of an EEA national for a continuous
    period of five years for the purpose of regulation 15(1)(b). Nor is she
    able to show that she was the 'family member' of the  EEA  sponsor  for
    the purpose of regulation 15(1)(d), because the date  he  retired  pre-
    dated their marriage.

12.   For the reasons given above, I conclude  that  the  decision  breaches
    the appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry to and
    residence in the United Kingdom.




DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on European law grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date 05 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan






































ANNEX


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02844/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 15 August 2019                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                           VINNETTE SANDRA FULLER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms A. Jones, instructed by Chris & Co.
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 07  March  2018
      to refuse to issue a residence card recognising a right  of  residence
      as the family member of an EEA national.

2.    The respondent did not dispute the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  a
      'family member' for the purpose of The Immigration (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations 2016"). The  sole  reason
      given for refusing the application was  that  the  appellant  did  not
      produce sufficient evidence to show that she was the family member  of
      a person exercising Treaty rights because:

           "   - You have not provided adequate evidence to show that  your
                 sponsor reached the age of entitlement to a  state  pension
                 on termination of employment/self-employment.
               - You have not provided adequate evidence to show  that  your
                 sponsor pursued their activity as a worker or self-employed
                 person in the United Kingdom for at least 12  months  prior
                 to retirement.
               - You have not provided adequate  evidence  of  your  sponsor
                 residing in the UK for a continuous  period  of  more  than
                 three years prior to retirement.

           In reference to the above points the home office  would  require
           proof that your EEA sponsor was employed for at least a  1  year
           period in the UK before  reaching  retirement.  No  evidence  of
           previous employment has been submitted therefore I am unable  to
           verify that any employment lasted for a period  of  at  least  1
           year before retirement. Lastly you have  not  provided  evidence
           that the EEA sponsor has resided in the UK continuously for more
           than three years prior to retirement."

3.    The reasons given for refusing the application related solely  to  the
      requirements contained in regulation 5 of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016
      relating to workers or self-employed persons who have ceased activity.
      The respondent did not dispute that the appellant was married  to  the
      sponsor and was  therefore  a  'family  member'  for  the  purpose  of
      regulation 7.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
      appeal in a decision promulgated on 09 November 2018. He outlined  the
      appellant's immigration history [2-7]. He  noted  that  the  appellant
      entered the UK in 2002 on a visit visa and then overstayed.  She  only
      came to the attention of the authorities when she applied for leave to
      remain on human rights grounds in 2009. He  observed  that  a  further
      application for leave to remain was made in 2011, which was refused in
      2013. He noted that the appellant made an application for a  residence
      card to recognise a right of residence as an 'extended family  member'
      based on  a  durable  relationship  with  an  Irish  citizen  (Bernard
      Carson). The application was refused on 26 August 2016. The  appellant
      married Mr Carson on 22 November 2017 and made a  further  application
      for  a  residence  card.  The  decision  to  refuse  the  most  recent
      application was the subject of this appeal.

5.    In respect of the only issue that was in dispute between  the  parties
      in the appeal the judge made the following findings:

           "8.   The respondent refused the present application as  it  was
                 not satisfied that the appellant's sponsor husband had been
                 exercising Treaty Rights; had  not  demonstrated  that  her
                 sponsor husband had reached the age  of  entitlement  to  a
                 state pension; and had not  established  that  her  sponsor
                 husband had been a worker or self-employed  person  in  the
                 United Kingdom for at least 12 months prior to retirement.


           9.     The  appellant  has  still  adduced  little  by  way   of
                 documentary evidence to  establish  the  foregoing,  except
                 that she has now demonstrated that her sponsor  husband  is
                 in receipt of a state retirement pension.


           10.   The appellant's sponsor husband gave oral evidence  which,
                 whilst lacking in detail and specificity, was sufficient to
                 persuade me that it is more probable that not that he was a
                 worker in this country  prior  to  his  retirement,  for  a
                 period of not less than 12 months.


           11.   I  raised  with  Miss  Jones  the  issue  of  whether  the
                 application nonetheless fell [to] be refused under  Part  4
                 of the 2006 Regulations, to which she  responded  that  the
                 appellant's conduct was essentially irrelevant because, she
                 submitted, the 2006  Regulations  contained  no  provisions
                 akin to those within  the  Immigration  Rules  directed  at
                 those  who  have  deliberately  flouted  and   abused   the
                 immigration laws of this country.


           12.   The evidence does not establish  that  the  appellant  has
                 acquired a permanent right of residence - see  15(1)(b)  of
                 the 2006 Regulations - because it does not  establish  that
                 she has resided with her sponsor  husband,  in  the  United
                 Kingdom, for a continuous period of five years. Indeed, the
                 evidence was to the contrary and to the  effect  that  they
                 had lived with one another only since May 2017."

6.    It is unclear what submissions were made on behalf of  the  respondent
      at the hearing because they were not summarised. On the  face  of  it,
      the judge appeared to raise and then determine two issues against  the
      appellant that had not been raised by the respondent. First, the judge
      concluded that the marriage was one of convenience (an issue where the
      burden of proof would be  on  the  respondent)  solely  based  on  the
      appellant's immigration history and without proper assessment  of  the
      oral or documentary evidence [13-17]. Second, having found that it was
      a marriage of convenience, he proceeded  to  find  that  this  was  an
      "abuse of rights" under regulation 21B of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006
      [18].

7.    Having raised two major new issues  without  notice,  which  were  not
      previously in issue between the parties, the judge  reflected  on  the
      fairness of his approach when  he  prepared  the  decision  after  the
      hearing:

           "20.  It is also fair to keep in mind that Miss  Jones  did  not
                 address any of these points because she asserted that there
                 was no basis upon which any application could  be  properly
                 refused once the primary facts, referred to [in]  paragraph
                 8 above, were established by evidence. It is  equally  fair
                 to observe that I did not take issue  with  that  assertion
                 and specifically invite her to address the issue  of  abuse
                 of rights within the meaning of regulation 21B of the  2006
                 Regulations. That has caused  me  some  concern  because  I
                 cannot be satisfied that had this matter been  specifically
                 raised, and Miss Jones had been specifically asked to  deal
                 with  it,  she  might  not  have  advanced  submissions  to
                 persuade me to depart from the conclusion at which  I  have
                 presently arrived.


           21.   Thus basic fairness requires  that  the  appellant  should
                 have a full and proper opportunity to address these matters
                 despite Miss Jones dealing with the abuse issues raised  by
                 me  in  a  very  perfunctory  and  dismissive  manner.   In
                 retrospect, perhaps I should have  specifically  drawn  her
                 attention to regulation 21B, which might have prompted  her
                 to deal with the matter more fully. I am now concerned that
                 that omission should not act to the  appellant's  prejudice
                 in circumstances where I have decided that  the  importance
                 of immigration control, particularly when exercised against
                 those who have shown their determination to flout and abuse
                 the immigration laws of this country, weighs heavily in the
                 balance when proportionality is considered. Indeed,  it  is
                 my judgement that the balance comes  down  heavily  against
                 the appellant.


           22.   Accordingly, my provisional decision is that  this  appeal
                 must be dismissed. However, for the reasons  which  I  have
                 set out in paragraphs 20 and 21 above,  the  appellant  has
                 liberty to apply for this appeal  hearing  to  be  restored
                 before me for further argument, if so  advised,  solely  in
                 respect of the matters relating to  paragraph  21B  of  the
                 2006 Regulations."

8.    The appellant duly applied for the hearing  to  be  resumed  following
      the 'provisional' dismissal of the  appeal.  A  further  hearing  took
      place on 10 April 2019. The judge promulgated a second decision on  17
      April 2019 dismissing the appeal on the same grounds. He accepted that
      he had wrongly referred to the EEA  Regulations  2006  throughout  the
      previous  decision  when  the  applicable  regulations  were  the  EEA
      Regulations 2016. The appeal appeared  to  proceed  by  way  of  legal
      submissions on the question of misuse of rights under regulation 26 of
      the EEA Regulations 2016. The judge rejected the appellant's  argument
      in the following terms:

           "13.  In my judgement there is no doubt that the  decision  made
                 by the appellant to  get  married  was  very  substantially
                 motivated by her desire to procure continued  residence  in
                 the  United  Kingdom  (a  desired  outcome  that  she   had
                 previously failed to procure), by the artifice  of  getting
                 married. In my judgement the fact that she married somebody
                 with whom she had previously resided, is far from  decisive
                 as to whether artifice was or was not involved. A  marriage
                 might be  artificial  within  the  purport  and  intent  of
                 paragraph 26(1)(b) of the 2016 Regulations  notwithstanding
                 that, as a  matter  of  matrimonial  law,  it  is  a  valid
                 marriage which can come to an end only through death  or  a
                 lawfully pronounced decree of  divorce  of  annulment.  The
                 essential issue to address is whether getting  married  was
                 part and parcel of a scheme to obtain  an  advantage  under
                 the 2016 Regulations. On that issue I am in no  doubt  that
                 that was precisely this appellant's intention. It was  part
                 of her manifested resolve to procure continued residence in
                 this country by any means which she thought  might  procure
                 that outcome for her.

           14.   In the foregoing circumstances, strictly speaking  I  need
                 not consider whether the marriage was or  was  not  one  of
                 convenience.  One  of  the  hallmarks  of  a  marriage   of
                 convenience will be  the  absence  of  love  and  affection
                 between the contracting parties. But I  am  satisfied  that
                 even if  there  is  a  manifested  degree  of  affection  a
                 marriage might, as a matter of law, still be a marriage  of
                 convenience; although the facts which will need  to  be  in
                 existence to allow such an inference to be drawn, will need
                 to be far more persuasive than those needed in a  situation
                 where the parties to  the  marriage  have  no  love  and/or
                 affection for one another.


           15.   Again, given the appellant's immigration history  and  her
                 determination  to  procure  continued  residence  in   this
                 country  by  any  means  whatsoever  (including   remaining
                 illegally  and  flouting  the  immigration  laws  of   this
                 country), the facts of this case lead me to  conclude  that
                 it is more probably than not that this was  a  marriage  of
                 convenience."

9.    The appellant appeals the two First-tier  Tribunal  decisions  on  the
      following grounds:

      (i)   The judge erred in his assessment of whether this was a marriage
           of convenience.

      (ii)  The judge erred in his assessment of whether there  had  been  a
           misuse of rights, which is a provision that should only apply to
           EEA nationals misusing rights of residence.

Decision and reasons

10.   I have no hesitation in finding that a  fair-minded  observer,  having
      considered the facts, would conclude that there was a real possibility
      that the First-tier Tribunal was bias: see Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL
      67. An overall reading of the decision  makes  clear  that  the  judge
      disapproved of the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  went  well
      beyond the scope of the only issue  in  dispute  between  the  parties
      (upon which he made a positive finding) in a  search  for  reasons  to
      dismiss the appeal.

11.   Even if the judge was entitled to raise a new issue at the hearing  it
      must be done with the utmost fairness. It is unclear whether the judge
      raised his concerns about this being a marriage of convenience at  the
      start of the hearing. The appellant was not on notice that this was an
      issue because the respondent did not raise it in the decision that was
      the subject of the appeal. The appellant would not have been  prepared
      to address the issue at the hearing. Although the judge did raise  the
      issue of misuse of rights during the course of the hearing,  it  seems
      to have been done in an off the cuff way that would not have given his
      legal  representative  sufficient  time  to  prepare  or  to   respond
      adequately given that the  application  had  only  been  refused  with
      reference to regulation  5  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016.  Fairness
      dictated that the  appellant  should  be  offered  an  opportunity  to
      properly prepare and address such  significant  issues  if  they  were
      raised for the first time by the judge.

12.   I note that the judge did belatedly reflect  on  whether  his  actions
      were unfair during the preparation of the first decision. However, the
      way in which he then dealt with the issue was not in  accordance  with
      the overriding objective to deal with cases  fairly  and  justly.  The
      judge should have considered  whether  an  adjournment  was  necessary
      during the first hearing in order to  allow  an  opportunity  for  the
      appellant to respond to new issues raised from the bench for the first
      time at the hearing. Even if he only had time to reflect  on  fairness
      after the hearing, the judge could and  should  have  made  directions
      inviting further submissions and allow the parties the opportunity  to
      request a resumed hearing before coming to a concluded view.  Instead,
      the judge went ahead and prepared a decision, making negative findings
      against the appellant in relation to a  marriage  of  convenience  and
      misuse of rights. Having  "provisionally  dismissed"  the  appeal  the
      horse had already bolted. No fair-minded observer,  having  considered
      these facts, could conclude that the judge was likely to have kept  an
      open mind about the issues.

13.   Even if the judge was entitled to raise new issues, he  erred  in  the
      way he assessed  them.  The  judge  failed  to  conduct  a  structured
      approach to  the  assessment  of  whether  the  marriage  was  one  of
      convenience in accordance with the relevant principles: see Papajorgji
      (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012]  UKUT  00038.  No
      consideration was given to the fact that the initial burden of proving
      a  marriage  is  one  of  convenience  is  upon  the  respondent.   No
      consideration was given to the fact that the respondent did not allege
      that the marriage was one of convenience.

14.   The tone of the judge's  findings  was  pejorative  and  the  language
      inappropriate for a judicial decision maker.  The  judge  appeared  to
      make no effort to conduct  a  fair  or  impartial  assessment  of  the
      evidence before him.  He  made  no  clear  findings  relating  to  the
      credibility of the witnesses.  He  did  not  appear  to  consider  any
      evidence that might support the appellant's case. The overall tone  of
      his findings was that the appellant could not be permitted to stay  in
      the UK because she had remained here illegally. No meaningful  attempt
      was made to establish whether, despite her poor  immigration  history,
      she might have acquired  a  right  of  residence  under  European  law
      through her marriage to Mr Carson.

15.    The  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  other  relevant  matters
      including the findings of the previous First-tier Tribunal in 2015. In
      that case the appellant was found to be a  credible  witness.  It  was
      accepted that she was in a genuine relationship with  Mr  Carson,  but
      the Tribunal concluded that she did not meet the  requirement  of  the
      rule to have been living together in a relationship akin  to  marriage
      for  two  years.  Certainly,  there  was  no   suggestion   that   the
      relationship was contrived, merely that it did  not  meet  the  strict
      requirements for cohabitation.

16.   The respondent refused the first application for a residence  card  on
      the ground that there was insufficient evidence to show  cohabitation.
      One could not conclude  from  the  refusal  that  the  respondent  had
      suspicions  about  the  relationship,  merely  that   the   respondent
      considered  that  insufficient  evidence   was   produced   that   was
      sufficiently  "compelling"  to  show  that  she  was  in   a   durable
      relationship with Mr Carson at the time. Even then, the respondent was
      assessing the issue on the  wrong  basis  because  it  is  trite  that
      European law does not require cohabitation. The appellant did not need
      to prove her case with compelling evidence. She only  needed  to  show
      that  it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  she  was  in  a  durable
      relationship with an EEA national. While on the issue of cohabitation,
      the judge's finding at [12] was also erroneous because  it  is  not  a
      requirement of regulation 15 for the appellant to  have  resided  with
      her husband for a continuous period of five years, only that  she  has
      resided in accordance with European law.

17.   The EEA Regulations 2016 define  a  'marriage  of  convenience'  as  a
      marriage entered  into  for  the  purpose  of  (i)  using  EU  law  to
      circumvent immigration rules that would otherwise apply to the non-EEA
      national or (ii) to circumvent any other requirement that the party to
      a marriage of convenience might have to meet in order to enjoy  rights
      of residence under EU law. In Papajorgji the Upper Tribunal found that
      a 'marriage of convenience' is a marriage entered  for  the  "sole  or
      decisive purpose of gaining admission to the host  state".  The  Upper
      Tribunal observed that  a  durable  marriage  with  children  and  co-
      habitation  was  inconsistent  with  the  notion  of  a  'marriage  of
      convenience'.

18.   In this case there were findings dating back as far as 2015  that  the
      appellant was likely to be in  a  genuine  relationship  with  an  EEA
      national albeit she was not co-habiting with  him  at  the  time.  The
      evidence suggested that the couple had  discussed  marriage,  but  the
      appellant had responsibilities as a carer. In this appeal,  the  judge
      appeared to accept that the evidence  showed  that  the  couple  lived
      together since May 2017. The judge first heard  the  case  in  October
      2018. By the time of the resumed hearing in April 2019  it  is  likely
      that the couple had been living together for nearly two years and  had
      been in a relationship for much longer.  None  of  this  was  properly
      considered. The judge made no clear finding as to whether this  was  a
      genuine relationship given that he appeared to accept that  there  may
      be "bonds of affection" [17]. In so far as  he  appeared  to  conclude
      that such affection was immaterial, he erred in law. The  question  of
      whether a marriage is one of convenience will depend  on  a  fair  and
      balanced assessment of all the facts, which  did  not  occur  in  this
      case.

19.   There may be some force in Ms Jones' submissions relating to  the  way
      the judge assessed misuse of rights. If the appellant did not  have  a
      right of residence because he concluded that she  was  not  a  'family
      member' because she entered a 'marriage of convenience' then she would
      not have a right of residence to misuse. It is not necessary  to  deal
      with the arguments in any  detail  because  the  judge's  finding  was
      predicated on his finding that the marriage was one of convenience. If
      that finding was flawed; so too is the finding relating to  misuse  of
      rights.

20.   For the reasons given above, I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision involved the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  The
      decision so far as it relates to the findings relating to marriage  of
      convenience and misuse of rights is set aside.  The  finding  made  at
      [10] is unchallenged and is preserved. The decision will  need  to  be
      remade.

DIRECTIONS

To the respondent

21.    The  decision  that  is  the  subject  of  this  appeal  refused  the
      application for a residence card on the sole ground that the appellant
      failed to produce sufficient evidence to show that the EEA sponsor met
      the requirements of regulation 5 of the EEA Regulations 2016.

22.   The respondent's position in relation to the  issues  raised  for  the
      first time by the judge at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
      is unclear. At the hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Lindsay
      suggested that the respondent stands by the findings even though  they
      were not raised  in  the  decision  letter.  However,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's findings relating to marriage of convenience and misuse  of
      rights have now been set aside. If the respondent were to allege  that
      this is a marriage of convenience adequate reasons would  need  to  be
      provided.

23.   The respondent shall serve a position statement within 14 days of  the
      date this decision is sent.

      (i)   If new matters are raised adequate reasons will need to be given
           for relying on them so that the  appellant  can  understand  the
           case she has to answer.


        i) If no new matters are raised, the respondent is invited to  make
           written submissions within 14 days of the date this decision  is
           sent as to whether the decision could be remade  on  the  papers
           based on the preserved finding or whether a further  hearing  is
           required.

To the appellant

24.   Upon receipt of the  respondent's  position  statement  the  appellant
      shall make any further written submissions on the  issue  of  remaking
      with 14 days.

25.   If the parties agree that the matter can be remade on the  papers,  if
      either party wishes, they can make further written submissions by  the
      latest date provided for in these directions i.e. within 14 days after
      the respondent files her position statement.

26.   Upon receipt  of  further  submission  from  both  parties  the  Upper
      Tribunal will make a case management decision regarding remaking.

27.   Liberty to apply.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of errors of law

The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal in due course


Signed   [pic]   Date 30 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
