

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/02309/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6 July 2017                            | On 7 July 2017                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             SINTHANI MASANKHULA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K M Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fox, promulgated on 25 November 2016,  dismissing  her  appeal  against
    refusal of a derivative residence card as the primary carer of her son,
    a UK citizen.

 2. At 12 the judge narrates the appellant's evidence that she  lived  with
    the father of her child from the birth of their son on 1 February  2014
    until October 2014.  However, he later refers to the parting as  taking
    place in October 2015 - twice at 15, and again at 17.

 3. The respondent accepts that the later references are erroneous.

 4. Ground 1 of the appeal to the UT, based on this  error,  triggered  the
    grant of permission.  The ground says that the error was  material  and
    amounted to error of law because it incorrectly  informed  the  judge's
    further findings.

 5. I find that this slip  was  of  no  significance.   The  judge  plainly
    proceeded on the appellant's account of the relationship, and  rejected
    her case for reasons which have nothing to do with the misplaced date.

 6. Ground 2 is failure to take account  of  the  child's  best  interests.
    Correctly,  Mr  Forrest  withdrew  this  ground.   Article  8   issues,
    including the best interest of a child, do not arise in  an  appeal  of
    this nature.

 7. Ground 3 complains that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant's knowledge of the medical condition of the child's  paternal
    grandmother showed some contact, because that  information  dated  from
    the time of their separation.  Ground 4 says that the judge  speculated
    in finding the appellant's account of earlier events in her life to  be
    untrue, and that further evidence had not been led about these  matters
    because they were irrelevant.

 8. Grounds 3 and 4 are no more than incidental quibbles.  They do not show
    that the judge went wrong on the decisive issue, which had been clearly
    put to the respondent in the decision appealed  against.   He  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had shown that she is the primary carer of
    the child, that the child would be forced to leave the UK if  she  were
    required to leave (which cannot occur as a result of the decision under
    appeal),  or  that  the  child's  father  was   unwilling   to   accept
    responsibility.   Those  findings  were  open  to  the  judge  and  are
    supported by reasons in which no  error  has  been  asserted.   On  the
    scanty state of  the  evidence  before  the  judge,  the  findings  are
    unsurprising.

 9. If the appellant has a case based on family life,  article  8  and  the
    best interests of her child, it needs to be  made  by  the  appropriate
    application to the respondent.  If she has  further  evidence  to  show
    entitlement to a derivative residence card, she may apply again on that
    basis.

10. The grounds do not show that the making of  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    involved the making of any error on a point of law, such that it  ought
    to be set aside.  That decision shall stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            6 July 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




