
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02970/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Justice Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 December 2017                      |On 22 January 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                 hamza said
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chohan, Solicitor Britain Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge M.A. Khan sitting at  Hatton  Cross  whereby  his
       appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a
       residence cared as confirmation of a right to residence as  a  spouse
       of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom had
       been dismissed.


    2. The Judge had said at paragraph 38 of his decision that the Appellant
       and his spouse had given evidence before him and had been  vague  and
       evasive during their evidence. He said the evidence was not  credible
       or consistent. The Judge noted at paragraph 37 of his  decision  that
       the Appellant and his spouse had married  in  a  registry  office  in
       Denmark. The Judge concluded though that, "I do not find it  credible
       or consistent that the  appellant,  a  practicing  Muslim  would  not
       undertake a religious ceremony for his marriage to have  any  meaning
       in his religious and cultural aspects...".


    3. At paragraph 38 the Judge said that the evidence in relation  to  the
       various addresses and the tenancies relied upon was "extremely  vague
       and evasive".  The Judge went on to say, "[The Appellant]'s  evidence
       with regards to taking out 12 months tenancies and not being  subject
       to any penalties for breach of contract is also not credible with the
       legal requirement of Land law and Tenants Law" [sic].


    4. At paragraph 38 the Judge concluded that the claimed work  with  HMRK
       was a fabrication.


    5. In his submissions before me, Mr Chohan said he relied on the grounds
       of appeal which had been drafted by Counsel. He amplified the grounds
       to ask why there had to be two marriage ceremonies. There  were  lots
       of different practices which were used by Muslims. Some say follow  a
       civil process and others say there is no need. The Judge did not  ask
       these parties why they did not undertake a Muslim ceremony. In so far
       as the job is concerned, there was a letter  with  a  signature.  The
       issue found by the Judge was not put to the parties. In so far as the
       Landlord and Tenant issue is concerned, the Judge  was  "jumping  the
       gun'. Was the Judge saying that the  Home  Office  should  have  been
       taking enforcement action in respect of  the  accommodation?  If  the
       Appellant is a family member  then  he  can  move  to  wherever,  for
       example to Manchester.


    6. Mr Bates said that there was no irrationality or  perversity  in  the
       Judge's decision. The Judge had properly found that despite  being  a
       practising Muslim the Appellant had failed  to  undergo  a  religious
       ceremony of marriage. By the time of the hearing the couple  had  had
       ample time to have had it done. As for the employment issue, why  was
       it that the evidence had not been corroborated and the  employer  had
       not attended the hearing. In so  far  as  the  tenancy  agreement  is
       concerned, page 147 of the bundle showed 2 addresses. Not all tenancy
       agreements were signed. I should also look at page 154 of the bundle.
       These  tenancies  were  for  12  month  periods  so  the  Judge   was
       effectively asking where is the  evidence  from  the  landlords?  How
       reliable a document was the tenancy  agreement?  Overall  there  were
       cogent reasons for not accepting the Appellant's case.


    7. Mr Chohan said in reply that the tenancy agreements or the  types  of
       documents are ones that one  can  get  from  WH  Smiths  and  so  the
       Appellant should not be penalised if there were errors in them or  if
       not signed. I should accept the submission that if a  room  is  being
       rented as opposed to a flat or  house  then  the  landlord  will  not
       penalise those who seek to break the agreement early.


    8. It is obvious in my judgment that the Judge was suspicious about  the
       Appellant's claim and indeed I can understand why when looking at the
       state of the documents relating to the tenancy  agreements.  However,
       it was incumbent upon the Judge set out to the  required  balance  of
       probabilities test why the facts and law was such as to enable him to
       dismiss the appeal. That therefore required  the  Judge  to  put  his
       concerns, particularly  those  relating  to  the  religious  marriage
       ceremony, to the Appellant and his spouse for a response  from  them.
       There may well have been an explanation that  the  Judge  might  have
       been satisfied with. I accept the submission and grounds on behalf of
       the Appellant that there are very many different practices within the
       religious communities as to whether  both  a  civil  ceremony  and  a
       religious ceremony are required. I accept that some communities  will
       see a religious ceremony as essential, but not all  will.  Similarly,
       the issues in respect of the employer documents ought  to  have  been
       put to the Appellant and to his spouse during the hearing. Again,  it
       is possible that  the  Judge  might  have  been  satisfied  with  the
       explanation provided.


    9. In my judgment, it is not possible to conclude that these  errors  of
       law were not material. The errors clearly  could  have  affected  the
       outcome of the case.


   10. I conclude that the decision of the Judge has to  be  set  aside  and
       that none of the current findings can stand. There  shall  be  a  re-
       hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision contains a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal on all issues.

There is no need for an anonymity direction.


Signed. A Mahmood                            23 12 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

