
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02975/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2018                            |On 02 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     he
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jaja, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


1.   I shall refer to the Respondent as the Appellant as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.   I  have  anonymised  the  Appellant  because  of
    sensitive issues raised relating to his son, P.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ecuador.    His  date  of  birth  is  [~]
    1966.  His case is that he came to the UK in 2000.  On 5 September 2016
    he applied for  a  derivative  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  (the  "2016  Regulations").
    This was on the basis that he is the primary carer of an EEA  national,
    P. P is a citizen of Spain. His date of birth is [~] 2000.  He was aged
    18 at the hearing  before  me.  The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application ON 3  March  2017.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  the
    decision and his appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    (the "FTT") M B Hussain, in a decision dated 30 May 2018,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 17 April 2018.  The decision was promulgated
    on 8 June 2018.

3.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes on 8 August 2018.  The matter came before  me  to
    determine whether the judge made an error of law.

4.   It was the Secretary of State's case that there was  no  evidence  that
    the Appellant and his son had comprehensive sickness insurance  in  the
    UK.  However, this was an issue that was  conceded  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant at the hearing before the FTT.  The application  was  refused
    was because the Appellant had not shown that he was P's  primary  carer
    and he had not demonstrated that P would be unable to remain in the  UK
    should the Appellant leave.  It was the Appellant's position  that  P's
    mother lived in Spain, but there was, according to the  Respondent,  no
    evidence of this. If she  is  Spanish  and  residing  in  the  UK,  the
    Respondent's case was that she could care  for  P  in  the  Appellant's
    absence.

5.   The judge heard evidence from the  Appellant,  P  and  the  Appellant's
    brother (P's uncle), ME.  They had made witness statements  which  they
    adopted as their evidence-in-chief.

6.   The Appellant's evidence was that before coming to the  UK,  whilst  in
    Spain, he met P's mother.  He left Spain and came to the UK unaware  at
    the time that she was  pregnant  with  P.   He  supported  them.   They
    developed  a  relationship  via  Skype  and   telephone   calls.    The
    relationship between P and his  mother  broke  down  following  regular
    attacks on P by her partner. The Appellant sent ME to Spain to  collect
    P and bring him to the UK. He met P for the first time when he was aged
    12.

7.   When P arrived in the UK at the age of 12 he was  skinny  and  nervous.
    He had no confidence.  He attended school  immediately  and  it  became
    clear that he had learning difficulties. As a result, he has  struggled
    at school. His problems may be as  a  result  of  the  abuse  from  his
    mother's partner.  The only place that P truly  finds  comfort  is  the
    church that they attend every day.  P is completely  reliant  upon  his
    father.  They do the usual activities together such as cycling, walking
    and playing football.  His son does not have friends outside of  family
    and church.

8.   ME has provided for the family.  He works and  has  savings.   He  does
    not question this.  They live together and have done so  for  6  years.
    They are a close family.  They do not receive public funds.

9.   P's mother remains in Spain with her violent partner.  She came to  the
    UK to visit two years ago. She stayed for four days.   Her  involvement
    in his life is minimal. The Appellant is his primary carer.

10.  In cross-examination he stated that if  he  left  the  UK  his  brother
    would not be able to take care of his son.   ME could  not  look  after
    the child because he is in a relationship of  his  own.   Although  his
    brother pays the rent for their current accommodation he  works  for  a
    few hours only.  He gives P pocket money and buys clothes for him.

11.  ME, a Spanish citizen, here with permanent residence in  the  UK,  gave
    evidence. He has been living here for six years. During which time  her
    has provided for his brother and  nephew.   He  brought  P  to  the  UK
    because of the violence perpetrated by his  mother's  partner.   P  has
    seen his mother once since he came here.  The Appellant is P's  primary
    carer.  ME  provides  his  brother  with  financial  support  including
    accommodation.  They live here as a family unit.  In  cross-examination
    he said that if his brother left the UK he would look after P but  that
    he (P) was more used to being with his father.

12.  P gave evidence. Life for him was difficult in  Spain  because  of  his
    violent step-father who was a heavy drinker and smoker. He  forced  the
    Appellant to drink and smoke when  he  was  a  young  child.  Life  has
    improved now he is here with his father who cares  for  him  and  loves
    him.  He has been bullied whilst at school here  because  of  his  poor
    English.  His father has always supported him and attended  the  school
    to speak with his teachers.  He is a there for him.  He does  not  know
    what he would do if his father was asked to leave the UK because he  is
    the only parent upon whom he could rely.  His uncle is there  for  him,
    but he cannot replace his  father.   He  hopes  that  their  lives  can
    continue here in the UK.

13.  The judge purported to made  findings  between  paragraphs  14  and  30
    under the heading "my findings." However, his findings do not  commence
    until  paragraph  25.  Paragraphs  14  to  23  summarise  the  evidence
    contained in the witness statements. At paragraphs 25 and 26 the  judge
    engaged with the evidence relating to sickness  insurance  despite  the
    concession by the Secretary of State. Although not an  issue  that  was
    specifically raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter, the judge found,
    at paragraph 27, that the Appellant's son is self-sufficient insofar as
    he was dependent on his uncle's earnings.  The judge was satisfied that
    the Appellant's brother was able to support the Appellant and  his  son
    from his earnings as a cleaner without recourse to public funds.

14.  At paragraphs 28 and 29 the judge considered whether the  Appellant  is
    the "sole carer" of his son. This is not the test.  Regulation  16  (2)
    requires the Appellant to be the primary carer of an EEA national.   In
    any event, it can be reasonably inferred from what the judge stated  in
    these paragraphs that he was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was  P's
    primary carer.   This is not an  issue  in  any  event  raised  in  the
    grounds by the Secretary of State.

15.  The judge went on to conclude the following at paragraph 30:

         "30. At the end of the hearing, the presenting officer made only  a
             single submission which was  that  if  the  appellant  is  not
             allowed to stay in this country, his  child  could  be  looked
             after by his brother.  I  reject  that  submission.   This  is
             because,  although  the  appellant's  brother  will  no  doubt
             continue to look after the child, the  child's  welfare  needs
             will not be adequately provided for by  him.   It  has  to  be
             borne in mind that the child  had  left  the  company  of  his
             mother because he was being abused.  Since 2012 he  has  lived
             with his father with whom he has built up a good relationship.
              He suffers from learning disability and I think  there  is  a
             growth issue as well.  Given all these factors and the duty of
             the state to safeguard the welfare of this child, it seems  to
             me that the support that the appellant's brother can give will
             be no substitute for this child's welfare needs.  Accordingly,
             I find that if the appellant were to leave the United  Kingdom
             then the EEA national child would not be able to exercise  his
             rights to live in this country."

The Grounds of Appeal

16.   The  grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  judge  erred  because  he
    misdirected himself in law, failed to give adequate  reasons  and  made
    inconsistent  findings.   The  reasons  for  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's son would have to leave the UK if the Appellant were to  be
    removed is wholly unsupported by the evidence.  All the  reasons  given
    by the judge point to the ideal circumstances for  P.  Given  that  his
    uncle was willing and  able  to  look  after  him  in  the  Appellant's
    absence, there  is  a  lacuna  of  findings  to  support  the  decision
    ultimately reached by the judge.  There was no independent evidence  to
    suggest that the Appellant's brother would not be  able  to  support  P
    given his involvement in his life to date.  Ms Everett  relied  on  the
    grounds. The Respondent's case was that  there  were  alternative  care
    arrangements, namely that ME could care for him.   Ms Everett confirmed
    to me at the hearing that it was not proposed by the Secretary of State
    that the Appellant's son could return to Spain to be cared for  by  his
    mother.

17.  I heard oral  submissions  from  both  parties.   I  brought  to  their
    attention the case of Nilay Patel [2017] EWCA Civ 2028.  Neither  party
    was familiar with it, however Ms Jaja addressed me  on  Chavez-Vilchez
    and Others and Raad Van Bestuur Van  De  Sociale  Verbekeringsbank  and
    Others (10 May 2017) (Case C-133/15)  (Grand  Chamber),  [2017]  3  WLR
    1326, [2017] 3 CMLR 35.  She also helpfully drew my attention  to  Home
    Office guidance published for Home Office staff  on  27  February  2018
    entitled Free Movement Rights:  derivative rights of residence  version
    4.0                                                                   (
    https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploa
    ds/attachment_data/file/684300/derivative-rights-v4.0ext.pdf).      She
    argued that there was no error of law.  She stated that considering the
    decision of the judge as a whole he properly considered whether P would
    be unable to remain in the UK in accordance with the guidance  and  the
    case law.  She submitted that the judge properly took into account  the
    evidence relating to P including his learning difficulties and  medical
    matters.  He took into account the child's vulnerabilities  which  were
    material matters to consider  when  assessing  the  appropriateness  of
    alternative care arrangements.  She submitted that paragraph 30 of  the
    decision was entirely consistent with the approach set out in the  Home
    Office guidance.

The Legal Framework

18.  Regulation 16(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 states::

         "Derivative Right to Reside


         16.  2)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-


                  (a)  the person is the primary carer of an  EEA  national;
                      and


                  (b)  the EEA national-


                      (i)  is under the age of 18;


                      (ii)  resides  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                           sufficient person; and


                      (iii)    would be unable  to  remain  in  the  United
                           Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for
                           an indefinite period."

Relevant Case Law

19.  The Court  of  Appeal  in  Patel,  promulgated  on  13 December  2017,
    considered whether the approach to derivative claims for  residence  by
    those without rights of residence based upon their  care  for  in  that
    case British citizens who are their "direct relatives" had been altered
    by the decision of the CJEU in Chavez- Vilchez and Others.

20.  The court made findings as follows:

         "72  In the light of the foregoing, the answer  to  the  first  and
             second questions is that Article 20 TFEU must be  interpreted
             as meaning that for the purposes of assessing whether a  child
             who is a  Union  citizen  would  be  compelled  to  leave  the
             territory of  the  European  Union  as  a  whole  and  thereby
             deprived of the genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the
             rights conferred on him by that article if the child's  third-
             country national parent were refused a right of  residence  in
             the Member State concerned, the fact that  the  other  parent,
             who is a Union citizen, is actually able and willing to assume
             sole responsibility for the primary  day-to-day  care  of  the
             child is a  relevant  factor,  but  it  is  not  in  itself  a
             sufficient ground for a conclusion that there is not,  between
             the third-country  national  parent  and  the  child,  such  a
             relationship of dependency that the child would indeed  be  so
             compelled were there to be  such  a  refusal  of  a  right  of
             residence. Such an assessment must take into account,  in  the
             best interests  of  the  child  concerned,  all  the  specific
             circumstances, including the age of  the  child,  the  child's
             physical  and  emotional  development,  the  extent   of   his
             emotional ties both to the Union citizen  parent  and  to  the
             third-country national parent, and the risks which  separation
             from the latter might entail for the child's equilibrium.


         Consideration of the third question referred


         73   By the third question submitted for a preliminary ruling,  the
             referring  court  seeks  in  essence  to   ascertain   whether
             Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as  precluding  a  Member
             State from providing  that  the  right  of  residence  in  its
             territory of a third-country national, who is a  parent  of  a
             minor child that is a national of that Member State,  and  for
             whose primary day-to-day care that parent is  responsible,  is
             subject to the condition that the third country national  must
             establish that the other parent, who is  a  national  of  that
             same Member State, is not in a position to provide the primary
             day-to-day care of the child.


         74   According to  the  Netherlands  Government,  pursuant  to  the
             general rule that a party who seeks to rely on certain  rights
             must  establish  that  those  rights  are  applicable  to  his
             situation, a rule that is accepted in EU  law  (see,  to  that
             effect, judgments of 8 May 2013, Alarape and Tijani, C-529/11,
             EU:C:2013:290, paragraph 38, and of 16 January 2014, Reyes, C-
             423/12, EU:C:2014:16, paragraphs 25 to  27),  the  burden  of
             proof  of  the  existence  of  a  right  of  residence   under
             Article 20  TFEU  lies  on  the  applicants  in   the   main
             proceedings. It is for them to demonstrate  that,  because  of
             objective impediments that prevent the  Union  citizen  parent
             from actually caring for the child, the child is dependent  on
             the third-country national parent to such an extent  that  the
             consequence of refusing to grant that third-country national a
             right of residence would be that the child would  be  obliged,
             in practice, to leave the territory of the European Union.


         ...


         78   In the light  of  the  foregoing,  the  answer  to  the  third
             question is that Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted  as  not
             precluding a Member State from providing  that  the  right  of
             residence in its territory of a third-country national, who is
             a parent of a minor child that is a national  of  that  Member
             State and who is responsible for the primary  day-to-day  care
             of that child, is subject to the requirement that  the  third-
             country national must provide evidence to prove that a refusal
             of a right of residence to the third-country  national  parent
             would deprive the  child  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
             substance of the rights pertaining to the child's status as  a
             Union citizen, by obliging the child to leave the territory of
             the European  Union,  as  a  whole.  It  is  however  for  the
             competent  authorities  of  the  Member  State  concerned   to
             undertake, on the basis of the evidence provided by the third-
             country national, the necessary enquiries in order to be  able
             to assess, in the light of  all  the  specific  circumstances,
             whether a refusal would have such consequences."



Error of Law

21.  The judge made inadequate findings.  He rejected the submission by  the
    Secretary of State that the child could be looked after by  his  uncle.
    The reason given was that his welfare needs  would  not  be  adequately
    provided for.  The judge considered that the child had been abused  and
    that he had built a good relationship with his father.  The judge  also
    considered that he has a learning disability (and he thought he  had  a
    growth issue).  The judge stated that the appellant's brother would  be
    no substitute for his father.  However, the judge did not make  a  full
    enquiry into the facts. He did not properly engage with the evidence of
    the uncle that he would be willing and able to care for P.   The  judge
    did not adequately  reason  why  ME  could  not  offer  an  appropriate
    alternative care arrangement. He did not  consider  whether  there  was
    such dependency between P and his father that he would be compelled  to
    leave with him rather than stay  with  his  uncle.  There  was  on  the
    evidence before the judge dependency financial and emotional, between P
    and his uncle.  There was an inadequate assessment of the evidence  and
    a failure by the judge to apply the correct  test.   I  set  aside  the
    decision of the FTT to allow the appeal.

Conclusions

22.  I raised with the parties how the matter should proceed  in  the  event
    that the decision  is  set  aside.   Ms  Jaja  submitted  that  it  was
    important for there to be a rehearing so that  a  judge  can  have  the
    opportunity to hear oral evidence from P.  Ms  Everett  submitted  that
    there was no reason why the UT could not go on to remake  the  decision
    in the light of the absence of further  evidence.   I  agreed  with  Ms
    Everett. The Appellant has not served any further evidence.  There  was
    no issue as regards the credibility of the witnesses and nothing to  be
    gained by a further hearing.  Neither party appreciated that P  is  now
    an adult and the Appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  Regulation
    16 in any event. His appeal must be dismissed in  these  circumstances.



23.  However, were P still a child, I would have dismissed the  appeal.   It
    is without doubt in his best interests for his father  to  remain  with
    him here. P has experienced abuse and his own mother failed to  protect
    him. In addition, I take into account evidence of developmental issues.
     ME's evidence before the judge was that he was  willing  and  able  to
    look after P. He is not a parent, but he has assumed a  parental  role.
    He collected P from Spain. They live together as a family unit  and  he
    provides for the  family.  Whilst  it  was  clear  that  the  level  of
    dependency between the Appellant and P was greater than  the  level  of
    dependency between P and his  uncle,  the  evidence  before  the  judge
    established considerable dependency on both his father and uncle.

24.   There  is  correspondence  from  Dr  Ajzensztejn,  a   consultant   in
    paediatric diabetes and endocrinology relating to  P.   In  respect  of
    stature, all the blood tests results were within the normal limits  for
    his age.  There was some evidence of developmental  issue  and  special
    needs from the witnesses' evidence, but there was no evidence  that  it
    was as significant as thought by the  judge.  I  note  that  P  in  his
    witness statement expressed his desire to become a doctor.

25.  The Appellant in oral evidence stated that ME could not  look  after  P
    because he has a  relationship  of  his  own.  However,  this  was  not
    sufficiently developed. In any event, this was not ME's  evidence.  P's
    evidence was that his uncle is no replacement for his father.  None  of
    the witnesses stated that P would leave the UK should his  father  have
    to leave.

26.  The evidence before the judge all pointed towards the uncle being  able
    to provide suitable alternative care.  There  was  simply  no  evidence
    that P would be compelled to leave the UK or indeed that he would do so
    out of choice.  Whilst I accept that he was and probably still is  more
    dependent on his father than his uncle, there is significant dependence
    on his uncle and the evidence did  not  establish  that  the  level  of
    dependency on his father was such that he would be compelled to  leave.
    Applying Patel, which is consistent with home office guidance relied on
    by Ms Jaja, the appeal cannot succeed.

27.  This appeal cannot succeed because the child is now an  adult  (Reg  16
    (2) (b) (ii))  In any event, for the reasons I have given if this  were
    not the case  the  appeal  would  fall  to  be  dismissed  because  the
    Appellant has not established that P would be unable to remain  in  the
    UK if he left the UK (Reg 16 (2) (b) (iii)).

28.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under 2016 EEA Regulations.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                    Date 24 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
