
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02051/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2018                              |On 26 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Frederick Quai Mensah-Crentsil
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Ume-Ezeoke instructed by Chris Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, to whom I shall refer hereafter as "the respondent",  as
    she was before the First-tier Tribunal, appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal
    with permission against the decision of the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal who allowed the  appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereafter  "the
    appellant") as he was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing  his
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  of  9  February  2017
    refusing his application for a grant  of  permanent  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom  under  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

2.   The appellant was last admitted to the  United  Kingdom  on  14  August
    2008 and was issued with a residence card valid until 1 October 2014 as
    the spouse of Ms Pudelko, who is a citizen of Poland.   On  24  October
    2014 he  applied  for  permanent  residence  and  his  application  was
    refused.  On 19 September 2016 he divorced his wife in  Ghana  and  was
    issued with an order of dissolution dated 4 October 2016.  He made  the
    application which is the subject of this appeal on 10 October  2016  on
    the basis of retained rights under the Regulations.

3.   The judge at paragraph 9 of his decision referred  to  the  documentary
    evidence  and  to  a  miscellany  of  documentation  relating  to   the
    appellant's and his former wife's working history.  He  commented  that
    the Secretary of State had acknowledged that the appellant had provided
    evidence of his former wife's working history for the  period  2008  to
    2016.  The appellant had acknowledged that he  did  not  give  evidence
    that he was working prior to the time of the  divorce  because  he  had
    erroneously assumed that he had already supplied sufficient evidence of
    his own employment and he therefore enclosed further evidence which  he
    contended  met  the  requirements  of  Regulation  10(6)  of  the   EEA
    Regulations.  The judge considered the documents and was satisfied that
    the appellant had satisfied the requirements of  Regulation  10(5)  and
    10(6).

4.   The judge went on to  conclude,  bringing  these  matters  together  at
    paragraph 18 of his decision, that the  appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden of  proof  to  show  he  had  resided  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous five year period and that his EEA national
    former spouse continuously exercised free movement  rights  up  to  the
    point of  divorce.   He  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  been  in
    employment and a taxpayer for the relevant continuous five year  period
    and as a consequence allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

5.   In her grounds of appeal the Secretary of State argued that  the  judge
    had failed to particularise what evidence he had seen that led  him  to
    conclude that  the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    exercising treaty rights at the relevant dates.  It had  been  a  paper
    hearing and the judge had not been provided by either side with a  copy
    of a determination in February  2016  in  which  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence was that he separated from his wife in November 2010 when  she
    returned to Poland and he remained  in  regular  contact  with  her  by
    telephone and he was therefore able to confirm that she had remained in
    Poland ever since.

6.   Permission was granted by a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that though it could not be said to be an error of  law  for  the
    judge to fail to take into account evidence which had not  been  before
    him, he had failed to give adequate reasons as to how he had  concluded
    that the appellant's ex-spouse was in  the  United  Kingdom  exercising
    treaty rights at the relevant dates.

7.   In her submissions Ms Everett accepted that the judge had not  had  the
    previous determination  before  him  so  could  not  have  applied  the
    Devaseelan guidance to it, but nevertheless  there  was  a  paucity  of
    reasoning for concluding that the sponsor was exercising treaty  rights
    at the time  of  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage.   The  judge  had
    purported to accept a concession in the refusal letter,  that  in  fact
    the letter had said that the appellant would need to  provide  evidence
    that the EEA national (his ex-wife) was a qualified person and  he  was
    therefore residing in accordance with the Regulations at the  point  of
    divorce, and in order to do this he would need to provide evidence that
    she was exercising free movement rights when the decree was issued.  It
    was then said that he  had  submitted  an  HMRC  OCA41  document  which
    confirmed continuous employment for Ms Pudelko from 6 April 2008  to  5
    April 2016.  Ms Everett argued that this was not  a  concession  but  a
    rehearsal of the documents, but in any event  the  dissolution  of  the
    marriage was in October 2016 and this was not a matter  dealt  with  by
    the judge.

8.   In his submissions Mr Ume-Ezeoke noted what had been  said  but  argued
    that it was not part of the grounds or the reasons why  permission  had
    been granted.  The judge had considered the  evidence  before  him  and
    made the decision as could be seen, for example from  paragraph  7  and
    paragraph 18 on the basis of the papers before him.  He had not  relied
    on a concession but considered the papers, as was clear from  paragraph
    9.

9.   At this point it became  necessary  to  adjourn  briefly  in  order  to
    establish what documentation there was before  the  judge  which  could
    have led him to conclude that the sponsor was indeed exercising  treaty
    rights  at  the  relevant  time.   This  was  done  on  the  basis   of
    consideration of the documents in the court's files, since it was clear
    that those documents had been before the judge,  whereas  it  was  less
    clear that documents on either party's file would have been in front of
    the judge.

10.  After the adjournment reliance was placed by Mr Ume-Ezeoke on a  letter
    from HM Revenue & Customs  with  attachments,  to  the  sponsor.   This
    letter was dated 9 September 2016 and referred to  her  employment  and
    benefits history.  He argued that this  showed  that  the  sponsor  was
    still active and exercising treaty rights at the date of  the  divorce.
    She was self-employed.  Her accounts were done every year  to  5  April
    and the appellant had put in evidence to the 5 April 2016 and the  next
    return was due on 5 April 2017 and hence there was a lack  of  evidence
    per se to show exercise of treaty rights in 2016.  The HMRC letter of 9
    September 2016 showed that she was still active in  self-employment  as
    at the date of divorce.

11.  By way of reply Ms Everett argued that it  was  clear  that  the  judge
    appeared to accept the Secretary of State had  made  a  concession  and
    dealt with the appellant's evidence  of  working  on  the  basis  of  a
    rectified mistake.  He had never  addressed  separately  the  issue  of
    whether the sponsor was exercising treaty rights at  the  date  of  the
    dissolution of the marriage.   The  grounds  referred  to  the  earlier
    determination at paragraph 3 and there were no findings made in respect
    of the  sponsor's  situation.   The  appellant  could  make  a  further
    application if he had evidence.

12.  By way of reply Mr Ume-Ezeoke referred to the  letter  of  9  September
    2016 and argued that the judge had not relied solely  on  a  concession
    but had referred to considering the documentary evidence before him and
    the working history of both the appellant and  the  sponsor.   All  the
    evidence had been considered.  The Secretary of State had conceded that
    and it was of relevance to 2016.

13.  I reserved my decision.

14.  I do not read the second paragraph on the second page  of  the  refusal
    letter as a concession that the sponsor was working on 6 April 2008  to
    5 April 2016.  The decision maker made  it  clear  that  the  appellant
    would need to provide evidence that Ms Pudelko was a  qualified  person
    and exercising free movement rights when  the  decree  of  divorce  was
    issued and in referring to the document produced was doing no more than
    recording evidence that had been provided.

15.  Nor do I consider that the letter of 9 September 2016 from HMRC to  the
    sponsor takes matters materially further.  This  consists  of  no  more
    than a response to a phone call of 8 September 2016 in which she  asked
    for her employment history and tax calculations were provided  for  tax
    years to 5 April 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016.  The marriage was dissolved
    on 4 October 2016.  The letter from the Revenue therefore takes matters
    no further than 5 April 2016.  As Ms Everett pointed out, even  if  the
    respondent could have been said to have made a concession  with  regard
    to the HMRC OCA41 document, that only took matters up to 5 April  2016.
    It is necessary for the  sponsor  to  have  been  shown  to  have  been
    exercising  Community  rights  at  the  time  when  the  marriage   was
    dissolved, and clearly as it seems to me on  the  evidence  before  the
    judge that was not the case.

16.  Accordingly I find  that  the  judge  erred  as  a  matter  of  law  in
    concluding  that  the  appeal  fell  to  be  allowed  under   the   EEA
    Regulations.  I bear in mind the further documentation produced at  the
    hearing today by Mr Ume-Ezeoke which might have  some  bearing  on  the
    matter and there may be other evidence also.   Accordingly  I  consider
    the most appropriate disposal of this matter is for it to  be  referred
    back to the First-tier Tribunal  at  Newport  for  rehearing  before  a
    different judge.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 23rd March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
