
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02928/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2019                           |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                            Mr Bernard kofi adjei
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Harper, counsel instructed by Fursdon Knapper
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell, promulgated on 15 November 2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 28 December 2018.



Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. On 4 January 2018, the appellant sought a permanent residence  card  as
    the former family member of a European Economic Area or Swiss  national
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom who had retained a right
    of residence. That application was refused on 23 March 2018 because the
    Secretary of State determined  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided
    adequate evidence that the former spouse was a qualified person or  had
    a right of permanent residence on the date of the  termination  of  the
    marriage and the appellant had not demonstrated that he had resided  in
    the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for a  continuous
    period of  five  years.  Essentially,  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant showed only that his  former  spouse  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights from 27 April 2012 until 29 February 2016 with the  latter  date
    being 10 months prior to the divorce.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier Tribunal judge was invited to find that on balance,  the
    former spouse had been working right up until the time of  the  divorce
    and as such there was no need to make an application under  section  40
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The judge concluded that the appellant had
    failed to discharge the burden upon him because he had relied  upon  at
    least one false document, namely the payslip for week 34 of 2016  which
    showed a lower gross pay to date figure than that shown in  an  earlier
    period.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal argued firstly, that the judge erred in making  a
    finding that the appellant had  relied  on  a  false  document  without
    giving him the opportunity to respond. Secondly, it was said  that  the
    judge erred in failing to grant an application under section 40 for the
    disclosure of HMRC records if he had concerns regarding the reliability
    of the evidence adduced.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

The hearing

 7. Ms Harper advised me that the appellant's divorce was  initiated  on  9
    November 2016 and that the respondent accepted that the EEA sponsor was
    a qualified person until 29 February 2016. For  the  period  between  1
    March and 9 November 2016, there were two payslips, in one of which the
    judge identified an error. It was argued that there was no lawful basis
    for this and there was procedural unfairness in not raising it with the
    appellant. Ms Harper argued  that  such  an  allegation  needed  to  be
    established to a high degree of proof. In this case, the respondent was
    unrepresented, no concerns had been raised by the respondent  regarding
    any documents previously submitted by the appellant who  had  given  an
    account as to how he had obtained it.

 8. Fairness dictated that the judge should have given the appellant or his
    representative an opportunity to address his concerns.

 9. In relation to the second ground, Ms Harper stated that counsel at  the
    hearing sought a direction for the respondent to approach HMRC for  the
    sponsor's records which the judge declined to grant. At that  point  no
    concerns were raised regarding the payslips.   If  the  documents  were
    insufficient the application for a direction ought to have been granted
    and both these errors were central to the case.

10. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bramble conceded that the  hearing  was
    procedurally unfair although the judge might have  thought  there  were
    payslips which covered the appropriate period and that there might  not
    be a need for the respondent to obtain  documents.  He  indicated  that
    this was a matter which needed to go back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for proper consideration.

Decision on error of law

11. As accepted by Mr Bramble, the judge  fell  into  procedural  error  in
    finding that the documents were "false" [28] owing to an issue with the
    payslips provided by the appellant to address the gap in the  evidence.
    The judge's concerns were not put to the appellant or his  counsel  and
    it was unfair to make a finding  that  all  the  documents  were  false
    without hearing from the appellant or inviting  a  submission  on  this
    point.

12. As to the second ground, the documents  before  the  judge  which  were
    relevant to the gap in the evidence, amounted to two payslips  covering
    two weeks' employment by the former spouse, ending in around 4 November
    2018. In view of the judge's concerns as to the reliability of at least
    one of  these  documents,  it  would  have  been  appropriate  for  the
    application under section 40 of the Borders Act to have been granted.


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell.

The appeal is to be considered at a case management review  hearing  with  a
view to a direction under section 40 of the UK Borders Act being sought.


Signed                                  Date 08 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
