
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/02807/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                 |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16th September 2019              |       On 19th September 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                               MR ONKAR SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Onkar Singh, In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India.  He appeals against the decision
      of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Clarke promulgated on 22nd August
      2018, dismissing his appeal against a decision to refuse to issue an
      EEA Residence Card as the extended family member of an EEA national
      exercising treaty rights in the UK in accordance with the Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations"),
      for want of jurisdiction.


   2. The appellant was assisted at the hearing of his appeal before me, by
      an interpreter who confirmed that he had spoken to the appellant and
      they were able to communicate properly in the Punjabi language.


   3. The appellant had claimed a right to reside in the UK as the extended
      family member of an EEA national. His application was refused by the
      respondent on 19th March 2018 because the applicant had failed to
      provide adequate evidence that his EEA sponsor is residing in the UK
      in accordance with the 2016 Regulations.


   4. The FtT Judge found that the 2016 Regulations do not provide for a
      right of appeal against the decision made by the respondent to refuse
      a residence permit to an extended family member pursuant to Regulation
      8 of the 2016 Regulations.    Permission to appeal was granted by FtT
      Judge Gibb on 4th October 2018.  The matter comes before me to
      consider whether or not the decision of FtT Judge Clarke involved the
      making of a material error of law, and if the decision is set aside,
      to re-make the decision.


Discussion


   5. At the hearing before me, I explained to the appellant that although I
      understand that he disagrees with the decision of the respondent, I
      must first consider whether there is a material error of law in the
      decision of the FtT Judge.  The appellant accepted that the 2016
      Regulations have been amended since the decision of the respondent,
      such that any application now made would give rise to a right of
      appeal. He accepted that the hearing of his appeal before the Upper
      Tribunal was adjourned by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 12th July 2019
      so that the appellant can made a further application to the
      respondent.  It appears that despite the passage of time since the
      adjournment, the applicant has not made a further application.  The
      appellant candidly accepted that he cannot identify any error of law
      in the decision of the FtT Judge but submitted that he disagrees with
      the respondent's underlying decision.


   6. Regulation 36(1) of the 2016 Regulations provides that "The subject of
      an EEA decision may appeal against that decision under these
      Regulations".  An "EEA decision" was defined in Regulation 2 of the
      2016 Regulations as in force as at the date of the hearing of the
      appeal, and the date upon which the decision was promulgated, as
      follows:

         "EEA decision" means a decision under these Regulations that
      concerns-
            (a)  a person's entitlement to be admitted to the United
                Kingdom;
            (b)  a person's entitlement to be issued with or have renewed,
                or  not  to  have  revoked,  a   registration   certificate,
                residence  card,   derivative   residence   card,   document
                certifying permanent residence or permanent  residence  card
                (but does not include a decision that an application for the
                above documentation is invalid);
            (c)  a person's removal from the United Kingdom; or
            (d)  the cancellation, under regulation 25, of a person's right
                to reside in the United Kingdom,


            but does not include a decision to refuse to issue  a  document
            under regulation 12(4) (issue of an EEA  family  permit  to  an
            extended  family  member),  17(5)  (issue  of  a   registration
            certificate to an extended family member) or 18(4) (issue of  a
            residence card to an extended family  member),  a  decision  to
            reject an application under regulation 26(4) (misuse of a right
            to reside: material change of circumstances), or any  decisions
            under regulation 33 (human rights  considerations  and  interim
            orders to suspend removal) or 41 (temporary admission to submit
            case in person);

   7. It was not until 28th March 2019, that the exclusion of an appeal
      against a decision to refuse to issue a document under regulations
      12(4), 17(5) or 18(4) to an extended family member, was revoked by the
      Immigration (European Economic Area Nationals) (EU Exit) Regulations
      2019/468 (Part 3 reg.3(2).  As at the date of the hearing before the
      FtT, and the date upon which the decision was promulgated, the
      appellant was not "the subject of an EEA decision", and quite
      properly, as set out at paragraph [11] of the Judge's decision, there
      was no right of appeal for extended family members.


   8. The decision of the Judge reflected the law set out in the 2016
      Regulations.  I accept that we now have the benefit of a decision of
      the Court of Justice of the European Union in SSHD v Banger
      (Citizenship of the European Union - Right of Union citizens to move
      and reside freely within the territory of the European Union -
      Judgment) [2018] EUECJ C-89/17 (12 July 2018). This makes clear that
      member states have an obligation to facilitate the residence of
      extended family members and to provide an accessible right of redress
      to challenge a disappointing decision. As I have already set out, the
      respondent has recognised that and has amended the 2016 Regulations so
      that the appellant would now have a right of appeal. That change does
      not create a right of appeal in a case such as this where the decision
      complained of was before the change in the Regulations.


   9. As Mr Howells submits, it remains open to the appellant to make a
      further application that will be decided upon its own merits, and if
      refused, will give rise to a right of appeal.


Decision:


  10. The appeal is dismissed.


  11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material
      error of law and the decision of FtT Judge Clarke shall stand.


  12. No aanonymity direction was made by the FtT.


Signed                                  Date          16th September 2019


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


