
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02735/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Heard on 5th of December 2017          |on 10th of January 2018             |
|Prepared on 15th of December 2017      |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               MS DORIS OGUNBA
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

The Appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent: Mr Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 25th of  May  1978.  The
      Respondent has appealed against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Mailer sitting at Hatton Cross on 23rd  of  January  2017  in
      which the Judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant against a decision
      of the Respondent dated 4th of November 2015.  That  decision  was  to
      refuse the Appellant's application  for  a  permanent  residence  card
      pursuant to Regulation 10(5) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"). For the reasons which
      I have set out below, see [16], I have set that decision aside and re-
      made the decision in this appeal. Although this matter came to  me  in
      the first place as an appeal  by  the  Respondent,  for  the  sake  of
      convenience I will continue to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
      referred to below.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in or about 2007 and  married
      her former husband, a citizen of France, on 2nd of January  2008.  She
      applied for a residence card as a family member  of  an  EEA  national
      exercising treaty rights on 17th of December 2009 and this was granted
      in September 2010. On 5th of April  2013  she  applied  for  permanent
      residence on the basis of retention of  rights  as  by  then  she  had
      divorced but this was refused by the Respondent. On 15th  of  February
      2014 she again applied for permanent residence on the same basis, that
      she resided with her husband  throughout  their  marriage  until  they
      divorced in December 2012 but had not seen him since  late  2014/early
      2015 when he was still working.


   3. She made a further application for leave to  remain  in  2013  without
      legal assistance merely including a few documents in that  application
      which was also rejected by the Respondent. She appealed that rejection
      and the matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  11th  of  May
      2015. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed, the Judge finding that the
      Appellant had "woefully failed" to provide any evidence which met  the
      specific requirements of the 2006 Regulations. The Appellant  did  not
      attend at the hearing, her solicitors at the time having come off  the
      record shortly before. She then instructed other solicitors to  assist
      her with another  application  gathering  some  further  documentation
      included in the application made on 19th  of  May  2015.  It  was  the
      refusal of that application on 2nd of November 2015 which gave rise to
      these proceedings.

The 2006 Regulations

   4. Regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations provides that  a  family  member
      such as a spouse will retain the right of residence if they  cease  to
      be a family member of a qualified person or of an EEA national with  a
      permanent right of residence on the termination of the marriage.  They
      must have been residing in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
      Regulations at  the  date  of  the  termination.  Regulations  10  (5)
      contains further requirements such as the length of the marriage,  the
      effect of domestic violence  and  custody  of  a  child  but  for  the
      purposes of this appeal the important sub paragraph is  (a),  that  is
      whether the Appellant's ex-husband was a qualified person,  exercising
      treaty rights on the termination of the marriage.


   5.  Regulation 15 provides that a family member of an  EEA  national  who
      has resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA national in  accordance
      with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous period  of  5  years  shall
      acquire the right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  permanently.  The
      burden of proof of establishing this rests upon the Appellant and  the
      standard  of  proof  is  the  usual  civil  standard  of  balance   of
      probabilities.

The Appellant's Case

   6. The Appellant's case is that she is entitled to a grant  of  permanent
      residence because she had lived with an EEA national exercising treaty
      rights for more than 5  years.  Her  ex-husband  had  been  exercising
      treaty rights as a worker throughout the duration of  their  marriage.
      He commenced employment in 2008 with Omega Travel and Emplex  Limited.
      She herself had been working in the United Kingdom since 2007.  As  at
      the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal she  was  still
      working although she informed me in oral evidence that she was now  no
      longer working. She was the sole parent of a 12-year-old son  who  was
      born in the United Kingdom. He was in full-time education. The  father
      of the child is not her ex-husband  and  the  child's  nationality  is
      Nigerian. She informed the  Judge  at  first  instance  that  she  had
      applied for her son to be naturalised as  a  British  citizen.  I  was
      informed by the parties that that application had been granted by  the
      Respondent in January 2017. I assume that if the Appellant's  son  was
      naturalised it was after 23rd of January when the hearing took  place.
      It does not seem to have been brought to the Judge's attention  before
      his decision was promulgated three weeks later.

The Decision at First Instance

   7. At [41] of his determination the Judge stated that the issue on appeal
      was whether the Appellant had shown on the  balance  of  probabilities
      that her ex-husband was exercising treaty rights as at the date of the
      final dissolution of their marriage in December  2012.  The  Appellant
      had produced a number of documents in support of her  contention  that
      her ex-husband was so working. These were 3 P60 certificates  said  to
      have been issued to her ex-husband between 2009 and 2012. In each case
      the employer was stated to be Empex Limited at the address set out  in
      the certificate.


   8.  The Respondent queried how the Appellant  had  been  able  to  obtain
      these P60s in time for the present appeal when she  had  not  produced
      them  in  her  previous  applications  and  appeals.  The  Appellant's
      response was that she had discovered the P60s in  her  house  although
      accepted in oral testimony that that meant the  documents  would  have
      been there and thus discoverable at least as far  back  as  2012.  She
      acknowledged that she had been  advised  by  solicitors  to  find  and
      collate all documents relating to  her  ex-husband's  employment.  She
      could  not  obtain  further  verification   about   her   ex-husband's
      employment because the company he worked for was no longer trading.


   9. During the course of the hearing the Appellant's counsel informed  the
      Judge that the Appellant and her ex-husband had separated in or around
      June 2012 which was inconsistent with  the  Appellant's  own  evidence
      that she had separated from her husband prior to  the  dissolution  of
      the marriage in December 2012. The significance of this  contradiction
      was that not only was it now in issue whether the ex-husband had  been
      residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with the regulations  but
      whether that had been going on for a continuous period of 5 years.  If
      the marriage was in January 2008 and the  parties  separated  in  June
      2012 the 5-year period could not be met by at least 6 months.


  10. The Judge was concerned at [51] about the lack of detail given by  the
      Appellant in her evidence about the work of her  ex-husband.  She  had
      not sought to  obtain  any  evidence  from  any  fellow  employees  or
      friends. Crucially the 3 P60s had been examined by the Respondent  and
      in  effect  found  to  be  fake.  The  Judge  put  the  matter   thus:
      "Interdepartmental checks were conducted but there was no record found
      of an employment history for [the Appellant's ex-husband]. Accordingly
      there were serious doubts of the credibility of the  P60  certificates
      in respect of her former spouse, evidencing  his  exercise  of  treaty
      rights in the UK". The Appellant had  not  dealt  with  any  of  those
      issues and the Appellant had given no details of  her  enquiries  that
      had apparently established that Empex limited was no longer trading.


  11. There was also no further evidence about the  ex-husband's  employment
      with Omega Travel (where he was said to have been employed as a travel
      consultant  commencing  on  2nd  of  February  2009).  There  were  no
      documents from HMRC regarding this particular employment. At [60]  the
      Judge concluded: "having regard to the evidence as  a  whole,  I  find
      that the Appellant has not shown on the balance of probabilities  that
      her husband was employed as at the date of the finalisation  of  their
      divorce in December 2012". The next subheading  in  the  determination
      was "notice of decision" but underneath that  the  Judge  had  written
      "the appeal is  allowed  under  the  2006  Regulations.  No  anonymity
      direction is made. No fee award is made."

The Onward Appeal

  12. The Respondent appealed against that decision on 21st of February 2017
      arguing that  the  Judge  had  concluded  in  great  detail  that  the
      Appellant's assertions about her ex-husband's status at  the  date  of
      the divorce had not been supported by reliable  documentary  evidence.
      The Judge had not accepted the Appellant's claim that  her  ex-husband
      was exercising treaty rights in United Kingdom  at  the  date  of  the
      divorce. That was the core issue relevant to the  appeal  against  the
      decisions taken under Regulations 10 and 15 of the  2006  Regulations.
      The final decision to allow the appeal was plainly  inconsistent  with
      the findings  which  preceded  it.  The  decision  must  have  been  a
      typographical mistake and as such the First-tier Tribunal was  invited
      to correct the obvious slip or to review the decision  under  Rule  35
      and set it aside.


  13. The power of review arises under  Rule  34  because  on  receiving  an
      application for permission to appeal the Tribunal must first  consider
      whether to review the decision in accordance with Rule  35.  In  fact,
      the Tribunal took neither course suggested by the Respondent.  Instead
      of a  review  the  application  was  treated  as  an  application  for
      permission to appeal and came on the papers before First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Robertson on 19th of September 2017. Not surprisingly she  found
      it arguable that  the  Judge's  findings  did  not  suggest  that  the
      criteria had been met for the grant of a permanent residence card  and
      that Judge Mailer had erred in stating that the  appeal  was  allowed.
      Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      authority of Katsonga [2016] UKUT 228. I pause to note here  that  the
      head note of that case insofar as it is relevant  states:  "The  'Slip
      Rule', Rule 31 of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules,  cannot  be
      used to reverse the effect of a decision." The case appears  to  leave
      open when it is appropriate for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  exercise
      its powers under Rule 35.

The Error of Law Hearing

  14. There was no Rule 24 response to the  grant  of  permission  from  the
      Appellant who appeared before me in person. She explained that she had
      been unable to afford to pay for legal representation but was  content
      for the case to proceed without a representative present. I asked  the
      Appellant a number of questions to assist her with the presentation of
      her case.


  15. I explained to the Appellant the difficulty in the case which was that
      it was clear from the tenor  of  the  Judge's  determination  that  he
      intended to dismiss the appeal because he was  not  satisfied  on  the
      core issue of the claim which was that the  Appellant  was  unable  to
      satisfy him on the balance of probabilities that  her  ex-husband  was
      working at the date of the divorce. It was not possible  to  read  the
      determination in any other way than that the Judge had made a clerical
      error  in  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  subheading  "notice   of
      decision". The Judge made no fee order (�140 was paid on  appeal),  if
      he had meant to allow the appeal it is reasonable to expect the  Judge
      to give a brief explanation why he  was  still  not  making  an  order
      having allowed the appeal. That he did not do so strongly suggests  he
      did not intend to allow the appeal.


  16. The Presenting  Officer  commented  that  following  the  decision  of
      Katsona the Judge granting permission to appeal was correct to observe
      that it was not possible to correct the determination  under  the  so-
      called slip Rule, Rule 31 if such  a  correction  had  the  effect  of
      altering the final decision. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granting
      permission had had no alternative but to grant permission to appeal to
      the Respondent and for the matter to come before the Upper Tribunal. I
      indicated to the parties that there was a clear material error of  law
      in allowing  the  appeal  when  the  reasoning  of  the  body  of  the
      determination clearly pointed to a dismissal  of  the  appeal.  I  set
      aside the decision at first  instance  and  after  further  discussion
      indicated to the parties that in the light  of  the  Judge's  findings
      which were full this was not an appropriate case to remit back to  the
      First-tier to be reheard but  that  I  would  proceed  to  rehear  the
      appeal.



The Rehearing

  17. The Appellant confirmed that she was no longer working because of  the
      visa difficulties she now had  as  a  result  of  the  expiry  of  her
      residence card. She had been working consistently in this country  for
      the last 10 years, had paid tax and had a family life here which would
      be disrupted by requiring her to return to Nigeria. She had no further
      contact with her ex-husband or with the father of her child. When  she
      was asked about the last time she had seen her ex-husband she had  not
      answered the question properly, the Judge had asked her to give a year
      but the truth was she had not seen her ex-husband in 2014. I asked the
      Appellant to explain what her case was on the P60s as  the  Judge  had
      been clearly  influenced  by  the  Respondent's  submission  that  the
      credibility of  the  P60s  was  seriously  questioned.  The  Appellant
      reiterated what she had told Judge Mailer that she had made  a  search
      at her property and had found the P60s. She found the P60s in a bag in
      storage outside the house. She could have produced five of them. Empex
      Ltd was no longer in existence.


  18. The Presenting Officer submitted that as  no  removal  directions  had
      been made in this case and no section 120 notice had been served,  the
      Appellant could not bring an Article 8 claim. The matter was solely to
      be determined on the basis of the 2006 Regulations.  If  the  decision
      was set aside it was unlikely that the Tribunal would be  assisted  by
      further evidence, the swiftest method of resolving the case  might  be
      to hear it now under Zambrano principles. Alternatively, it  was  open
      to the Appellant to make a further application now that  her  son  was
      naturalised as a UK citizen. The Appellant responded to  this  stating
      that whilst she appreciated that she could make a further  application
      for leave to remain under Article 8 in relation to  her  family  life,
      she did not wish to do this because she would have to pay a fee to the
      Respondent for such an application. She did  not  have  the  necessary
      funds at the present time to pay for that application (although an EEA
      application would not attract a fee). Her  appeal  should  be  allowed
      now.

Findings

  19. At first instance, this was an appeal under the 2006  Regulations.  If
      the Appellant's son had been naturalised as a United  Kingdom  citizen
      before the hearing she might have been able to  argue  that  following
      the decision of the Court of Justice of the European Union in Zambrano
      she should remain in this country as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
      citizen. The argument potentially would be that the EEA  citizen,  her
      son, would be forced to leave the European Union if she were to  leave
      there being no other carer available. She  could  also  make  a  fresh
      application under the Immigration Rules as her  son  is  a  qualifying
      child. The Appellant could make an application under  Appendix  FM  of
      the Rules and/or Article 8 outside the Rules but in either event  that
      could not be brought in the course of this appeal since it is  an  EEA
      appeal, see the Court of Appeal authority of Amirteymour.


  20. The EEA issue in this case was whether the Appellant could  show  that
      her ex-husband was  exercising  treaty  rights  at  the  date  of  the
      divorce. She produced no further documentary evidence to me in support
      of her case. Judge Mailer had set out in his determination  the  types
      of further evidence which  she  could  have  produced,  assuming  they
      existed. I appreciate that the Appellant is unrepresented but she  had
      been given advice by previous solicitors along broadly  similar  lines
      to the indication given  by  Judge  Mailer  of  the  type  of  further
      evidence she needed  to  produce.  Whether  or  not  she  was  legally
      represented would not  of  itself  affect  the  existence  of  further
      evidence. As a result, the question marks over the  documentation  the
      Appellant produced remain and the Appellant cannot show on  the  basis
      of that documentation that her ex-husband was working. The divorce was
      shortly before the expiry of the 5-year period required by  Regulation
      15. The inability of the Appellant to produce supporting evidence when
      it was reasonable to have expected  that  supporting  evidence  to  be
      available means that I too find that the Appellant could not show  her
      ex-husband was working at the relevant time. This is compounded by the
      fact that the evidence she produced was highly questionable.


21. I have some sympathy for the Appellant's predicament that the  cost  of
    an application for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules, on  the
    basis that her son is a British citizen might involve  her  in  further
    expenditure. That however is not a good  reason  to  allow  her  appeal
    outright at this stage. I do not accept that I can  remit  this  appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that Article 8 would  then
    become arguable. There would have to  be  a  further  decision  by  the
    Respondent before the Appellant could argue Article 8 in  what  remains
    an EEA appeal. For a further decision to be taken, the Appellant  would
    have to lodge a notice of application paying the appropriate fee.  This
    is the procedure laid  down  by  Parliament  and  does  not  of  itself
    represent a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights.


22. The situation has changed since Judge Mailer allowed the appeal  (when,
    I find, he meant to dismiss  it).  The  Appellant  now  has  a  British
    citizen child but there is little evidence of the  involvement  of  the
    child's  father  in  the  child's  upbringing.  This  is  important  to
    ascertain in the light  of  a  possible  Zambrano  argument  (see  [19]
    above).  The evidence strongly suggests that the Appellant cannot  meet
    the requirements of the 2006 Regulations in relation to her  ex-husband
    and that the correct course of action in this case is  to  dismiss  her
    appeal.


23. The Appellant can then make such further applications as she sees  fit.
    I do not consider it appropriate to decide the  case  on  a  basis  not
    before Judge Mailer, that is on a potential  Zambrano  argument,  since
    that is to make the Upper Tribunal a primary  fact  finder.  Nor  do  I
    consider it appropriate to remit the case back to the First-tier for an
    issue to be decided that  has  not  been  previously  raised  in  these
    proceedings or considered by the Respondent. There is no fee for making
    an EEA application (which addresses one of the concerns  the  Appellant
    has) and the Appellant could make the appropriate application  now  for
    leave to remain on the basis that she is the carer of  an  EEA  citizen
    child. She would have to provide supporting evidence  of  her  argument
    (for example of the non-involvement of the father) which could then  be
    properly looked at by the Respondent  and  if  appropriate  granted.  I
    therefore dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to issue her with a permanent residence card. I make
    no anonymity order as none was made at first instance.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I remake the decision  by  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant
    a permanent residence card.

Appellant's appeal dismissed


Signed this 15th of December 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 15th of December 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


