
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02270/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                 |Determination Promulgated        |
|On Wednesday 31 October 2018                 |On Wednesday 28 November 2018    |
|                                             |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              MR GBENGA SOLANKE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Hussain, Counsel instructed by OA solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge B A Morris promulgated on 5 December 2017 ("the Decision").   The
    Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
    decision dated 20 October 2015 revoking his residence  card  which  was
    issued following an earlier  appeal.  In  that  earlier  appeal,  by  a
    decision promulgated on 12 February 2014, Judge Hindson found that  the
    Appellant was not married but nevertheless in  a  durable  relationship
    with a Slovakian national, Ms Rafajova.

2.    The Respondent's decision revoking the residence permit had been  made
    on the basis that the Appellant was married to Ms Rafajova but that the
    marriage had  been  one  of  convenience.   The  action  taken  by  the
    Respondent followed an interview of Ms Rafajova in  the  course  of  an
    enforcement visit on 20 August 2015 in which Ms Rafajova said that  she
    was married to another Slovakian, Miroslav Rafaj and had  been  for  25
    years.   She  denied  knowing  the  Appellant  or  having  been  in   a
    relationship with  him.   Following  checks  made  by  the  enforcement
    officers, it was discovered that Ms Rafajova had sponsored not only the
    Appellant but another Nigerian national to who it had also been claimed
    she was married.

3.    At the start of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Morris,  the  Respondent
    indicated that the case was  no  longer  pursued  on  the  basis  of  a
    marriage of convenience because of  Judge  Hindson's  earlier  finding.
    Instead, it was argued that, since the durable relationship  no  longer
    subsisted (on the Appellant's own case it  had  ended),  the  residence
    permit could be revoked on that basis.  The Judge accepted that  change
    of  position.  The  Appellant's  representative  submitted   that   the
    Respondent's revocation decision was incorrect in law as there had been
    no marriage and therefore the whole basis of the decision  was  legally
    incorrect.  He later submitted that,  if  it  were  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been legally married to Ms Rafajova, then  the  Appellant
    had a retained right of residence.

4.    Judge Morris proceeded on the basis  that  all  documents  before  her
    were also before Judge Hindson.  Since the finding of Judge Hindson had
    not been overturned, she concluded that there was no basis on which  to
    disturb the previous finding that  the  proxy  marriage  had  not  been
    validly entered into under Nigerian law and accordingly that there  was
    no legal marriage.  Since the Appellant could not claim to  be  legally
    married to Ms  Rafajova,  he  could  not  claim  a  retained  right  of
    residence.   On  his  own  case,  the  relationship   had   ended   and
    consequently, the Judge found that the  decision  did  not  breach  the
    Appellant's rights under the EU Treaties.

5.    We do not need to refer to the  pleaded  grounds  as  the  appeal  was
    argued before us on a narrow basis.  It is though convenient to set out
    the basis on  which  permission  was  granted  by  UTJ  Perkins  on  14
    September 2018 (permission having been refused previously by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett):

         "1.      This needs to be looked at again and I give permission  on
         each ground.

         2. The Appellant challenges a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         to dismiss his appeal against the revocation of his residence  card
         confirming his right to reside in the United Kingdom as the husband
         of an EEA national.

         3. The Respondent was satisfied that the Appellant's  marriage  was
         one of convenience.

         4. The problem with that finding is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         had decided that there was no marriage  at  all  but  there  was  a
         durable relationship.

         5. At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Respondent
         changed his case and argued that the card should be revoked because
         the durable relationship no longer endured.

         6. Clearly this is in some ways a different decision from  the  one
         that  was  appealed.   However  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
         established that the same rules were relied upon and the  Appellant
         was not able to indicate what he needed to do to present his appeal
         that he had not already done.  The Judge then decided  to  continue
         with the hearing and dismissed the appeal.

         7. It might be that the Judge was right but it is clearly  arguable
         that the Respondent should not have been allowed to change his case
         at the hearing of the appeal."

6.    The matter comes  before  us  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
    disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Discussion and conclusions

7.    As is evident from what is  said  by  Judge  Perkins  at  [7]  of  his
    decision, the challenge found to be arguable is based on  a  procedural
    error by Judge Morris permitting the Respondent to change his  case  at
    the hearing.  Mr Deller indicated that this is the case  which  he  had
    expected to have to meet.  That though is not the way in which the case
    was pursued before us.  Mr Hussain accepted in  reply  to  Mr  Deller's
    submission that whilst an adjournment request could and perhaps  should
    have been made to allow the Appellant to address the  revised  case  as
    put forward by the Respondent, this did not happen.  The Appellant  was
    legally represented before Judge Morris. No objection was taken on  his
    behalf about the Respondent's change of position.

8.    Mr Hussain's case was put forward instead  on  a  revised  version  of
    [2.3] and [2.4] of the pleaded grounds in which it was said that  Judge
    Morris should not have taken Judge Hindson's decision as  her  starting
    point; she should have focussed instead on the evidence that the  proxy
    marriage was registered in Nigeria and considered the  relationship  in
    that light.

9.    Mr  Hussain  accepted  that,  following  Devaseelan,  Judge  Hindson's
    decision was the appropriate starting point.  He  pointed  out  however
    that Judge Morris's observation that there was no  challenge  to  Judge
    Hindson's decision failed to take into  account  that  the  Appellant's
    appeal had been allowed by Judge Hindson albeit on a finding that there
    was a durable relationship.  The Appellant did not  therefore  consider
    it necessary to appeal Judge Hindson's decision further.

10.   Mr Hussain submitted that in those circumstances, Judge Morris  should
    have gone on to consider for herself the evidence about the validity of
    the marriage and should have considered  whether  that  was  reason  to
    depart  from  Judge  Hindson's  finding.   The  difficulty  with   this
    submission, as Mr Deller pointed out, is that both  the  Appellant  and
    his  legal  representative  were  "adamant"   that   the   registration
    certificate at page [4] of the  Appellant's  bundle  was  before  Judge
    Hindson when he reached his decision (see [21] of the Decision).

11.   The other difficulty with Mr Hussain's submission is,  as  we  pointed
    out to him, if Judge Morris intended to revisit the  issue  of  whether
    there was a legal marriage or not, she would also  have  to  take  into
    account the evidence of the enforcement officer's minute to the  effect
    that Ms Rafajova was  already  married.   Unless  there  were  evidence
    before us that Nigeria permits polyandrous marriages  (which  there  is
    not), even if we found that the Judge had committed an error by failing
    to consider the registration  certificate  for  herself,  the  evidence
    before us strongly suggests that  the  marriage  could  not  be  lawful
    because Ms Rafajova was not free to marry at that  time.    Mr  Hussain
    did point out that there is no statement from the  enforcement  officer
    and the minute is not signed but it cannot sensibly be  suggested  that
    the minute is not a genuine document and, absent any  evidence  to  the
    contrary, that document, at the very least, meets the evidential burden
    of proving its contents.

12.   We note that the Appellant said at the  hearing  before  Judge  Morris
    that he was unaware that Ms Rafajova was already married.   Mr  Hussain
    also drew our attention to documents which tend to show  that  she  and
    the Appellant lived at the same address and there were  photographs  of
    them together.  However, absent evidence from Ms Rafajova herself  that
    she lied to the enforcement officer or evidence that the person who the
    Appellant married was wrongfully using Ms  Rafajova's  identity  (which
    would not assist his case in any event), it is difficult to see how the
    Appellant can show that he was legally married to Ms Rafajova.  He  may
    well have been duped  by  her  but  that  does  not  affect  the  legal
    position.

13.   For those reasons, any error by Judge Morris in  failing  to  consider
    the registration certificate is immaterial.  We add though that,  as  a
    result of what is said at [21] of the Decision, we do not  accept  that
    Judge Morris did err in that regard.  Once she had been told  that  the
    evidence relied upon had been  before  Judge  Hindson  and  no  further
    evidence was put forward, she was entitled to conclude that  there  was
    no reason to disturb the earlier finding.

14.   We observe for completeness that Judge Hindson did  not,  or  says  he
    did not, have that registration certificate before  him  ([13]  of  his
    decision).  We also observe that Judge Hindson was asked  to  determine
    the earlier appeal on  the  papers  and  without  submissions  or  oral
    evidence.  The written decision of Judge Hindson was not however before
    Judge Morris and  in  fact  we  only  received  it  because  Mr  Deller
    recognised its relevance and produced it to us.  On the basis  of  what
    Judge Morris was told by the Appellant and his advocate she  cannot  be
    faulted for not knowing that Judge Hindson either  did  not  have  that
    certificate or did but failed to notice it because of a failure to draw
    it to his attention.   As we have already pointed out, though, none  of
    this matters in light of the evidence  that  Ms  Rafajova  was  already
    married when she purported to marry the Appellant.

15.   We end as we started with the basis on which  permission  was  granted
    in this case namely the potential procedural error  by  permitting  the
    Respondent to change his case at the hearing.

16.   As Mr Deller pointed out to us, as a result of  changes  made  to  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations in 2015[1],  the  sole
    ground of appeal in this case is whether the decision appealed  against
    breaches the appellant's rights under the EU Treaties.  It was the task
    of the Judge to consider that  for  herself.   Whilst,  as  Mr  Hussain
    accepted, it may have been preferable if the Appellant's representative
    had sought at least a  short  adjournment  following  the  Respondent's
    change in position so that the Appellant could take stock and  consider
    whether  further  evidence  was  required,  the  issue  for  the  Judge
    thereafter remained the same.  She had to consider  whether  there  was
    reason to depart from Judge Hindson's finding that the marriage was not
    legally valid.  If she had found that the marriage was a legal one, she
    would have needed to go on to consider what flowed from that  in  terms
    of retained rights.  For the reasons we have  already  given,  however,
    she was entitled (indeed bound  on  the  evidence)  to  find  that  the
    marriage was  not  legally  valid.   Thereafter,  since  the  Appellant
    accepted that any durable relationship had  ended,  she  was  bound  to
    conclude that the appeal must fail.

17.   For those reasons,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Decision  does  not
    contain any material error of law and we uphold it.

DECISION

We are satisfied that  the  Decision  does  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  We  uphold  the  Decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  B  A  Morris  promulgated  on  5  December  2017  with  the
consequence that the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 21 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
-----------------------
[1] Schedule 1 to the Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment)
Regulations 2015 amends Schedule 1 to the Immigration (European Economic
Area) Regulations 2006 with effect from 6 April 2015

