
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02193/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2017                           |On 07 February 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 Waqas ejaz
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mr Ejaz against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge refusing his appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  28
    October 2015 for an EEA family permit to join his spouse in the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge dismissed the appeal and  the  main  point  in  the
    grounds and in relation to which permission was granted by  the  First-
    tier Judge is that the judge failed  to  state  that  the  burden  with
    regard to the alleged marriage of convenience was  on  the  respondent.
    That is a point which I think is well taken and  Mr  Tufan,  as  always
    helpful, does not really take issue with that  provisional  view.   The
    judge says the standard of proof is the civil standard of a balance  of
    probabilities which is ambiguous of course and  does  not  go  on  when
    looking at the evidence to say on whom that burden is, and in  fact  it
    is not really conclusive as to whether the burden has  been  discharged
    or not anyway.  Clearly, the judge had concerns with the evidence and I
    may say entirely understandable concerns, but that is  not  really  the
    point if those matters have not been brought together into  the  proper
    evaluation of the claim in the context of identification of  the  party
    on whom the burden was and what the standard of proof was.   There  is,
    as Mr Tufan says, a child.

Notice of Decision

2.   In all the circumstances it seems  to  me  that  the  only  appropriate
    outcome in this case is it for it to be remitted back to the First-tier
    Tribunal in Glasgow for a full hearing.

3.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

