
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02428/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th May 2019                     |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                 aqsa naheed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees, instructed by Clyde Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Aujla, dated 11 January 2019, dismissing her appeal  against  the
    refusal of a residence card under Regulation 8 of the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  I  D
    Boyes on 11 April 2019 on the following grounds:

         "2.  The grounds, which are extraordinary prolix, assert  that  the
             Judge erred in the assessment of whether a  Non  EU  appellant
             can rely upon derivative EU rights from a person who is in the
             EU but is too not an EU national.   Secondly,  can  one  be  a
             member of a household in which the principal does not live and
             which is in a different country to the principal.

         3.   I fear I know the answer to both questions but  I  agree  they
             are arguable in terms of a permission request.

         4.   The grounds really ought to be narrowed and streamlined  prior
             to an appearance in the UT.

         5.   Permission is granted on all matters raised."

Submissions

3.   Mr Rees submitted that there were two issues to be  decided.   Firstly,
    can a non-EU Appellant rely on derivative EU rights from  a  person  in
    the EU who is not an EU national at all relevant times?  In  this  case
    the Appellant's Sponsor, her uncle Mr Kohlon, became a Belgian national
    in July 2013, after the Appellant came to the UK. The issue was whether
    the Appellant could benefit from Regulation 8 because the  Sponsor  was
    exercising Treaty rights as an EEA national at the time the application
    was made.

4.   The second issue was  whether  an  Appellant  can  be  a  member  of  a
    household in which the principal does not live at  the  relevant  time?
    The Sponsor had lived in Belgium since 2000. The Appellant had lived in
    his family home, of which he was the head of the household, in Pakistan
    until she came to  the  UK  in  2010.  The  Appellant  lived  with  the
    Sponsor's brother and his parents.

5.   Mr Rees submitted that there was no authority on  whether  the  Sponsor
    had to be an EU national prior to the Appellant's entry  into  the  UK.
    The Respondent accepted that the Sponsor was exercising  Treaty  rights
    since his entry into the UK. The judge found that it  was  implicit  in
    Regulation 8 that dependency on an EEA  national  or  membership  of  a
    household prior to entering the UK meant that the Appellant  could  not
    succeed because it was  accepted  that  the  Sponsor  was  not  an  EEA
    national until after the Appellant came to the UK.  Mr  Rees  submitted
    that this assumption was incorrect and invited a liberal interpretation
    of Regulation 8. The judge should assess the situation at the time  the
    application was made because  the  Regulations  were  unclear  on  this
    point.  The judge  should  look  at  the  facts  at  the  date  of  the
    application and the judge had erred in law in  reading  something  into
    the Regulation that was not there.

6.   Mr Rees submitted that the time the Sponsor had spent in  Pakistan  was
    not addressed in detail, but he could still be the head of a  household
    even  though  he  was  working  abroad.  The  Sponsor  was  financially
    supporting the family living in his household and there was no evidence
    before the judge to show  that  the  Sponsor's  brother  was  providing
    financial support.

7.   Miss Cunha submitted that  when  looking  at  extended  family  members
    under Regulation 8 it was necessary to consider the exercise of  Treaty
    rights by an EEA national in the UK.  In order to be able  to  exercise
    Treaty rights a person had to be an EEA national.  Someone  who  became
    an EEA national in 2013 was not able to exercise Treaty  rights  before
    that date. The Sponsor could not satisfy Regulation 6 before 2013.  The
    Sponsor was living and working in Belgium under domestic  law.  He  was
    not exercising Treaty rights at that time, nor was he dependent  on  an
    EEA national.

8.   In relation to membership of the household the  Sponsor  could  not  be
    part of a household  in  Pakistan  if  ground  one  succeeded.  If  the
    Appellant was exercising Treaty rights in Belgium, then he could not be
    the head of a household outside the EU.  Membership  of  the  household
    involved  living  under  the  same  roof.  There  could  not  be  prior
    dependency because there was insufficient evidence that  the  Sponsor's
    income was necessary to maintain the Appellant. The judge's finding  at
    paragraph 34 was open to him and there was no error of law.

9.   Miss Cunha submitted that Regulation  8  ensured  dependants  from  the
    same household can exercise free movement. The Sponsor  was  exercising
    free movement rights without being present in  the  household,  so  the
    Appellant's argument did not prevent the Sponsor from exercising Treaty
    rights. The Appellant submitted  a  person  was  entitled  to  exercise
    freedom of movement in any EU country. As an EU  national  the  Sponsor
    moved from Belgium to UK.  It  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    already been in the UK for five years at that time.

10.  Mr Rees submitted  that  the  Sponsor  had  financially  supported  the
    Appellant notwithstanding the previous entry clearance application. The
    challenge to paragraph 34 was a rationality challenge.

Conclusions and reasons

11.  The relevant Regulation is Regulation 8(2).  It states:

         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his  civil  partner
         and

         (a)  the person is/was residing in a country other than the  United
             Kingdom and is/was dependent upon the EEA  national  or  is  a
             member of his household;

         (b)  the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a)  and  is
             accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or  wishes
             to join him there; or

         (c)  the person satisfied  the  condition  in  paragraph  (a),  has
             joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to
             be dependent upon him or a member of his household".

12.  The judge referred to the case of Dauhoo (EEA Regulations -  reg  8(2))
    [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC) in which the Tribunal held:

         "Under the scheme set out in reg 8(2) of the Immigration  (European
         Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  a  person   can   succeed   in
         establishing that he or she is an 'extended family member'  in  any
         one of four different  ways,  each  of  which  requires  proving  a
         relevant connection both prior to arrival in the UK and in the UK:

             i.   prior dependency and present dependency

             ii.  prior membership of a household and present membership of
                  a household

             iii. prior dependency and present membership of a household

             iv.  prior membership of a household and present dependency.

         It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  show  prior  and   present
         connection in the same capacity: i.e. dependency  -  dependency  or
         household membership - household membership ((i) or (ii) above).  A
         person may also qualify if able to show (iii) or (iv)."

13.  At paragraphs 28 to 30 the judge found:

         "28. It is implicit in, if not clear from, the regulations that for
             a dependency or  membership  of  the  Sponsor's  household  to
             count, both prior and in the United Kingdom, it had to be on a
             citizen of a member state of the European Union. Any period of
             dependency or membership  of  household  prior  to  a  foreign
             national becoming  an  EU  national  did  not  count  for  the
             regulations  are  intended  to  encourage  free  movement   of
             European Union nationals and their family members, both  close
             and extended.

         29.  A very important and highly relevant revelation came to  light
             during the Sponsor's evidence. There was no mention of that in
             the witness statements of the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  and
             the Appellant's representatives had equally not revealed  that
             information. By 'her representatives' I  mean  her  solicitors
             and not Mr Malik. Any nondisclosure of relevant  material  was
             not the responsibility of Mr Malik as counsel  presenting  the
             appeal before me and was clearly  the  responsibility  of  the
             Appellant's solicitors who were duty-bound to  make  enquiries
             and submit relevant evidence and information so that there was
             no risk of the tribunal, even Mr Malik himself,  being  misled
             into making a legal error.

         30.  The Sponsor stated for the first time in his evidence that  he
             had not become a Belgian national until 2013. His passport was
             issued on 01 July 2013 but that would not itself be enough  to
             indicate that he was  not  a  Belgian  national  before  2013.
             However, the Sponsor clearly stated that he became  a  Belgian
             national in 2013 although he  could  not  remember  the  exact
             date. I was astonished when I heard that evidence and Mr Malik
             also appeared to be taken by surprise, through no fault on his
             part."

14.  The facts of this case are that the Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 February  2010  and  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously since then. The Sponsor did not become a Belgian  national
    until July 2013, three years after the Appellant  arrived  in  the  UK.
    The judge found that any dependency on or membership of  the  Sponsor's
    household that the Appellant may have had before arriving in the United
    Kingdom clearly did not count as the Sponsor was not an EU national  at
    the time.  Even if it was accepted that she was now  dependent  on  the
    Sponsor or member of his household here in the  UK,  the  Sponsor  only
    became a Belgian national in July 2013. This appeal would  fall  to  be
    dismissed on the ground that  there  was  no  prior  dependency  on  or
    membership of the household of an  EU  national  before  the  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom.

15.  The purpose of the EEA Regulations is to facilitate the  free  movement
    of EU nationals within the EU. Prior to July 2013 it was accepted  that
    the Sponsor was not an EU national. Up to that date he could  not  rely
    on the exercise of Treaty rights under the EEA Regulations. It  follows
    from reading Regulation 8 that a person  satisfies  the  conditions  in
    this Regulation if s/he is a  relative  of  an  EEA  national  and  was
    residing or dependent on the EEA national or a member of the  household
    prior to coming to the UK.  Since the Sponsor was not an  EEA  national
    prior to  the  Appellant  coming  to  the  UK  she  could  not  satisfy
    Regulation 8 because she was not a relative of an  EEA  national  until
    July 2013. She had to show that she was dependent upon an EEA  national
    or member of his household prior to her arrival in the UK. On the facts
    of this case she could not do so. Regulation 8 was  not  satisfied  and
    the appeal was properly dismissed on that basis.

16.  For the sake of completeness, the judge found that the Appellant  could
    not be a member of the Sponsor's household because he had  been  living
    in Belgium since 2000 and his household was there.  The  Appellant  had
    never lived in Belgium as part of the Sponsor's household and there was
    insufficient evidence to show that the Appellant was wholly  or  mainly
    dependent on the Sponsor given that she  was  being  sponsored  by  her
    father and another man to come to the UK to study.

17.  The question of whether a person was a member  of  someone's  household
    was a question of fact and degree. Whilst it is accepted that a  person
    may be the head of a household and working abroad it had to be assessed
    on the facts and the amount of time the head of the household had spent
    away from that household would be relevant.  In this case  the  Sponsor
    had not lived in the same household as the Appellant  since  2000.  The
    Appellant has not lived with the Sponsor in Belgium prior to coming  to
    the UK. On the facts of this case it could not be  said  that  the  two
    were part of a shared household.

18.  There was insufficient evidence to show that as head of  the  household
    the Sponsor financially supported his  brother,  his  parents  and  the
    Appellant. The judge's finding at paragraph 34 was open to the judge on
    the evidence before him and therefore the Appellant was unable to  show
    that, by reason of his financial support, the Sponsor remained the head
    of the household in which she lived in Pakistan.

19.  In summary, the Appellant cannot derive any rights from the Sponsor  at
    a time when he was not an EEA national. The Sponsor could not  exercise
    Treaty rights until July 2013. The Appellant's presence in the  UK  had
    no bearing on the Sponsor's  ability  to  exercise  his  free  movement
    rights. The Appellant was not a member of the Sponsor's household prior
    to coming to the UK, nor was she financially dependent on him. She came
    to the UK as a student and there was insufficient evidence of financial
    support by the Sponsor.

20.  Accordingly, the judge's finding that the Appellant could  not  satisfy
    Regulation 8 was open to him on the evidence before him.  I  find  that
    there was no error of law in the judge's decision of  11  January  2019
    and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances

Signed   Date 7 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances

Signed   Date 7 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
