
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02514/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd March 2020                    |On 16th March 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                GURJIT SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Shah of 786 Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. In a decision promulgated on 23rd July  2019,  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge O'Hagan dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision
         of the respondent refusing to issue him with a  residence  card  as
         the family member of a British citizen who had previously exercised
         Treaty Rights in an EEA state.

      2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  that
         given the overall findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge,
         it was arguable the judge had incorrectly found the  appellant  did
         not meet regulation 9, taking into account  ZA  (reg  9  EEA  Regs;
         abuse of rights) Afghanistan [2019] UKUT 00281, the  appellant  and
         his wife had produced and relied upon evidence that fulfilled  many
         of the requirements of Regulation 9 including that the  couple  had
         spent time in Germany,  had  socially  interacted  with  people  in
         Germany, that they were building a life  together  in  Germany  and
         that Mrs Kaur had attended at least some  immigration  classes  and
         had made some effort to learn German.

         Background

      3. The appellant is a national of India. He previously entered the  UK
         illegally and claimed asylum under a false name. His  asylum  claim
         was refused; he did not appeal but remained unlawfully in  the  UK.
         He met his British Citizen wife Ms Kaur in 2010. He  then  returned
         to India voluntarily. She travelled to India in October 2011  where
         the couple were married. She returned to  the  UK;  his  subsequent
         application for entry clearance as a spouse was refused  under  the
         Immigration Rules because, inter alia, of his  adverse  immigration
         history.

      4. In January 2014 the appellant travelled to Italy.  Ms  Kaur  joined
         him there and  they  lived  there  until  December  2014.  Ms  Kaur
         returned to the UK;  the  appellant  remained  in  Italy.  On  30th
         October 2015 the  appellant  travelled  to  Germany  and  Mrs  Kaur
         travelled to Germany where they both recommenced living  with  each
         other.

      5. Mrs Kaur commenced employment on 2nd November 2015 and was employed
         for one month. Her next employment  was  from  30th  December  2016
         until June 2017 at Burger  King  in  Frankfurt  am  Main.   On  6th
         November 2017 she commenced work with Koch  and  Benedict  but  was
         injured and issued with  a  sick  note  covering  the  period  28th
         November 2017 until 20th December 2017. She did not work  again  in
         Germany.

      6. The appellant was issued with a Residence Card in Germany  on  30th
         October 2015.

      7. On 30th May 2018 the appellant and his wife travelled to the UK. 11
         days later Mrs Kaur obtained employment in the UK; the  application
         under regulation 9 was made on 13th November 2018.

      8.  The  appellant's  application  under  regulation  9  of  the   EEA
         regulations was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in  a
         letter dated 16th May 2019. In essence the respondent took the view
         that the residence in  Germany  was  contrived  to  circumvent  the
         Immigration Rules, and that the appellant had not established  that
         their residence in Germany was genuine.

         Error of Law

      9. In reaching his decision the First-tier Tribunal  judge  identified
         the factors he  had  to  consider  and  amongst  those  factors  he
         referred to whether the 'centre of the British Citizen's  life  had
         transferred to the EEA State'. This is plainly incorrect - see ZA.

     10. Mr Clarke submitted that irrespective of the time  the  couple  had
         spent in Germany, that they had rented a home and that Mrs Kaur had
         undertaken integration and language tuition, they  could  not  meet
         the requirements of regulation 9[1]. The findings of the First-tier
         Tribunal judge as to Mrs Kaur's employment history in  Germany  and
         her intentions on return to the UK  in  May  2018  were  such  that
         firstly she was not exercising Treaty Rights immediately  prior  to
         returning to the UK  -  a  finding  which  undermines  the  claimed
         genuineness of the residence in Germany; and secondly that  it  was
         her intention on her return to the UK to obtain employment and  the
         move to Germany had been contrived to  circumvent  the  Immigration
         Rules - an abuse of rights.

     11. There was, Mr Clarke submitted, what could be described as  a  two-
         stage process. The first question to be  asked  was  whether  there
         was, as per paragraph (ii) of the headnote of ZA, a genuine in  the
         sense of real, substantive or effective exercise of  Treaty  Rights
         in Germany and, depending on the answer to that question, there may
         then be a second question: had there been an abuse of rights.  With
         regard to the latter question, the burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
         Secretary of State.

     12. Mr Clarke submitted that regulation 9 required the  sponsor  to  be
         exercising Treaty rights immediately prior to coming back to the UK
         - regulation 9(2)(a)(i). Mrs Kaur was, he submitted not  exercising
         Treaty rights and had not been exercising Treaty Rights since  June
         2017 or, at its most generous December 2017.  She  could  not  meet
         9(2)(a)(i) because that required  the  exercise  of  rights  to  be
         immediately prior to entry to the UK.

     13. Furthermore, her very limited employment during the time she was in
         Germany did not support  the  submission  that  she  was  genuinely
         exercising Treaty  Rights:  there  was  no  real  or  effective  or
         substantive employment.

     14. In any event, he submitted, the finding by the First-tier  Tribunal
         judge that it was the intention of the parties  to  circumvent  the
         Immigration Rules was in itself  sufficient  to  have  enabled  the
         appeal to be dismissed. That finding had been taken holistically on
         the basis of all  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge considering Mrs Kaur's employment immediately  after
         her return to the UK, her employment history as well as the  length
         of time they had been away from the UK.

     15. Mr Shah submitted that although Mrs  Kaur  had  not  been  employed
         throughout her time in Germany, her periods  of  unemployment  were
         such that, by analogy with a person seeking permanent residence  in
         the UK she remained a qualifying person and, because she  had  been
         working in the 6 month period prior to coming to  the  UK  she  was
         thus exercising Treaty Rights. He drew  attention  to  the  tenancy
         agreement, that the appellant had been employed and  that  although
         she had not been working immediately prior to entry to the  UK  the
         reasons for that were reasonable and included her being  away  from
         work because of injury. The fact that the appellant had been issued
         with a Residence Card in Germany was relevant because it  meant  it
         was accepted that Mrs Kaur was exercising Treaty Rights.

         Discussion

     16. Regulation 9(2)(a)(i) requires Mrs Kaur  to  have  been  exercising
         Treaty Rights immediately  prior  to  her  entry  to  the  UK.  The
         evidence before the First-tier Tribunal could not have led to  that
         conclusion. She was not working from December 2017 at the latest.

     17. In so far as Mr Shah's submission that because  6  months  had  not
         elapsed after she ceased work and she returned to the UK  she  thus
         did not cease to be exercising Treaty Rights is concerned, he could
         not refer me to where this was stipulated in the Regulations either
         directly or by analogy. Regulation 6 sets out the  criteria  to  be
         satisfied to  be  a  Qualifying  person  for  the  purpose  of  the
         Regulations. In this case, Mrs Kaur has to be a qualifying  person,
         as defined by regulation 6, for her husband  to  be  able  to  meet
         regulation 9(2)(a)(i), accepting at its highest the submission that
         if she were a Qualifying person then being unemployed for less than
         6 months would not affect her status as a qualifying person.

     18. Mr Shah accepted that, because Mrs Kaur had been employed for  less
         than a year in Germany, she had to meet regulation 6(2)(c) in order
         to be a Qualified person  as  defined.  He  accepted  she  was  not
         working after December 2017, that she had not registered as  a  job
         seeker and had not voluntarily ceased working in order to embark on
         vocational training related to her  previous  employment.  Although
         she had not been unemployed for more than 6 months she did not,  by
         analogy, meet regulation 6(3) because she had not retained  'worker
         status', ie she did not meet  regulation  6(2)(c),  after  December
         2017.

     19. Mr Shah submitted that the appellant's Residence Card was  relevant
         to the question of whether Mrs Kaur was exercising  Treaty  Rights,
         it having been accepted by the German authorities that she was.  It
         is correct that the German authorities  accepted  at  the  date  of
         issue of the Residence Card that Mrs  Kaur  was  exercising  Treaty
         Rights. But it is not  evidence  that  she  continued  to  exercise
         Treaty Rights - which factually she did not.

     20. Nor, given that Mrs Kaur was not exercising Treaty Rights,  was  it
         relevant that the couple had been in Germany for the time they  had
         or that she had undertaken integration  and  language  training  or
         that he was working. The failure to exercise Treaty Rights is fatal
         to the application for a Residence Card under regulation 9.

     21. In so far as the finding by the First-tier Tribunal judge that  the
         appellant and his wife had contrived to circumvent the  Immigration
         Rules is concerned, that finding was predicated upon  the  evidence
         as a whole which included a finding, in effect, by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge that the couple had not transferred  the  centre  of
         their life to Germany. As established in ZA, that is  an  incorrect
         test and, had that been the only finding by the First-tier Tribunal
         judge it is  possible  the  decision  would  have  been  flawed  by
         material error of law.

     22. But in this case, the fact that Mrs Kaur was not exercising  Treaty
         Rights means that, irrespective of any other findings by the judge,
         the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Regulations
         and the First-tier Tribunal judge has not erred in  law  such  that
         the decision is set aside to be re-made.



    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  is  to
    be set aside to be remade.

    I do not set aside the decision.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  judge  dismissing  the  appeal
    stands.



     Date 2nd March 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------

[1] 9.-  Family members of British citizens

   (1)   If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
   Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F") of a
   British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national.
   (2)   The conditions are that-
      (a) BC-
        (i)    is residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-employed
        person, self-sufficient person or a student, or so resided
        immediately before returning to the United Kingdom; or
        (ii)  ...
      (b) F and BC resided together in the EEA State;
      (c) F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine
   (3)   Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is or was
   genuine include-
      (a) whether the centre of BC's life transferred to the EEA State;
      (b) the length of F and BC's joint residence in the EEA State;
      (c) the nature and quality of the F and BC's accommodation in the EEA
      State, and whether it is or was BC's principal residence;
      (d) the degree of F and BC's integration in the EEA State;
      (e) whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with BC was in the
      EEA State.
   (4)   This regulation does not apply-
      (a)   where the purpose of the residence in the EEA State was as a
      means for circumventing any immigration laws applying to non-EEA
      nationals to which F would otherwise be subject (such as any
      applicable requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter or
      remain in the United Kingdom)
   (5)   ...
   (6)   ...
   (7)   For the purposes of determining whether, when treating the BC as
   an EEA national under these Regulations in accordance with paragraph
   (1), BC would be a qualified person-
      (a)  any requirement to have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in
      the United Kingdom still applies, save that it does not require the
      cover to extend to BC;
      (b)  in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated as a worker
      under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC is not required to satisfy
      condition A;
      (c)  in assessing whether BC can be treated as a jobseeker as defined
      in regulation 6(1), BC is not required to satisfy conditions A and,
      where it would otherwise be relevant, condition C.

