
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02473/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 August 2017                             |On 6 October 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                        mr ikechukwu chinedu nzeakor
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Singh, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He made an  application  for  a
    permanent residence card  but  that  application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision dated 24 February 2016.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan ("the FtJ") on 25 November 2016.   The
    FtJ dismissed the appeal.

 3. The FtJ recited the basis of the appellant's claim to  be  entitled  to
    confirmation of his right of residence  in  the  UK.   The  appellant's
    spouse is a Portuguese national and  they  have  a  child  born  on  29
    December 2011.  The  appellant's  wife  was  employed  until  she  took
    maternity leave between 17 October 2011 and 14 October 2012.   Although
    the respondent had concluded  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant's wife had been exercising Treaty rights for the  years  2013
    to 2015, so  that  she  could  not  establish  five  years'  continuous
    residence as a qualified person, the appellant's argument was that  his
    wife had a medical problem which meant that she was unable to work  and
    she was in receipt of income support.

 4. The FtJ noted that the contention on behalf of the appellant  was  that
    she had a problem with her right arm and shoulder which meant that  she
    was unable to work.  He also noted that her  medical  history  included
    that she had had a colostomy.  He said that there was evidence  in  the
    documents confirming receipt of income support.

 5. The FtJ heard evidence from the appellant and his wife.  He found  that
    both of them had been in the UK for a period of more than  five  years,
    and noted that it was not disputed but that the appellant's wife was in
    employment between 2010 and the tax year ending  2013.   He  identified
    the issue in dispute as being whether she had  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights between 2013 and 2015.

 6. The FtJ referred to regulations 15 and 6 of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations"),  and  also
    referred to various authorities.

 7. At [13] he found that it was clear that the appellant's  wife  did  not
    return to work after her maternity  leave  ended  on  17  October  2011
    (although it seems to me that the FtJ meant 14 October 2012, since that
    is when her maternity leave ended).  He  noted  that  during  his  oral
    evidence the appellant said that his wife had stopped working after she
    went on maternity leave and did not go back to work, and that  he  also
    said that for the period 2013 to 2015 his wife was looking after  their
    baby and that she did not work.  Although the appellant had  said  that
    she was looking for work, the FtJ said that there was no evidence  that
    that was the case.

 8. He referred to the appellant's wife's oral  evidence  that  from  April
    2012 to August 2016 she had been in receipt of income support  and  had
    done some part-time work as a cleaner which had not  been  declared  to
    the Department for Work and Pensions ("DWP").   She  said  in  evidence
    that the Job Centre had told her that she did not have to declare  that
    income.

 9. Referring to the earlier assertion that she had had  difficulties  with
    her hand that prevented her from looking for work,  the  FtJ  concluded
    that there was no evidence that any such difficulties had prevented her
    from looking for work, or indeed prevented her from actually working.

10. He referred to the lack of documentary evidence for the period 2013  to
    2015, and in particular nothing from  the  Job  Centre  or  the  Inland
    Revenue.  He accepted that the  appellant's  wife  had  been  receiving
    income support but there was no evidence  to  establish  that  she  was
    seeking work, and according to her own  evidence  and  the  appellant's
    evidence she had not  in  fact  worked.   The  evidence  was  that  the
    appellant's wife decided to look after their baby and, in effect,  stay
    at home.  He concluded therefore, that it was difficult to see how  she
    could be classified as a worker and thus a qualified person under reg 6
    of the EEA Regulations.

11. He found at [17] that she was not  exercising  Treaty  rights  for  the
    period 2013 to 2015, and thus she had not been exercising Treaty rights
    for a continuous period of five years.  Thus, the appellant  could  not
    succeed under reg 15 of the EEA Regulations.

12. At [18] the FtJ referred to a further argument to the effect  that  the
    appellant was entitled to a derivative right  of  residence  under  reg
    15A, and it was argued on the appellant's behalf that this had not been
    considered by the respondent.  However, the FtJ pointed out that in his
    application the appellant had not raised this as a basis upon which  he
    was entitled to a residence card and the matter had not been raised  in
    the grounds of appeal.  He said that it was, in effect,  a  new  matter
    and under s.85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the
    consent of the Secretary of State was required before that matter could
    be addressed.

    Submissions

13. In submissions before me Mr Singh referred  to  reg  5(3)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, which has a subheading "Worker or self-employed person who
    has ceased activity".  He accepted however, that there was no  evidence
    that the appellant's wife had ceased work "as a result of  a  permanent
    incapacity to work".  Nevertheless, I was referred to  various  aspects
    of the appellant's bundle in terms of the  medical  evidence  that  was
    before the FtJ.  This was relevant to the submissions made before me in
    relation to reg 5(3).

14. It was then submitted that  the  appellant  could  rely  on  reg  5(4),
    although again, for reasons which I shall briefly  explain  below,  the
    appellant is not able to rely on that aspect  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    either.

15. Mr Singh also relied on reg 6(2)(a), on the basis that the  appellant's
    wife was temporarily unable to work as the  result  of  an  illness  or
    accident.  Again, I  was  referred  to  the  medical  evidence  in  the
    appellant's bundle.

16. It was submitted that the evidence showed that she had  been  receiving
    continuous treatment since she had become pregnant and that that was an
    obstacle to her continuing working.  She was assessed as  eligible  for
    income support.

17. I enquired as to whether it was argued on behalf of the appellant  that
    he qualified for a derivative right of residence under reg 15A,  albeit
    that that is not advanced in the skeleton argument submitted in support
    of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal provided on the day of the  hearing
    (although it is in the grounds).  Mr Singh did not refer me  in  detail
    to the provisions of reg 15A,  although  I  indicated  my  reservations
    about whether the appellant could qualify in that respect.

18. Mrs Aboni submitted that there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  FtJ's
    decision.  The FtJ was entitled to conclude on the  evidence  that  was
    presented that the appellant's wife was not a worker between  2013  and
    2015.  Although she was in  receipt  of  income  support,  it  was  not
    explained why that was the case.  She was not a job seeker and was  not
    exercising Treaty rights.

19. With reference to a printout that  was  relied  on  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in submissions, being information about  income  support,  it
    was submitted that it was not clear where that  information  came  from
    because it does not appear to be from a government website.

20. The appellant was not able to meet the requirements of reg 5(3) or (4).
     There was no evidence of permanent incapacity or of  work  in  another
    EEA state.

21. In relation to the appellant's wife's inability  to  work,  it  appears
    from the FtJ's decision that the argument in that respect  was  put  in
    terms of a problem with her right arm and shoulder, which is  different
    from the evidence in the appellant's bundle.

22. It was initially submitted by Mrs Aboni that the  FtJ  was  correct  to
    refuse to consider argument  in  relation  to  a  derivative  right  of
    residence given that this was not the basis of the  application  for  a
    residence card and the  Secretary  of  State's  consent  was  required.
    However, it was then accepted that in this respect  the  FtJ  may  have
    erred in law since an appeal under the EEA Regulations is not  governed
    by the s.85 provision.

23. In reply, Mr Singh then  contended  that  the  respondent  should  have
    considered the issue of a derivative right of residence  since  it  was
    known that the appellant had a child in the UK.

    Conclusions

24. Reg 6(2)(a) of the EEA Regulations provides that a  person  who  is  no
    longer working shall not cease to be treated as a worker  (and  thus  a
    'qualified person') if he is temporarily unable to work as  the  result
    of an illness or accident.

25. Reg 5 deals with workers  or  self-employed  persons  who  have  ceased
    activity. Reg 5(3) is one of the bases upon which  a  person  could  be
    qualified as a worker or self-employed person who had ceased  activity,
    but it requires the individual to have terminated his activity  in  the
    UK as a worker or  self-employed  person  "as  a  result  of  permanent
    incapacity to work".

26. Reg 5(4) relates to a worker or self-employed person in  an  EEA  state
    who retains his place of residence in the UK and to  which  he  returns
    "as a rule" at least once a week.   Such  an  individual  may  also  be
    classified as a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity,
    subject to the other qualifications.

27. The FtJ accepted that there was evidence that the appellant's wife  was
    receiving income support.  However, it was not established why she  was
    receiving income support.  At [16] the  FtJ  said  that  there  was  no
    evidence, notwithstanding her income support, that she was seeking work
    and there was no evidence of her employment.  Instead, she had  decided
    to look after their baby and stay at home.

28. Whilst it does appear from [14] that the appellant's wife said that she
    had done some part-time work as a cleaner,  it  does  not  appear  that
    there was any evidence to  support  that  contention.   Indeed,  it  is
    contrary to the appellant's case which was to the effect that  she  was
    unable to work.  For the period 2013-2015, there was simply no evidence
    that she was employed or looking for work.

29. Whilst the appellant relies on a letter dated 10 December 2015 at  page
    147 of the appellant's bundle, in relation  to  various  health  issues
    that the appellant's wife has, there is actually no evidence  that  she
    was unable to work "as the result of an illness or accident",  per  reg
    6(2)(a).  This is not a matter that can be inferred from  that  medical
    report.  The evidence that she had had a colostomy indicates that  that
    was a procedure that was performed 13 years  ago  and  since  then  the
    appellant's wife plainly has been in employment.

30. Other medical evidence goes back to 2011 but includes, for  example,  a
    letter dated 4 October 2013 at page 142  of  the  bundle,  and  another
    dated 11 January 2016 on the following page.  But none of that evidence
    reveals that the appellant's  wife  during  the  period  2013-2015  was
    unable to work as a result of illness  or  accident.   Certificates  of
    fitness for work, stating that she was not fit for work  are  at  pages
    132-134, but are dated March to May 2011.  They refer to shoulder pain,
    as does the letter  dated  22  February  2011  at  page  135  from  the
    Occupational Health Nurse Adviser.  There is no evidence however,  that
    that condition prevented her from working between  2013  and  2015,  as
    appears to have been the basis of the argument on her behalf.

31. I do not at all accept that the fact  that  the  appellant's  wife  was
    receiving income support in that period necessarily indicates that  she
    was unfit for work as a result of illness or accident.   The  one  does
    not (necessarily) follow the other at all, and the  arguments  advanced
    on behalf of the appellant did not make good that assertion.

32. I am satisfied that the FtJ was entitled to conclude on  the  basis  of
    the evidence before him that the appellant had not established that his
    wife was a qualified person within the meaning of the  EEA  Regulations
    and thus exercising Treaty rights  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years, as required.

33.  The  arguments  put  before  me  in  terms  of  reg  5   are   plainly
    unsustainable.  There was and  is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    spouse is or was unable to work as a result of a  permanent  incapacity
    to work (reg 5(3)), and she is not  active  as  a  worker  or  a  self-
    employed person in an EEA state (reg 5(4)) who  retains  her  place  of
    residence in the UK to which she returns at least once  a  week.   That
    provision relates to people working in States other  than  the  UK  but
    retaining a place of residence  in  the  UK.   Under  reg  2,  for  the
    purposes of the EEA Regulations, the UK is not to be regarded as an EEA
    State.

34. The FtJ at [13] referred to  the  appellant's  evidence  that  for  the
    period 2013 to 2015 his wife was looking after their baby and that  she
    did not work.  Although it was said that  she  was  looking  for  work,
    there was no evidence to that effect.

35. The FtJ was plainly correct to conclude as he did in  relation  to  the
    appellant's wife's exercise of Treaty rights.

36. The case in relation to reg 15A was not one that  was  put  before  the
    Secretary of State.  That has not been demonstrated with  reference  to
    the application for a residence card.  Although I  was  referred  to  a
    document in the appellant's bundle before the FtJ entitled "Grounds  of
    Appeal", that document is undated and it is not the same as the grounds
    of appeal which initiated the appeal.  Regardless of that,  it  is  not
    apparent that this was an argument put before the respondent.

37. Having said that, it was conceded before me that the FtJ was  wrong  to
    find that s.85  of  the  2002  Act  (as  amended)  prevented  him  from
    considering that matter.  An appeal under the EEA Regulations is not an
    appeal under s.82 of the 2002 Act, to which this provision applies.

38. Nevertheless, the evidence before the FtJ simply did  not  support  the
    contention that the appellant is entitled  to  a  derivative  right  of
    residence under reg 15A, which requires the appellant to establish that
    he is the primary carer of an EEA national.  It  was  submitted  to  me
    that his child, born on 29 December 2011 to  the  appellant's  wife,  a
    Portuguese national, was therefore  an  EEA  national  because  of  the
    nationality  of  his  mother.   Even  if  that  is  so,  the  appellant
    nevertheless needed to establish, for example, that he is the  "primary
    carer" of that child.  There was no evidence that the child is in full-
    time education, which is one of the other ways in  which  a  derivative
    right of residence may be obtained.  Apart from anything else, in  that
    context the EEA national parent needs to have been a worker,  which  is
    not established in this case.

39. Reg 15A(7) defines what is meant by "primary carer".  That can  include
    where a person has primary responsibility for that  person's  care,  in
    respect of which there was no evidence in this case, or shares  equally
    the responsibility of that person's care with one other person  who  is
    not an exempt person.

40. Again, the evidence before the FtJ was absent in terms of the extent to
    which the appellant shares responsibility for the care of his child.

41. Additionally, reg 15A(2)(b)(iii) in terms of the primary carer  'route'
    requires it to be established that the child would be unable to  remain
    in the UK if the appellant were required to leave.  I was not  referred
    to any evidence that was before the FtJ which establishes that that was
    the case.

42. The argument in relation to reg 15A and a derivative right of residence
    could not have succeeded in any event.  Therefore, any error of law  on
    the part of the FtJ in not considering that argument is not material.

43. I am not satisfied that there is any  material  error  of  law  in  any
    respect in the FtJ's decision.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law.  Its decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds therefore stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 5/10/17

