
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/02699/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 October 2018                      |On 26 November 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                            Chinelo Agnes Okafor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Osifeso, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  in  1977,  made  an
    application for  a  residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
    permanent residence pursuant to regulation 15(1)(f) of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. The application was refused and the  appellant's  appeal  against  that
    refusal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones  ("the
    FtJ") after a hearing on 8 June 2018.

 3. The basis of the respondent's refusal of the application was  in  terms
    of the appellant having failed to provide a valid ID card  or  passport
    as evidence of her former EEA  national's  spouse's  identity  and  had
    failed to provide sufficient evidence of her  inability  to  obtain  or
    produce those  documents  due  to  circumstances  beyond  her  control.
    Another reason  given  for  refusing  the  application  was  that  HMRC
    documents provided as evidence of her former  spouse's  self-employment
    were copies of documents and copies were not acceptable.

    The FtJ's decision

 4. The following is a summary of the FtJ's decision and her own summary of
    the evidence before her. It has to be said however, that the  style  of
    paragraph numbering in the FtJ's decision is apt to confuse.

 5. The FtJ heard evidence from the appellant who said that she  could  not
    obtain her ex-husband's passport because the marriage had broken  down.
    She said that she had tried all she could with his sister to get him to
    sign the application form but he would not and would  not  provide  his
    passport.  Some documents had been obtained  through  his  sister,  and
    some correspondence still came to her address.

 6. She said that her relationship with her ex-husband started  in  October
    2011 and ended in around April  2015.   However,  she  still  keeps  in
    contact with her ex-husband's sister with whom she is on good terms and
    they speak very often.  The FtJ recorded that the appellant  said  that
    she had asked her to attend  court  but  she  was  very  busy  and  the
    appellant thought that she was doing something else.

 7. In relation to documents that had been obtained  via  her  ex-husband's
    sister, she said that she thought that his sister had  begged  her  ex-
    husband on her behalf to provide documents.   When  she  was  asked  if
    there was any reason as to why  her  ex-husband  would  give  her  HMRC
    documents  but  would  not  give  her  further   documents,   such   as
    identification documents, the appellant said that he would not  release
    his original passport and was not willing to provide a photocopy of  it
    either.  Regarding  a  document  relating  to  her  ex-husband's  self-
    employment, she said that she obtained it from her ex-husband's sister.



 8. The FtJ summarised the grounds  of  appeal,  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant had used her best endeavours to obtain an  identity  document
    from him but she was unable to because the relationship had broken down
    irretrievably.

 9. At para 5.9 the FtJ quoted from the respondent's guidance entitled Free
    movement rights: retained rights of  residence,  version  3.0  dated  7
    February 2017.  She also referred to the appellant's witness  statement
    in  terms  of  the  difficulties  she   said   that   she   encountered
    psychologically because of the breakup of the  relationship,  including
    that her ex-husband  flatly  refused  to  make  available  his  Italian
    passport.

10. She recorded a submission made on  behalf  of  the  respondent  to  the
    effect that the appellant had avenues of contact but she had still  not
    supplied documents.  The submission made on behalf of the appellant was
    to the effect that although the appellant was in contact with  her  ex-
    husband's sister, she could not compel her to obtain the passport.   At
    paras 5.13-15 the FtJ said as follows:

         "13. I have no evidence before me save what  the  Appellant  states
             that  her  relationship  with  her  ex-husband   ended   under
             difficult  circumstances  such  as  a  copy  of  the   Divorce
             Petition, evidence of  witnesses  etc.   The  Appellant's  ex-
             husband did not sign the EEA (PR) form  but  this  could  have
             been for a number of reasons  arising  from  the  relationship
             breakdown.  I also have no evidence  that  the  Appellant  has
             made every effort to provide  the  required  documents,  again
             save  for  her  evidence.   The  Appellant  said   in   cross-
             examination that she had asked  her  sister-in-law  to  attend
             Court but she was buy and she was doing something else.  There
             is no statement from her before me.  There  was  therefore  no
             obligation on the Respondent to make enquiries  having  regard
             to the above.

         14.  Mr Osifeso said that the Appellant was previously granted a  5
             year residence document and her ex-husband's identity was  not
             in dispute.  There is no mention  of  this  in  the  EEA  (PR)
             (question 3) and I do not have a copy of the above before  me.
             In any event any national identity card or  passport  must  be
             valid so even if a Residence Card was previously issued  there
             is no  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  ex-husband's  current
             passport/identity card is still valid.

         15.  The Appellant's application was not accompanied or joined by a
             valid national identity card or passport in the name of her ex-
             husband, the same has not been since produced (sic) and  there
             was no obligation on the Respondent to make  enquiries  having
             regard to what I say above.  The Appellant therefore falls  at
             the first hurdle as she does not satisfy Regulation  21(5)  of
             the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016.   The  appeal   is
             therefore dismissed under the EU Treaties."

    The grounds and submissions

11. The grounds contend that the FTJ failed to  consider  the  respondent's
    guidance (to which I have referred) and reiterate the appellant's  case
    that  she  had  made  concerted  efforts  to  obtain  her  ex-husband's
    passport, as set out in her witness  statement.   It  is  said  in  the
    grounds that there was no suggestion that any credibility issues  arose
    in relation to the appellant's witness statement.  It  is  argued  that
    the respondent  did  have  an  obligation  to  make  enquiries  on  the
    appellant's behalf.

12. In submissions  before  me  Mr  Osifeso  relied  on  the  grounds.   He
    submitted that in relation to the  respondent's  guidance,  there  were
    only examples given there of circumstances  in  which  it  may  not  be
    possible to obtain documents.  The guidance was not exhaustive in  that
    respect.  The  appellant  could  not  have  obtained  her  ex-husband's
    passport or ID document  during  the  course  of  the  proceedings  for
    divorce because that was not in issue at that time.

13. Furthermore,  the  appellant  was  previously  granted  a  five  years'
    residence permit. Thus the respondent must have been satisfied that her
    husband was an EEA national.  There was no evidence that  anything  had
    changed in that regard.  There were no reasonable  grounds  to  believe
    that he was no longer an EEA national.

14. As regards what the FtJ said at para 5.13 in terms of  there  being  no
    statement from the appellant's ex-husband's sister who it is  said  had
    helped the appellant to obtain documents,  Mr  Osifeso  said  that  his
    instructions were that she was ready to assist informally but  was  not
    willing to give evidence to the Tribunal.  As a general matter, it  was
    submitted that persons in the appellant's situation find it  very  very
    difficult to obtain the necessary documents.

15. In relation to the other issue raised in the respondent's  decision  in
    terms of the appellant having failed to provide acceptable  documentary
    evidence of the self-employment of her ex-spouse, Mr Osifeso said  that
    that was a matter that "fell away" at the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  In any event, he submitted that there  was  evidence  before
    the FtJ on that issue, as set out in the appellant's bundle to which my
    attention was drawn.

16. In his submissions, Mr Tarlow  himself  referred  to  the  respondent's
    guidance to the effect that it was  nevertheless  the  case  that  even
    where there had been a residence document previously issued, up-to-date
    evidence was still required.  It was submitted that even looking at the
    matter pragmatically (as the guidance suggests) the Tribunal could  not
    simply accept evidence from the appellant that her husband had a  valid
    Italian  passport.   There  was  no  evidence  that  any  passport   he
    previously had was valid.

17. It was further submitted that the FtJ was  entitled  to  conclude  that
    even if a residence card was previously issued, there was  no  evidence
    that her ex-husband's passport or identity card were still valid.

18. In relation to the photocopy HMRC documents  that  were  provided,  the
    respondent was entitled to reject  that  evidence  on  the  basis  that
    photocopies were not acceptable.

19. In his reply, Mr Osifeso submitted  that  the  guidance's  use  of  the
    phrase "where  necessary"  in  relation  to  a  case  where  there  had
    previously been a residence document, indicated that that only  applied
    where there was reason to think that the EEA national no longer retains
    his or her nationality.  The respondent could  have  verified  her  ex-
    husband's nationality.  I was referred to documents in the  appellant's
    bundle, from page 5, in  support  of  the  contention  that  there  was
    evidence of his exercise of Treaty rights.

    Assessment and Conclusions

20. Reg 15(1)(f) provides that a person  who  has  resided  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five
    years and who was at the end of the period  a  family  member  who  has
    retained a right of residence, acquires the right to reside in  the  UK
    permanently.

21. It is common ground that in order for the appellant to be issued with a
    residence card reg 21(5) requires that the appellant  provide  a  valid
    national identity card or passport in the name  of  the  EEA  national,
    namely her ex-husband.  It is also common  ground  that  the  appellant
    failed to do that.  Her case is that she  was  unable  to  because  her
    husband would not assist and her ex-husband's sister could not  get  it
    from him because he would not provide it.  It is  further  argued  that
    given  that  the  appellant  previously  had  a  residence  card,   the
    respondent must have been satisfied as to his nationality/identity.

22. The extract of the guidance to which I was referred states  as  follows
    on page 20:

         "Applicants who are unable to provide all the evidence of their EEA
         sponsor

         This page tells you what to do  when  an  applicant  is  unable  to
         provide evidence of their European Economic Area (EEA)  sponsor  to
         support their application for a document confirming they retain the
         right of residence in the UK due to difficult circumstances.

         Where a relationship has broken down due to  domestic  violence  or
         other difficult circumstances it may not always be possible for the
         applicant to provide all of the necessary documents about  the  EEA
         national sponsor. In  such  circumstances,  you  can  make  further
         enquiries about the EEA national sponsor's status  but  only  where
         the applicant has shown they have made every effort to provide  the
         necessary evidence.

         Regulations  17,18  and  19  of  the  2016  regulations   put   the
         responsibility on the applicant to provide the necessary proof that
         they are  eligible  for  a  document  to  confirm  their  right  of
         residence in the UK.

         In cases where an applicant has previously been issued  a  document
         this only demonstrates that they had a right to  reside  under  the
         regulations on the date it was issued. If they apply for a retained
         right of residence, you must be satisfied that the applicant  meets
         the relevant requirements relating to retained rights  and  request
         evidence where necessary.

         No evidence of EEA sponsor

         In cases where there has  been  a  breakdown  in  the  relationship
         between the applicant and their EEA national  sponsor  it  may  not
         always be possible for them to get the documents that are needed to
         support their application.

         An example of this could be where the applicant was the  victim  of
         domestic violence and cannot provide evidence relating to their EEA
         national sponsor's nationality or free movement rights (to ask them
         to do so could put them  at  risk).  See:  Documents  required  for
         retained residence in domestic violence cases.

         Another example would be where  the  applicant's  relationship  has
         ended under difficult circumstances but they have provided evidence
         to show that they have made every effort to  provide  the  required
         documents. Such  as,  attempting  to  make  contact  with  the  EEA
         national sponsor during divorce proceedings.

         When dealing with these cases you must take  a  pragmatic  approach
         and:

         .    consider each case on its merits

         .    if you are satisfied the applicant  cannot  get  the  evidence
         themselves, make enquiries on their behalf where possible,  getting
         agreement from your senior caseworker before doing so."

23. As I pointed out to Mr Osifeso at the hearing, it is  simply  incorrect
    for  the  grounds  to  state  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  consider  the
    respondent's policy guidance.  She plainly did, setting it out in  full
    at para 5.9.  The appellant's complaint in reality is not that the  FtJ
    failed to consider the guidance but that she  found  that  it  did  not
    assist the appellant in her appeal.

24. I do not consider that there  is  any  merit  in  the  contention  that
    because  the  appellant  had  previously  held  a  residence  card  the
    respondent ought to have concluded that evidence  of  her  ex-husband's
    Italian nationality had been provided.  The  guidance  makes  it  clear
    that in cases where an applicant has  previously  been  issued  with  a
    document, that only demonstrated that they had a right to reside  under
    the EEA Regulations on the date that it was  issued.   Further,  it  is
    clear from the guidance that if an application was made for a  retained
    right of residence the  caseworker  needs  to  be  satisfied  that  the
    relevant requirements relating to retained rights are met  and  request
    evidence "where necessary".

25. With respect to Mr Osifeso's submissions, the phrase "where  necessary"
    cannot relate to evidence relating to an ex-spouse's nationality.   The
    phrase clearly relates to the paragraph in which it is  contained,  and
    that makes it plain that a person's previous possession of  a  document
    only relates to the circumstances on the date  it  was  issued  and  an
    applicant needs to establish that the relevant  requirements  are  met,
    and evidence in that respect is to be requested when the  need  arises.
    The next section of the guidance deals with issues relating to the  EEA
    national sponsor's  nationality  (or  free  movement  rights).   It  is
    contained within the sub-heading "No evidence of EEA sponsor".

26. It is also worth noting, as Mr Tarlow pointed out at the hearing before
    me, that the appellant did not indicate on her  application  form  that
    she had previously been issued with a residence card.  Section 3 of the
    form in this respect was left blank.  Therefore, even if there was  any
    merit in the contention that the respondent already had evidence of the
    appellant's ex-husband's current nationality, which I do not accept for
    the reasons I have given, that matter was not drawn to the respondent's
    attention.  The point otherwise has no merit.

27. The guidance at para 2 on page 20 makes it clear that Home Office staff
    can make further enquiries about the EEA national sponsor's status, but
    "only where the applicant has shown that they had made every effort  to
    provide the necessary evidence".  There is nothing to indicate, and  no
    submissions were made before the FtJ or  before  me  to  suggest,  that
    anything was put before the respondent to the effect that the appellant
    had  made  every  effort  to  provide  the  necessary  evidence.    Her
    application form does not give any indication of any efforts made,  and
    indeed  at  section  11  it  states  that  she  sees   her   ex-husband
    "occasionally" or "once in a while", and that she last saw him in 2017.
     I do note however, that the application form does state under  section
    B "Sponsor's declaration" that the relationship has broken down.

28. At question 2.13 of the form, which relates to evidence of a  sponsor's
    identity and nationality, it  states  that  if  the  applicant  is  not
    submitting a valid passport, travel document or national identity card,
    the  applicant  should  say  why  in  the  box  indicated,  and  submit
    alternative evidence of "your" identity and nationality.  There was the
    opportunity there for the appellant to indicate that she was unable  to
    obtain the necessary identification document in  relation  to  her  ex-
    husband.  In addition, the letter of  application  submitted  with  the
    application itself, written by the appellant's  legal  representatives,
    says nothing  about  any  difficulty  of  the  appellant  in  obtaining
    relevant documents, merely stating that  she  and  her  ex-husband  got
    divorced, with proceedings having started in 2016.

29. Accordingly, there was no basis from which the respondent could be said
    to have been required under the  guidance  to  make  enquiries  on  her
    behalf as set out in the second bullet point of the last  paragraph  on
    page 20.

30. Whereas the grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's decision  states
    that "There was no suggestion that any credibility issues  arose  as  a
    consequence", meaning  presumably  no  credibility  issues  arising  in
    relation to  her  evidence  of  efforts  to  obtain  relevant  identity
    documents, that proposition is inconsistent with what the FtJ  said  at
    para 5.12.  There, she recorded that  the  respondent's  representative
    said that the appellant had avenues of contact and she had not supplied
    documents.  In other words, the respondent at the  hearing  before  the
    FtJ did not accept that the appellant was unable to obtain the relevant
    documents.

31. In any event, the FtJ was entitled to state that she  had  no  evidence
    before her save what the appellant had said, to  the  effect  that  her
    relationship with her ex-husband ended under "difficult circumstances",
    to use the words of the guidance.  She said that no  evidence  such  as
    the divorce petition or evidence of witnesses "etc." had been provided.
     She referred to the fact  that  the  appellant's  ex-husband  had  not
    signed the application form but found that that could have been  for  a
    number  of  reasons  arising  from  the  relationship  breakdown.   She
    concluded that there was no evidence that the appellant had made  every
    effort to provide the required documents, again save for her evidence.

32. The FtJ pointed out that there was no statement from the appellant's ex-
    sister-in-law.  It is to be remembered that the  appellant's  case  was
    that her ex-sister-in-law helped her to obtain at least some  documents
    but, according to the appellant's witness statement, had flatly refused
    to make available his Italian passport.  The fact  that  there  was  no
    statement from the appellant's ex-sister-in-law was a matter  that  the
    FtJ was entitled to take into account in assessing the extent to  which
    the appellant had had the difficulties she suggests and had made  every
    effort to obtain the required documents, as per the guidance.

33. Before me, Mr Osifeso said  in  relation  to  the  lack  of  a  witness
    statement from her ex-husband's sister, that his instructions were that
    she was ready to assist informally but not willing to go so far  as  to
    give evidence to a court.  That however, is inconsistent with what  the
    FtJ was told in evidence by the appellant at para  4.7.  The  appellant
    said that she had asked her sister-in-law to attend court but  she  was
    very busy and the appellant  thought  that  she  was  "doing  something
    else".  There was no suggestion from the appellant along the  lines  of
    the information Mr  Osifeso  conveyed  to  me  in  terms  of  what  his
    instructions were.  At para 5.13 the FtJ referred to this aspect of the
    appellant's evidence in cross-examination, in terms of  the  fact  that
    there was no witness statement from  her.   The  FtJ  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant's evidence in relation to the  difficulties
    she had in obtaining relevant identity documents  was  insufficient  to
    trigger the application of the guidance  in  terms  of  the  respondent
    making enquiries on behalf of the appellant.

34. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law  in  the
    FtJ's decision.  She did not go on to consider the other  reason  given
    by the respondent for refusing the application, that is in terms of the
    unsatisfactory nature  of  the  documentary  evidence  provided,  being
    photocopies. However, it was not necessary for her  to  do  so  in  the
    light of her conclusions in relation  to  the  appellant's  failure  to
    produce her ex-husband's valid national identity card/passport. I  also
    bear in mind that Mr Osifeso told me that that  issue  (of  photocopied
    documents) "fell away" at the hearing before the FtJ, although it would
    have been helpful for the FtJ to have reflected any discussion of  this
    issue in her decision.

    Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  dated 22/11/18


