
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02917/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2018                   |On 13 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                Antara Barua
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                  New Delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Chowdhury, Counsel instructed by Kingdom
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  refusal  of  a  family
    permit as the family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom.  The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.

Background

 2. The appellant's  circumstances  are  not  correctly  described  in  the
    application: in fact, she bases her claim on her status as the wife  of
    her husband, who is in the United Kingdom as the extended family member
    of his  father,  a  Portuguese  national,  and  thus,  an  EEA  citizen
    exercising Treaty rights here.

 3. The respondent refused the application on the sole basis that  she  was
    not satisfied that this appellant was dependent upon her father-in-law.



 4. On 7 July 2017, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  appellant
    was indeed  the  extended  family  member  of  her  father-in-law,  but
    dismissed the appeal for reasons not advanced by the  respondent,  that
    is, for want of  jurisdiction,  applying  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Sala (EFMs: right of appeal) Albania [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).



 5. On 9 November  2017,  in  Khan  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department & Anor [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the Court of Appeal held  that
    Sala was wrongly decided and that a decision to refuse admission  or  a
    residence card to an extended family member is an 'EEA decision' within
    the meaning of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (as amended) and therefore attracts a right of appeal.

 6. On 21 November 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted  permission
    to appeal on that basis.

Upper Tribunal hearing

 7. At the hearing today, Mr Wilding accepted that the decision would  have
    to be remade, on the law as it stands.  He asked, however, that  before
    remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  the  Tribunal  should
    await the  outcome  of  SM  (Algeria)  (Appellant)  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, UK Visa Section (Respondent) (Case ID UKSC 2015/0243), due  to
    be handed down on 14 February 2018.  Mr Wilding told the Tribunal today
    that the Sala/Khan issue had arisen during the hearing of SM  (Algeria)
    in November 2017, and may be the subject of further guidance  from  the
    Supreme Court.

 8. The issue is also before the Court of Justice of the European Union  by
    way of a reference from this Tribunal in Banger (unmarried  partner  of
    British national)  [2017]  UKUT  125  (IAC),  in  which  the  questions
    referred for a preliminary  ruling  under  Article  267  TFEU  were  as
    follows:
         (1)  Do the principles contained in  the  decision  in Immigration
         Appeal Tribunal and Surinder Singh, ex parte Secretary of State for
         the Home Department (Case C-370/90) [1992] operate so as to require
         a Member State to issue or, alternatively, facilitate the provision
         of a residence authorisation to the non-Union unmarried partner  of
         a EU citizen who, having exercised his Treaty right of  freedom  of
         movement to work in  a  second  Member  State,  returns  with  such
         partner to the Member State of his nationality?
         (2)   Alternatively,  is  there  a   requirement   to   issue   or,
         alternatively,  facilitate  the   provision   of   such   residence
         authorisation  by  virtue  of European  Parliament  and   Council
         Directive 2004/38/EC on the right of  citizens  of  the  Union  and
         their family members to move and reside freely within the territory
         of the Member States ("the Directive")?
         (3)  Where a decision to refuse a residence  authorisation is  not
         founded on an extensive examination of the  personal  circumstances
         of the Applicant and is not justified  by  adequate  or  sufficient
         reasons is such decision unlawful as being  in  breach  of  Article
         3(2) of the Citizens Directive?
         (4)  Is a rule of national law which precludes an appeal to a court
         or tribunal against a decision of the executive refusing to issue a
         residence card to a person claiming to be an extended family member
         compatible with the Directive?

 9. I refused Mr  Wilding's  application.   The  Sala/Khan  issue  may  not
    finally be resolved until the conclusion of the Court of Justice of the
    European Union hearing, but as at today, the Upper Tribunal is bound by
    the decision of the Court of Appeal that there is a right of appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for extended family members.  On that basis the
    appellant is entitled to have his appeal allowed and  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing there.

10. If there should be a change in the authoritative position by reason  of
    a decision of the Supreme Court and/or the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union, that can be dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal  when
    it rehears this appeal.

DECISION

11. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal will be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Date:         9 February 2018                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                            Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
