
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02557/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 6th December 2016                   |On 3rd January 2017           |
|Prepared on 23rd December 2016               |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              MRS MAUREEN OKORO
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Patel, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  14  April  1985.  She
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated  3  March  2016  in
    which the Respondent refused to issue the Appellant  with  a  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the family member of a European economic area  national  who
    was exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom. Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Traynor allowed the appeal on the papers  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 May 2016. The Respondent appeals with  leave  against
    that decision and for the reasons which I have set out below I have set
    the decision at first instance aside and have proceeded to  remake  the
    decision. I therefore refer to the parties as they were known at  first
    instance for the sake of convenience.

2.   The Appellant married Mr Kelvin Alfred, born on 28  December  1984,  on
    22nd of November 2008 their relationship having begun the year  before.
    Mr Alfred is a citizen of Austria who has had a history of  working  in
    this country and I will refer to him as the  Sponsor.  On  18  December
    2009 the Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  (having  visited  this
    country 3 years before). 11th of May  2010  she  applied  for  and  was
    granted a residence card as a non-EEA national. This was issued to  her
    on 12th of October 2010. On 30th of September 2015 she  applied  for  a
    permanent residence card on the basis that she  had  held  a  residence
    card for 5 years. It was the refusal  of  that  application  which  has
    formed the basis of these proceedings.

Explanation for Refusal

3.   In refusing the application the Respondent  noted  that  the  Appellant
    needed to provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate that  the  Sponsor
    was exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  as  defined  under
    Regulation 6 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the 2006  Regulations").  With  her  application  the  Appellant
    provided wage slips for the Sponsor for the period  11th  of  September
    2014 and 11 January and 11th of February 2015.

4.   The Respondent decided to make various checks to verify  the  Sponsor's
    employment. On 26th of February 2016 a telephone call was made  to  the
    payroll Department of Wilson James Ltd who confirmed that  the  Sponsor
    no longer worked for that company. The Sponsor had left on 18 September
    2015 and there was no further evidence to demonstrate that the  Sponsor
    was currently exercising treaty rights. The application  was  therefore
    refused under Regulation 6. The Respondent did not consider the  matter
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on human rights, Appendix FM
    or  paragraph  2768DE  of  the  immigration  rules  stating  no   valid
    application had been received under one or other of those requirements.

The Proceedings at First Instance

5.   The Appellant appealed explaining that both she  and  the  Sponsor  had
    been in employment until they moved from Grays in  Essex.  The  Sponsor
    was  looking  for  work  and  she  asked  for  the  application  to  be
    reconsidered. She had the right to stay in the United  Kingdom  as  the
    family member of an EEA national. Not only was the Sponsor Austrian but
    so were the 2 children of their family.

6.   In his determination the Judge directed himself on Regulation 6 of  the
    2006 Regulations which defines a qualified person. A  qualified  person
    can mean a person who is in the United Kingdom as  a  job  seeker.  The
    Judge noted that the Sponsor had been awarded jobseekers allowance from
    2nd of September 2015. On 18 April 2016 the Sponsor began work with the
    Reed business support agency (although no direct  written  evidence  of
    that employment appears to have been provided to the Judge).

7.   At paragraphs 16  to  20  the  Judge  set  out  his  findings.  It  was
    sufficient for the Sponsor to establish that he  was  a  jobseeker  and
    actively looking for employment for the Appellant's appeal to  succeed.
    As this was an EEA appeal the Judge was entitled to take  into  account
    evidence given at the date of hearing. The  new  employment  with  Reed
    business  support  agency  was  in  his  view  sufficient  because  the
    Appellant had provided reference numbers for that business which  could
    be contacted by telephone  if  necessary  in  order  to  establish  the
    authenticity of the information which the Appellant  had  provided.  At
    paragraph 20 the Judge explained why he was allowing  the  appeal.  The
    Appellant could discharge the burden of proof because:

               "there is no other information  which  would  show  that  the
    Appellant's husband is not a genuine jobseeker or someone who  has  not
    been actively pursuing  employment.  I  find  that  such  circumstances
    prevailed at the time of the application and that there was  no  intent
    on the  part  of  the  Appellant  to  otherwise  seek  to  mislead  the
    Respondent  concerning   her   husband's   circumstances.   Where   the
    Appellant's husband is a jobseeker then for the purposes of  Regulation
    6 he is a qualified person."

      He allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Respondent's appeal against this decision argued that there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination. There was  no  evidence  to
    show the Sponsor was currently exercising treaty rights, there  was  no
    formal evidence of the job  with  Reed  business  support  agency.  The
    burden was on the Appellant to provide evidence in support of her claim
    it was not for the Respondent to obtain  it  for  her  for  example  by
    telephoning the number the Appellant gave for Reed. It was insufficient
    for the Appellant to argue that as she had held a residence card for  5
    years she qualified for permanent residence.  All  the  residence  card
    demonstrated was that at the  time  of  the  original  application  her
    Sponsor  was  a  qualified  person.  In  order  to  acquire   permanent
    residence, she needed to show  that  she  had  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom with the Sponsor in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for  a
    continuous period of 5 years. The Judge had made  no  finding  on  that
    crucial point.

9.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett. In  granting  permission  to
    appeal she wrote that it was arguable that there  was  no  evidence  to
    show that the Sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights  at  the  date  of
    decision and no evidence to show he was receiving jobseeker's allowance
    after 5th of April 2016.  The  Appellant  responded  to  the  grant  of
    permission by way of a skeleton argument  which  was  lodged  with  the
    Tribunal. This  gave  more  information  about  the  Sponsor's  working
    history than had been provided to the Respondent at  the  time  of  the
    original application. The skeleton argument  referred  to  the  Sponsor
    being employed by G4S as a security officer between 16th of  July  2012
    and 31st of October 2012. Thereafter between 17th of October  2013  and
    19th of September 2015 the Appellant was employed as a security officer
    with Wilson James Ltd. From August 2015 he was entitled to  jobseeker's
    allowance. There were payslips to show that between 18th of April  2016
    and 29th of June 2016 the Sponsor was employed as a security  guard  by
    Giant professional Ltd. After that employment finished he  went  on  to
    jobseeker's allowance. Currently the Sponsor was employed by SQR  as  a
    security officer and had been since October 2016.

The Error of Law Hearing Before Me

10.  At the commencement of the hearing the Appellant's  solicitor  referred
    to the detailed letter supplied by the Appellant to the  Judge  at  the
    first instance hearing which gave details of the Sponsor's  employment.
    In response and by way of argument for the Respondent's appeal  against
    the decision at first instance the Presenting Officer stated  that  the
    Appellant could not qualify for a permanent residence card. The leading
    authority on the point was the Upper Tribunal decision of  OA  Nigeria.
    This made clear that a Sponsor must be exercising treaty rights  for  a
    continuous period of 5 years in order to satisfy  the  requirements  to
    obtain a permanent residence card. The 5 year period did  not  have  to
    start with the Appellant's arrival in the United  Kingdom  nor  did  it
    have to be backdated from the date of the hearing at first instance but
    it did have to be a continuous period of 5 years.

11.  Looking at the Appellant's skeleton argument which  gave  more  details
    of the Sponsor's work history than  had  been  before  the  Judge  this
    showed that the Appellant had been employed by G4S for a matter of 2 or
    3 months  in  2012.  Employment  started  a  year  later  according  to
    paragraph 6 of the skeleton on 17 October 2013 when the Appellant  went
    to work for Wilson James  Ltd.  What  was  the  Sponsor  doing  in  the
    meantime? Was he looking for a job for a year? The rule said  that  one
    can only look for a job for a maximum of 6 months but in any event  the
    case did not reach that far because there  was  no  evidence  from  the
    relevant period.

12.  On the basis of the paperwork at the  moment  the  most  the  Appellant
    could get would be another residence card but she could not  receive  a
    permanent residence card because that was not  evidenced.  A  residence
    card was a snapshot of the situation at the time of application. For  a
    permanent residence card there had to be 5 years of  exercising  treaty
    rights. In reply the  Appellant's  solicitor  said  that  it  would  be
    possible for the Sponsor to show that he had been continuously employed
    for a period of 5 years he would be able to fill in the gaps.

13.  I considered the submissions made to me noting that the  test  at  this
    stage was whether the First-tier Tribunal had made such an error of law
    that the determination fell to be set aside and the appeal reheard.  In
    considering whether the Appellant was entitled to a permanent residence
    card the Judge had applied the wrong test. The Judge applied  the  test
    which arises when  a  residence  card  is  sought.  Where  a  permanent
    residence card is sought the test is more onerous. The  relevance  then
    of the 5 year period is that the Appellant must be able  to  show  that
    her Sponsor had exercised treaty rights over a continuous period  of  5
    years. There was nowhere near enough evidence before the Judge at first
    instance to show that and it was therefore an error of law to allow the
    appeal on the limited evidence which was available even if it was  more
    than the Respondent had had. I indicated to the parties  that  I  would
    set aside the First-tier decision and rehear the appeal there and then.

The Substantive Re-hearing

14.  The Sponsor attended and gave oral testimony. Asked to explain the  gap
    between October 2012 when his G4S employment finished and October  2013
    when his employment with Wilson James began he said he was looking  for
    a job. Work at the Olympics had finished by October 2012 and he was  on
    jobseeker's allowance. Before he began work at the  Olympic  site  with
    G4S as a security officer he had been doing agency work at Bow  Street.
    There was no gap he had been working with an agency.  Asked  in  cross-
    examination whether he had any documentary evidence to  prove  this  he
    said if he was allowed more time he could contact  the  job  centre  or
    otherwise look through his papers to find payslips.  He  did  not  know
    that the requirement was that he should go back over the last 5  years.
    It was put to him that point had been raised in the grounds  of  onward
    appeal but he said that he was not aware of it.

15.  In closing submissions the  Appellant's  solicitor  asked  for  further
    time for the  Sponsor  to  look  through  his  papers  to  obtain  more
    information showing  his  working  history.  In  reply  the  Presenting
    Officer indicated that if the Appellant could find acceptable  evidence
    at the date of hearing she would qualify for a permanent residence card
    but as the evidence stood at  present  she  did  not.  The  Appellant's
    solicitor asked for a period  of  14  days  to  look  for  the  further
    information as the  Sponsor  was  certain  that  he  could  gather  the
    necessary evidence. The Appellant's solicitor accepted  that  the  work
    record in the skeleton argument was  incomplete.  I  therefore  gave  a
    direction that there  was  leave  to  the  Appellant  to  file  further
    evidence  of  the  Sponsor's  working  history  within  14  days,   the
    Respondent to be entitled to comment thereon within 7 days  of  receipt
    of the evidence.

16.  On 12th December 2016 the Appellant's solicitors wrote to the  Tribunal
    with further evidence of the Sponsor's employment. This was received by
    the Tribunal on 15th of December 2016. A period of 7 days  has  elapsed
    since the further evidence would have been received by  the  Respondent
    but no comments in reply have been  received  from  the  Respondent.  I
    proceed therefore on the basis  that  the  respondent  has  no  further
    submissions to make in this matter.

The Further Evidence

17.  The further evidence supplied took the form of a witness  statement  of
    the  Sponsor  and  a  large  bundle   of   unpaginated   but   original
    documentation mostly pay slips and correspondence with  employers.  The
    Sponsor had always been employed since he had arrived in United Kingdom
    save when he was claiming jobseeker's allowance. He had  payslips  that
    covered the period from 31st of March  2007  to  31  May  2007  from  a
    company called NCP. His solicitors had asked for  confirmation  of  the
    exact start and end dates for that employment. There  was  then  a  gap
    between 1 June 2007 and 24 September 2008 when the Sponsor  began  work
    with a company called ITS construction. Further information  from  them
    was awaited. There was then a gap between 25th of  September  2008  and
    17th of April 2011 when the Sponsor began work with  a  company  called
    the Superior service but he had no documentation as to the end date  of
    that employment.

18.  That suggested a gap between 18th of April 2011 and 29th  of  May  2011
    when he was employed by the Brook Street agency from 30th of  May  2011
    until 6th of January 2012. In fact a record  from  Premiere  Employment
    Group Ltd (another agency) showed that the Appellant worked  some  days
    for them between 18th  April  20111  and  16th  July  2011.  He  worked
    throughout 2012 for G4S and was on jobseeker's  allowance  on  29th  of
    January 2013 until 27th of October 2013 when he began work with  Wilson
    James until 19th of September 2015. He was then  again  on  jobseeker's
    allowance from 17th of August 2015 to 22nd of April 2016 when  he  went
    to work for Giant from 18 April 2016 to 29th of June 2016.  He  was  on
    jobseeker's allowance from 28th of June 2016 until 18 October 2016 when
    he began work with SQR security  solutions  Ltd.  He  continues  to  be
    employed by that company.

19.  Unfortunately the dates given in the Sponsor's statement do  not  match
    some of the original payslips and other documentation he provides.  For
    example, the Sponsor states that he began work for the Superior service
    on 18th of April 2011 and that there was  a  gap  undocumented  between
    25th of September 2008 and 17th of April  2011  before  then.  However,
    that is not borne out by the wage slips provided by the  Sponsor  which
    shows that he was working for the Superior service in  March  2009  and
    there is a letter from the superior service company dated 6th of  April
    2009 confirming that the Sponsor  had  been  working  with  them  as  a
    temporary warehouse operative since 25th of September  2008  until  the
    date of that letter (addressed to whom it may concern). Quite why  that
    letter was required is not explained but is perhaps irrelevant for  the
    Tribunal's purposes. What is important is that contrary to what is said
    in the statement there are not in fact as many gaps  as  the  statement
    would tend to suggest.

Findings

20.  What I have to decide is  a  very  narrow  point,  it  is  whether  the
    Sponsor can show continuous exercise of treaty rights over  a  given  5
    year period. If he can show that then the Appellant is entitled  to  be
    issued with a permanent residence card. The best 5  year  period  would
    appear to be from about the middle of 2011 until the middle of 2016. It
    is clear from the documentation now supplied by the Appellant  that  he
    has had a long working history in this country. I do  not  consider  it
    speculation to find that gaps in the Sponsor's employment record before
    2010 are most likely to relate to periods abroad for  example  when  he
    was in Nigeria and met the  Appellant.  According  to  the  Appellant's
    application for a permanent residence card she and the Sponsor  met  in
    Nigeria and they began living together in November 2007.  Between  2009
    and 2014 they lived together at the address in Grays Essex referred  to
    by the Appellant (see paragraph 5 above).  Given  that  history  it  is
    inevitable that the early years of the  Sponsor's  employment  in  this
    country should have gaps whether documented or  otherwise.  What  I  am
    concerned with is whether the  Sponsor  can  show  5  years  continuous
    employment for the period which I have suggested above. What  is  clear
    is that the Appellant worked in 2011 and 2012 for different  employers.
    According to the Sponsor's statement there was a short gap of  about  a
    month over the Christmas period which could be  explained  by  a  short
    holiday. In the bundle is a payslip for Wilson James which  shows  that
    the Sponsor was employed for a month in December 2012. According to the
    Sponsor's statement he  then  went  on  to  jobseeker's  allowance  for
    several months before working (for a second time) for Wilson James.  It
    was the difficulty over the evidence for  work  at  Wilson  James  that
    caused the Respondent to refuse the application  in  the  first  place.
    That evidence has now much improved.

21.  What the  Sponsor  has  now  provided  are  payslips  for  January  and
    February 2015 which show that he had already  been  working  10  or  11
    months for that company by that time. There are further payslips and  a
    letter from Wilson James dated 25th of November 2016 addressed  to  the
    Appellant's solicitors confirming that the Sponsor  began  work  on  17
    October 2013 and left that company on 15  September  2015.  There  then
    followed another period of receipt of jobseeker's allowance and further
    employment. I am satisfied therefore that there are no significant gaps
    in the employment history. The Sponsor can  show  that  he  was  either
    working (which  he  did  for  most  of  the  time)  or  in  receipt  of
    jobseeker's allowance (for a minority of the  time)  for  a  continuous
    period of 5 years such that he can satisfy the Regulations.

22.  The main problem for the Sponsor according to the argument made  to  me
    at the hearing is that during 2013 relying upon the records of the  Job
    Centre he received jobseeker's allowance for about 9  months  from  the
    end of January until October 2013. This runs up  against  regulation  6
    (2A) which provides that a person  who  has  ceased  working  may  only
    retain worker status for a maximum of 6 months. The  paragraph  applies
    to someone who is  in  duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment  after
    having been employed in the United Kingdom for less than one  year.  In
    this case the sponsor had been working for substantially more than  one
    year when he was registered as a jobseeker for more than  6  months  in
    2013. I do not therefore  regard  the  nine-month  period  in  2013  as
    breaking the 5 years continuous employment which  the  sponsor  has  to
    show.

23.  It is to be regretted that the information  has  come  out  in  such  a
    piecemeal way but as the date of  hearing  is  the  relevant  date  for
    evidence, I consider that the Sponsor has now demonstrated a continuous
    period of 5 years employment. For different reasons therefore to  those
    given by the Judge at first instance I am prepared to allow this appeal
    on the basis that the Sponsor  is  a  qualified  person  who  has  been
    exercising treaty rights for the requisite period.

Notice of Decision

     The decision at first instance involve the making of a  material  error
    of law and I have set it aside. I remake the decision by  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to issue
    a permanent residence card to her.

     Appellant's appeal allowed.

     I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy  reason  for  so
    doing.

    Signed this   23rd day of December 2016

    .......................................................
    Judge Woodcraft
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

    The Judge at first instance made a  fee  award.  That  decision  cannot
    stand since it was based  on  an  incorrect  application  of  the  law.
    Subsequently the Sponsor has provided sufficient evidence to show  that
    he had exercise  treaty  rights  for  the  appropriate  time  but  that
    evidence was not available to the Respondent at the date of decision. I
    therefore set aside the fee award made at first instance  and  make  no
    fee award in this case.


    Signed this 23rd day of December 2016


    .......................................................
    Judge Woodcraft
     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


