
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02745/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April 2018                            |On 23rd April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   Ms LDNR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lau, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Colombia born  on  [  ]  1977.   On  29th
    September 2015 the Appellant had applied under Regulation 15A(2) of the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 for a derivative residence  card  on
    the basis that she was the parent/carer of an EEA  national  child  who
    claims to be exercising treaty rights as a  self-sufficient  person  in
    line with Directive 2004/38/EC as defined in  Regulation  4(c)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The  Appellant's  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 18th February 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Boyes sitting at Hatton Cross on 8th  August  2017.
    By a decision promulgated on 23rd August 2017  the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant
    anonymity.

 3. On 7th September 2016 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 15th February  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Farrelly granted permission to appeal.  Judge Farrelly noted that after
    hearing evidence  the  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  her
    daughter's primary carer and the child would have to leave  the  United
    Kingdom if the Appellant  were  required  to  leave.   The  judge  also
    accepted that there were sufficient resources not to be a burden on the
    state social assistance  scheme.   However,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal on the sole basis that the Appellant did not hold  comprehensive
    sickness cover.  The Appellant had produced private  health  cover  but
    the judge had concluded this was not comprehensive as it  only  covered
    elective surgery and related treatment.

 4.  It  was  noted  that  the  grounds  contended  that  the  question  of
    comprehensive sickness insurance related to  the  EEA  national  rather
    than the Appellant and that it was not argued that the insurance  cover
    taken  out  whilst  arguably  not  comprehensive  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant, who is diabetic, was adequate for her child,  who  was  not.
    Judge Farrelly found that the application raised an arguable  point  of
    law.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   Prior  to  the  hearing  I  was  handed  a
    detailed letter from Mr Farhat, Legal Director and Head of  Appeals  in
    Public  Law  at  the  Appellant's  instructed  solicitors,   Gulbenkian
    Andonian.  That letter made two points.  Firstly it accepted  that  his
    firm of solicitors remained on the court record and that no application
    had been made to remove themselves from the court record.   It  further
    set out that they had been without instruction from the Appellant since
    December 2017.  Miss R does not appear.  I am satisfied,  having  heard
    the Appellant's legal representative, that attempts have been  made  to
    notify her both by email and letter to her last known address  of  this
    hearing.  I am satisfied that she has been properly served.

 6. Secondly Mr Farhat points out personal circumstances, which means  that
    he is not in a position to attend court.  I am appreciative of the time
    he has taken to write such letter  and  that  his  assistant,  Mr  Lau,
    attends on his behalf.  I further acknowledge the position in which  Mr
    Lau finds himself.  Firstly  he  is  not  familiar  with  this  matter.
    Secondly he is not a litigator and thirdly his instruction to attend in
    this matter has come at the shortest of notice.  What, however, he does
    is to produce a skeleton argument on behalf of the Appellant running to
    some nine pages which I have considered in its entirety.  That skeleton
    is produced by Mr Farhat.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  As mentioned, Mr Lau appears on  behalf  of
    the Appellant.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Clarke.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. This concentrates largely on the requirement of an EEA national  to  be
    self-sufficient and  it  forms  the  basis  of  the  skeleton  argument
    provided by Mr Farhat and of the submissions made  by  Mr  Clarke.   Mr
    Clarke, and also by way of reference to the skeleton, takes me  through
    the relevant law.  The starting point is to be found in Section 15A  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  That states:

         "(1) A person who is not an exempt person  and  who  satisfies  the
             criteria in paragraph (2), (3),  (4),  (4A)  or  (5)  of  this
             Regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in  the
             United Kingdom  for  as  long  as  the  person  satisfies  the
             relevant criteria.

         (2)  A person satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

             (a)  A person is the primary carer of an EEA national; and

             (b)  the relevant EEA national -

                  (i)  is under the age of 18;

                  (ii)  is  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                      sufficient person; and

                  (iii)    would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom
                      if P were required to leave."

 9. That sets out the basic criteria for a derivative right and from  there
    it is appropriate to turn to paragraph 4 of the 2006 Regulations, which
    sets out at 4(1)(c) to define the term "self-sufficient  person".   The
    Regulation therein states:

         "Self-sufficient person means a person who has

         (i)  sufficient resources not to become  a  burden  on  the  social
             assistance system of the United Kingdom during his  period  of
             residence; and

         (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom."

10. That paragraph thereafter leads me to consider whether or not there  is
    appropriate comprehensive sickness insurance and the  relevant  Section
    therein of the 2006 Regulations is paragraph 4(2)(b), which states:

         "For the purposes of paragraph (1)(c) or (d), where family  members
         of the person concerned reside in  the  United  Kingdom  and  their
         right to reside is dependent upon their  being  family  members  of
         that person:-

         (b)  The requirement for that person to have comprehensive sickness
             insurance cover in the United Kingdom shall only be  satisfied
             if he and his family member have such cover."

11. It is Mr Clarke's submission that comprehensive  should  be  given  its
    natural meaning and that  consequently  when  given  due  consideration
    paragraph 4(2)(b) shows that the Appellant needs sickness insurance and
    that this has not been met.  He further briefly addresses the issue  of
    what constitutes exclusions on a policy  and  pre-existing  conditions,
    referring me to the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  Ahmad  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 988 and points out that from that decision you cannot construe
    a policy to show no burden on the NHS and therefore he submits that  in
    this instant case the policy is not comprehensive within the meaning of
    the Court of Appeal decision in Ahmad.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. I start by reminding myself that I am not retrying this  issue.   I  am
    merely considering whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge has materially
    erred  in  law  in  his  decision.   His  conclusions  with  regard  to
    comprehensive sickness cover start at paragraph 20.  He  has  begun  by
    noting the decision in Ahmad, where it was held  that  the  requirement
    that comprehensive sickness cover be held had to be  strictly  complied
    with and could not be satisfied by the  EEA  citizen's  entitlement  to
    free healthcare from the NHS.  Thereafter he has gone  on  to  consider
    the arrangements made for private health  insurance  and  to  give  due
    consideration to the exclusions  on  the  policy.   Thereafter  it  was
    submitted by the Secretary of State's representative that in the  light
    of the policy exclusions the insurance that had been obtained  was  not
    comprehensive.   Judge  Boyes  noted  that  there  is  no   legislative
    definition of what will or will not amount to  comprehensive  insurance
    and that it is therefore a matter of fact.   Thereinafter  he  set  out
    details of the Appellant's  medical  history  and  concluded  that  the
    policy's cover was actually very limited.

15. Based on that I am satisfied that this is a judge who  has  given  very
    thorough analysis to the position with regard to  the  cover  but  more
    importantly, following the paper trail that is explained in some detail
    to me by Mr Clarke, I agree  with  his  submission  that  it  has  been
    evidenced that the Appellant needs to show the sickness insurance cover
    and that this has not been shown to the satisfaction of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and consequently they do not meet  the  requirements  of
    the EEA Regulations.  Therefore, when I look  at  this  matter  in  the
    round and whilst having given consideration to the submissions made  in
    the skeleton argument and to the authorities referred to therein, I  am
    satisfied that this is a judge who has not materially erred in law  and
    has made findings to which he was entitled to  and  for  which  he  has
    given full and proper reasons.  In such circumstances the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material  error  of  law  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the Appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations is dismissed.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and the anonymity  direction  remains
in place.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
