
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/02665/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 January 2018                        | On 29 January 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                              mohammad ibrahim
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and no representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Woodcraft promulgated on 13 March 2017, brought with the
    permission of Designated First-tier Tribunal  McCarthy  granted  on  25
    October 2017.



2.   Judge Woodcraft declined to engage with the facts  and  issues  in  the
    appeal in reliance upon the  case  of  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal:
    Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).





3.   The decision in Sala has since been overturned by the Court  of  Appeal
    in MK v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1755.  The effect is that the  Respondent  now  acknowledges  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside  for  error  of
    law and the appeal be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal  with
    all issues under the EEA Regulations at large.



4.   I agree that that is the appropriate approach.



5.   It does seem to me that the appeal  can  be  reheard  by  any  Judge  -
    including Judge Woodcraft who did not engage with the evidence or  make
    any findings of fact.  Notwithstanding this observation, it is a matter
    for Listing as to who should now remake the decision in the appeal.


Notice of Decision

6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated for error of law.


7.   The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge with all issues at large.


8.   No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript if ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 26 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis





