
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02133/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2018                            |On 17 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                             mrs iswaree hunkar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah (instructed by JF Law Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was heard by
    Judge Oliver at Hatton Cross on  20th  April  2018  and  refused  in  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 20th June 2018.

 2. The appeal was by a Mauritian national who had  applied  for  permanent
    residence on the basis of  her  retained  rights,  having  married  and
    subsequently divorced a French national.

 3. The Judge identified,  correctly,  that  the  Appellant  had  to  show,
    amongst other things, that her former  husband  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights at the date of the termination of the  marriage.   However,  the
    Judge took that date to be the date of the  decree  absolute.   We  now
    know that that is wrong and the applicable date  is  the  date  of  the
    initiation of the divorce proceedings (Bagazieva [2018] EWCA Civ 1088).

 4. Therefore, the whole basis upon which the Judge approached the evidence
    was in error, although the Judge is not to be criticised for that as he
    heard the appeal prior to the Court of Appeal deciding  Bagazieva.   It
    is clearly material because  that  was  the  fundamental  issue  to  be
    decided.  On that basis the Decision and Reasons is set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

 5. The evidence that  has  to  be  shown  by  the  Appellant  is  somewhat
    different than when the original bundle was filed and for  that  reason
    it is appropriate for the matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing on the issues when no doubt the Appellant
    will lodge additional evidence.

 6. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal. and  I  see
    no reason for making one now.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  Decision
and Reasons is set aside and the matter remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for rehearing.


Signed [pic]                            Date21st November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

