
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02875/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2021                      |On 15 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                          JESSICA AMADIN USIOBAIFO
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Emezie, Solicitor acting on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill (hereinafter referred to as  the
         "FtTJ") promulgated on the 5 March 2021 , in which the  appellant's
         appeal against  the  decision  to  refuse  her  application  for  a
         residence card as confirmation of a  retained  right  of  residence
         under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016
         ("the EEA Regulations") was dismissed.

      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order no  application  was  made
         for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 23 July 2021, by means of Microsoft teams
         which has been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A
         face- to- face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,
         and both parties agreed that all issues could be  determined  in  a
         remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via  video  as  did
         the appellant so that she was able to hear and see the  proceedings
         being conducted. There were  no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no
         problematic technical problems were encountered during the  hearing
         and  I  am  satisfied  both  advocates  were  able  to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

The background:

      4. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision letter, the
         decisions of the previous two  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  (Judge
         Pickup and Judge Foudy) and the decision of the FtTJ under appeal.

      5. The appellant is a national of Nigeria. Judge Pickup  set  out  the
         history at A129(AB) as  follows.  The  appellant  came  to  the  UK
         illegally with the assistance of an agent she paid. It  is  claimed
         that she met her husband in 2008 after being in the UK for 2 years.
         He was then already a Spanish national but she  did  not  know  how
         that came about as he was born in Nigeria.

      6. On 5 December 2009 the appellant married the sponsor.

      7. In September 2010 she was issued with a residence card as a  family
         member of her sponsor.

      8. They were divorced on 16 March 2015.

      9. On 14 July 2015 she made an application for a residence card on the
         basis of a retained right following  termination  of  the  marriage
         pursuant to the EEA Regulations 2006.

     10. On 29 February 2016 a decision was made to refuse the  application.
         The Secretary of State concluded on the  information  provided  and
         for the reasons explained in the refusal letter  the  marriage  was
         one  of  convenience  and  thus  was  not  protected  by  the   EEA
         Regulations.

     11. The appellant appealed that decision and it came before FtTJ Pickup
         on 14 November 2017.

     12. In a decision promulgated on 27 November 2017 FtTJ pickup dismissed
         the appeal having found that the respondent discharged  the  burden
         of proof on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  appellant's
         marriage was a marriage of convenience.

     13. The FtTJ set out  his  findings  of  fact  and  assessment  of  the
         evidence  at  paragraphs  [14]-[29]  and  they  are  summarised  as
         follows:

          1) The judge found the appellant to be a poor witness  and  reach
             the  conclusion  on  the  evidence  as  a   whole,   including
             explanations in oral and written evidence  that  she  had  not
             been true for the tribunal  about  a  former  spouse  and  the
             nature of the relationship (at [16]).

          2) The judge was not satisfied on the evidence of  the  appellant
             and  the  sponsor  genuinely  live  together,  even  if   some
             documents showed a common address at sometimes (at [17]).

          3) In the marriage interview the appellant stated  that  she  and
             the ex-spouse had lived together throughout the  period  April
             2009 the end of summer 2011 but also  said  the  marriage  got
             into difficulties in 2012 and that her  spouse  moved  out  in
             February 2013. The judge did  not  find  that  account  to  be
             entirely consistent with the  evidence  as  to  the  addresses
             lived at and as set out in his factual findings.

          4) In interview the appellant suggested her  spouse  had  been  a
             student between 2010 and 2012 when he finished.  When  pointed
             out to her that the P 60s for her husband, which  she  claimed
             he'd given in June/July 2015, showed different addresses,  she
             said she didn't know any different  addresses  he  might  have
             lived at. She later said she wasn't  actually  aware  when  he
             stopped studying they claimed it was full time every day.  The
             judge made reference to the immigration officer  visiting  the
             appellant's home when she gave an alternative address for  her
             ex-spouse. Whilst the appellant had  denied  this,  the  judge
             found  that  there  was  no  reasonable  explanation  for  the
             information homing provided the immigration authority.  Taking
             the evidence as a whole the judge found the  appellant  lacked
             credibility and did not accept  that  she  had  been  truthful
             about that aspect of the claim (at [19]).

          5) The judge took into account that the appellant was  unable  to
             stay to the witnesses were at their wedding and only knew them
             as the aunt and cousin of her ex-spouse whom she had met a few
             times prior to the wedding. The judge found that the interview
             was conducted long after the marriage terminated during  which
             it was reported that they had lived together until  2013.  The
             judge found it was not credible that she would meet his family
             members before the marriage and  yet  not  at  all  after  the
             marriage or that she had no clue as  to  their  names  despite
             several years of marriage. The judge noted that when  she  was
             challenged on this in oral  evidence  she  said  that  in  her
             culture one does not call people directly by the name but  as,
             for example,  the  mother  of  the  child's  name.  The  judge
             rejected that explanation as "fanciful and unsatisfactory, and
             not  at  all  believable".  The  judge  also  found  that  the
             appellant was "remarkably  uninformed  about  his  income  and
             employment". The judge rejected as not credible her  claim  to
             have been so illiterate that he handed all  financial  details
             and correspondence, particularly since she must  have  made  a
             single person council tax discount application and  as  handle
             matters alone at least since he allegedly left  in  2013.  The
             judge found that there were no bank accounts in joint names in
             the appellant's bundle, only her own. When  challenged  as  to
             why, she said no one had asked for them. The judge  took  into
             account the sum of the utility bills had both names, but  many
             did not (at [20]).

          6) At [21] the judge found that the  evidence  "strongly  suggest
             that during the period of the marriage the appellant  and  the
             former EA spouse spent considerable period living at  separate
             addresses, undermining the claim to have been living together.
             The FtTJ set out the analysis of the  evidence  at  paragraphs
             [21]-[24].

          7) At [24] the FtTJ reached a  finding  that  the  appellant  was
             unable to satisfactorily explain the differences/discrepancies
             in the addresses and as pointed out in interview she said  she
             was unaware of any other  addresses  that  she  had  given  an
             address to the immigration  authorities.  She  had  said  that
             another male  lived  at  the  address  and  that  her  husband
             sometimes if there but also that  he  had  a  property  at  an
             address given at x which was an  address  that  could  not  be
             verified as genuine.

          8) At [25] the judge found that her claim of a 25% discount as  a
             single occupant in relation  to  council  tax  undermined  her
             claim. The judge rejected explanation that she didn't give his
             name as he was a student at University  because  at  the  same
             time she could not clarify when he ceased being a student. Had
             he been such a student, that would have been reflected in  the
             council tax document. The judge rejected as not  credible  her
             claim that her spouse told  her  that  she  did  not  need  to
             declare why she was there with him because he was  a  student.
             The judge was satisfied that claim a  single  person  discount
             she would have had to specifically make that  application.  He
             was satisfied that on any version of her events, the appellant
             had been dishonest about this aspect of her evidence.

          9) At [26] the FtTJ  found  that  it  was  not  credible  in  the
             application form signed on 22 June  2015  that  the  appellant
             claimed that she was unable to  contact  her  ex-spouse.  When
             interviewed she was asked where she got a documents  form  and
             confirm that she got from her  ex-spouse  in  June/July  2015.
             When challenged on the evidence, she said when she was  making
             the application her ex-spouse was agreeable to  provide  those
             documents to her. The judge found that  that  "undermined  her
             assertion that she was not able to  contact  him".  The  judge
             also recorded that she told the tribunal that when she  needed
             the documents she called him. She denied stating that she  was
             unable to contact him and confirm that she was able to contact
             him in making the applications. She claimed that it  was  only
             after the application was made that she was able to reach him.
             The  judge  found  "none  of  this   makes   any   sense   and
             inconsistency in  her  explanation  seriously  undermines  the
             credibility."

         10) At [27] the judge considered the appellant's oral evidence and
             her explanation as to why his  name  was  not  on  the  rental
             agreement even though she claimed she was living with  him  at
             the time. Her answer was that he was "not around" at the  time
             and so she just put her own name on the agreement.  The  judge
             found that that appear to be  inconsistent  with  the  picture
             that she tried to paint of being illiterate  and  leaving  all
             financial correspondence matters to husband.

         11) At [28] the judge concluded that having taken the evidence  as
             a whole,  he  found  the  appellant  "a  poor  and  ultimately
             incredible witness, said that I do not accept any part of  the
             claim. On the contrary, I'm  satisfied  that  this  is  not  a
             genuine marriage but one of convenience."

     14. The appellant made an application to appeal that  decision  and  it
         was refused on 18 May 2018. An application was made for  permission
         to the Upper Tribunal but permission was refused on  19th  of  July
         2018. The appellant had exhausted her appeal rights in July 2018.

     15. The appellant made a further application for a residence  card  and
         this was refused by  the  respondent  on  15  November  2018.   The
         appellant appealed that decision before the FtT on 17 June 2019 and
         in a decision promulgated on 10 July 2019 FtTJ Foudy dismissed  her
         appeal. The judge applied the principles in  Devaseelan  and  found
         that the appellant had produced no new evidence that was  incapable
         of being produced before the tribunal in  2017  and  therefore  the
         genuineness of the marriage was not  open  for  review.  The  judge
         recorded at [5] that the evidence in the  appellant's  husband  was
         new evidence that the judge found that that was evidence that could
         have been placed before the tribunal in 2017 as the  appellant  and
         her ex-spouse was still in contact and that "no good  reasons"  had
         been advanced as to why  that  evidence  was  not  put  before  the
         tribunal therefore the judge found from the  evidence  that  "there
         was no good reason to look behind a finding that  the  marriage  is
         one of convenience." The judge also found that  the  appellant  had
         also not demonstrated that her  ex-husband  was  exercising  treaty
         rights for a continuous period as required.

     16. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  but
         permission was refused by a FtTJ on 5  September  2019.  A  further
         application for permission to appeal made before the Upper Tribunal
         was also refused on 1 October 2019.

     17. On 3 December 2019 the appellant applied  for  permanent  residence
         card as confirmation that she was a former family member of an  EEA
         national. This was the appellant's 3rd application. It was  refused
         by the respondent in a decision letter dated 14 March 2020.

     18. The appellant sought to appeal this decision and it came before the
         FtT (Judge Shergill) on 23rd of February 2021. It is recorded  from
         the decision that  the  judge  heard  no  oral  evidence  from  the
         appellant and that the appeal was decided on the  papers  to  which
         both  advocates  agreed.  The  appellant  had  provided  what   was
         described as an updated version of her witness statement at a 23  -
         28 setting out her history.  Reference  is  made  in  that  witness
         statement to the previous findings made by the FtT. In relation  to
         the issue about the council tax, the appellant stated that she must
         have  misunderstood  the  council  tax  official  over  the   phone
         (paragraph 9) and that she was confused  when  she  had  filed  her
         previous witness statement  (paragraph  10)  and  paragraph  11  in
         relation to the application that she had signed,  she  stated  that
         she had signed it without reading it. Other aspects of the  witness
         statement refused to her  being  confused  before  the  immigration
         judge and that she was not able to explain to the  judge  the  full
         context and that she was confused and nervous and had made mistakes
         (paragraph 14). At paragraph 18 she set  out  the  reason  for  the
         breakdown of the marriage and made reference to that as a result of
         her inability to conceive. At paragraph  2  24  she  confirmed  her
         marriage was not one of convenience but  out  of  "stress,  anxiety
         confusion grief of the breakdown of her marriage... And resulted in
         me not giving satisfactory answers to the  Home  Office  during  my
         interview  and  to  the  Honourable   Judge   of   the   First-tier
         Tribunal...".

     19. The FtTJ applied the principles in Devaseelan to the appeal in  the
         light of the  2  previous  decisions.  The  findings  of  fact  and
         assessment of the evidence is set out at paragraphs  [11]  -  [23].
         The judge undertook an assessment of the medical report  which  had
         been relied upon to provide an explanation for the adverse findings
         made by the previous tribunal judges. At [14] the  judge  concluded
         that there was nothing in the report  to  support  the  proposition
         that the evidence before the 2017  tribunal  should  be  looked  at
         retrospectively to explain or "cure the defect" and that appeal  in
         the appellant's favour. The judge found that the evidence  did  not
         take the appellant's case in the direction she  sought  or  as  was
         submitted on her behalf and only confirmed  current  mental  health
         issues, a recent past history and failed to show why  any  of  that
         was relevant to the last 2  tribunal  hearings  for  the  judge  to
         depart from the previous conclusions. At paragraphs  [18]-[20]  the
         FtTJ address the issues relating to the fertility claim  which  was
         also advanced as evidence on her behalf. The  judge  rejected  that
         claim for the reasons set out in those paragraphs. At [22] the FtTJ
         concluded that the burden remained with the appellant  to  disprove
         that this is a marriage of  convenience  for  that  she  failed  to
         provide satisfactory probative evidence  to  move  away  from  that
         starting point. The judge found that her evidence was  "very  weak2
         and whilst the 2019 decision was short it relied upon the  previous
         detailed findings made by the  tribunal  in  2017  which  were  not
         successfully appealed. Thus the judge  was  not  satisfied  on  the
         balance of probabilities that there  were  "very  good  reasons  to
         depart from the 2017 and 2019 decisions under Devaseelan." At  [23]
         the FtTJ stated "I am satisfied that the appellant  has  failed  to
         discharge the burden of proof to show the marriage was not  one  of
         convenience." The FtTJ dismissed the appeal.

     20. Permission to appeal  was  issued  and  permission  to  appeal  was
         granted by FtTJ on  Judge  Keane  on  the  26  April  2021.  It  is
         important to set out the terms of the grant of permission.

     21. Judge Keane stated as follows:

             "The grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement with  the
             findings of the judge, an attempt to reargue  the  appeal  and
             they did not disclose an arguable error or errors of  law  but
             for which the outcome of the appeal might have been different.
             I have however, considered the judge's decision  in  order  to
             ascertain whether it disclosed a "Robinson obvious"  error  of
             law. The appeal gave rise to a single  issue,  namely  whether
             the appellant and her EEA national  spouse  were  party  to  a
             marriage of convenience. At paragraphs 22 and 23 the  decision
             by way of  self-direction  the  judge  remarked,  "the  burden
             remained with the appellant disprove that this was a  marriage
             of convenience ...".  Sadly,  the  judges  self-direction  was
             arguably  irrational  and  the  judge  might  preferably  have
             directed himself so as to place the burden of proving that the
             marriage  was  indeed  a  marriage  of  convenience   on   the
             respondent. The application for permission is granted."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     22. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on that the  provisional  view  was  that  it  would  be
         appropriate to determine the  issue of whether there was  an  error
         of law and if so whether the decision should be set aside without a
         face to face hearing and that it should be a  remote  hearing.  The
         parties did not provide any further representations as to the  mode
         of hearing. The appeal was therefore listed as a remote hearing.

     23. On the 6 May 2021, the respondent filed a Rule 24 response  to  the
         grounds.

     24. The hearing was therefore listed as  a  remote  hearing  with  both
         advocates providing their oral submissions. I am grateful  to  both
         advocates for their submissions.

     25. Mr Emezie on behalf of the appellant submitted that permission  had
         only been granted on one ground which related to the issue  of  the
         burden of proof. He submitted that this was a material misdirection
         in law by the FtTJ and that was clear from the relevant case law.

     26. By reference to the rule 24 response and the  submission  that  the
         FtTJ relied upon the decision of the previous judges, he  submitted
         that that could not be correct because the judge had made  his  own
         findings of fact and therefore was  not  relying  on  the  previous
         findings. The judge could not rely on the  previous  decisions  and
         subvert or circumvent the statutory duty to  apply  the  burden  of
         proof.

     27. Mr Emezie further submitted that the Secretary of  State  had  made
         the point that the FtTJ's direction was  poorly  phrased  but  that
         could not be right because when looking at paragraph 23  there  was
         no typographical area. It was  a  clear  misdirection  in  law  and
         therefore it is an error which the appeal court, namely  the  Upper
         Tribunal could not cure. The burden of proof was so fundamental  it
         could not be cured by the Upper Tribunal.

     28. Mr Emezie further submitted that an important consideration was the
         public confidence in the administration of justice and that justice
         must be seen to be  done  and  the  appellant  should  be  able  to
         understand  what  was  being  said.  He  further   submitted   that
         consistency was important in judicial decision-making and that  the
         FtTJ was not consistent in applying the burden of  proof.  Thus  he
         submitted this was a very strong case.

     29. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
         response dated 6 May 2021. The  reply  referred  to  the  grant  of
         permission where the judge found the factual findings to be nothing
         more than a disagreement. The  respondent  submitted  that  in  the
         light of those factual findings and based on the  previous  appeals
         where it was found that the appellant's marriage was a marriage  of
         convenience, the Secretary of State had adduced  adequate  evidence
         to discharge the initial evidential burden stop  it  was  submitted
         that the reality of the appeal before the present FtTJ was that the
         appellant was seeking to offer  a  reasonable  explanation  to  the
         respondent's evidence raising a reasonable suspicion.

     30. By reference to the decision at paragraph 6 - 9  it  was  submitted
         that the judge directed himself properly in law and that the  issue
         before the tribunal was whether the appellant provided a reasonable
         explanation to confront the reasonable suspicion of a  marriage  of
         convenience which had been proven and upheld in the  appellant's  2
         previous appeals decisions. Therefore the judge  did  not  need  to
         assess whether the respondent to discharge the  initial  evidential
         burden as she had been found have done so in the 2 previous appeals
         which had been unsuccessfully challenged, the positive  conclusions
         on the initial evidential burden on the respondent were binding  on
         the parties as correctly noted by the  judge  at  paragraph  8.  In
         those circumstances the evidential burden transferred to rest  upon
         the appellant to give an explanation to undermine the  respondent's
         case.

     31. It was submitted that whilst it could be said that the judge poorly
         phrased the sentences at paragraphs 22 and 23, the approach of  the
         judge was nonetheless correct.

     32. In his oral submissions, Mr  Diwnycz  submitted  that  this  was  a
         cogent and focused decision of the FtTJ and should be upheld.

     33. No further submissions were made in behalf of the appellant.

     34. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.

Decision on error of law:

     35. The appellant's case before the FtTJ was that she was entitled to a
         retained right of residence under Regulation as  a  former  "family
         member of an EEA national". There  was  no  dispute  that  she  had
         married the sponsor on 5 December 2009. The issue was whether under
         the EEA regulations, the sponsor was not her  "spouse",  and  so  a
         "family  member"  because  their  marriage  was  a   "marriage   of
         convenience" (I refer to regulation 2 (1) defining "spouse" is  not
         including "a party to a marriage of convenience".

     36. The narrow point upon which permission has been granted is that the
         FtTJ failed to apply the correct  burden  of  proof  applicable  in
         marriage of convenience cases by reference to paragraphs [22 -  23]
         of the FtTJ's decision.

     37. Mr Emezie submits that there was a material  misdirection  made  by
         the FtTJ. He further submits a set out above that such  a  material
         misdirection cannot  be  corrected  as  set  out  in  the  rule  24
         response. He argues that the FtTJ did not only rely on the findings
         of the previous 2 judges but  that  the  judge  had  made  his  own
         findings.

     38. As to the suggestion made by the respondent that the FtTJ had  made
         a typographical error or that it was  "poorly  phrased"  Mr  Emezie
         submitted that this was not the position  and  there  was  a  clear
         misdirection in law and that the application of the burden of proof
         was so fundamental it could not be cured by the Upper Tribunal.

     39. I have carefully considered those submissions and have done  so  in
         the light of the decision of the FtTJ, and the evidence before  the
         tribunal.

     40. The Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ('the
         Regulations')  define  a  marriage  of  convenience   as   follows:
         "marriage of convenience" includes a marriage entered into for  the
         purpose of using these Regulations, or any other right conferred by
         the EU treaties, as a means to circumvent - (a)  immigration  rules
         applying to non-EEA nationals (such as any  applicable  requirement
         under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter or remain in  the  United
         Kingdom); or (b) any other criteria that the party to the  marriage
         of convenience would otherwise have to meet in  order  to  enjoy  a
         right to reside under these Regulations or the EU treaties."

     41. It is not disputed that in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 it was held that
         the legal burden was  on  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department to prove that an otherwise valid marriage was a marriage
         of convenience so as to justify the refusal  of  a  residence  card
         under the EEA Regulations. The legal burden of proof in relation to
         marriage lay on the Secretary of State, but if she adduced evidence
         capable of pointing to the conclusion that the marriage was one  of
         convenience, the evidential burden shifted to the applicant  (paras
         24 - 27).

     42. Sadovska & Another and Rosa, that the legal burden of proof  is  on
         the Secretary of State and that that burden lies with the Secretary
         of State throughout although the evidential burden  shifts  to  the
         appellant if there is a reasonable suspicion (and so the  Secretary
         of State discharges  the  evidential  burden  upon  her)  that  the
         marriage is one of convenience.

     43. The FtTJ set out the relevant law at paragraphs [5]-[8]  and  there
         is no dispute that the  judge  was  not  in  error  in  those  self
         -directions and expressly at paragraph [6] where the  judge  stated
         "there is no burden at the outset of an application on the claimant
         to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national  is  not  one  of
         convenience", and that  the  evidential  burden  started  with  the
         respondent.

     44. However, when applied to this particular appeal  it  is  of  direct
         relevance that the appellant's  appeal  started  from  a  different
         point in the evidence as there had been 2 previous decisions by the
         First-tier Tribunal, Judge Pickup in 2017 and Judge Foudy in  2019,
         both of whom had reached the conclusion that the  appellant  was  a
         party to a marriage of convenience. That  being  the  case,  in  my
         judgement the respondent was correct to submit that  the  FtTJ  was
         not required to assess whether the respondent  had  discharged  the
         initial evidential  burden  as  this  had  been  satisfied  by  the
         decisions in the previous 2 appeals; the last one having only  been
         made  in  July  2019.  The  judge  correctly  identified  that  the
         principles of the decision in Devaseelan  applied  to  this  appeal
         (see paragraph [8] of the FtTJ decision).

     45. Therefore in accordance with the decisions set out above  (Sadovska
         and Rosa), the evidential burden was on the  appellant  to  provide
         her evidential explanation via any further evidence  in  order  for
         the FtTJ to depart from the previous assessment. Whilst  Mr  Emezie
         points to the phraseology of the FtTJ set out at paragraphs 22  and
         23, in my judgement those paragraphs need to be read in  the  light
         of the decision  as  a  whole  and  the  litigation  history  which
         included the 2 previous decisions and where 2  judges  had  reached
         the conclusion that the respondent had discharged the legal  burden
         that the marriage was one of convenience.

     46. The appellant did not start the appeal on the basis that there  had
         been no earlier findings and therefore the legal approach taken  by
         the judge by reference to those decisions and then considering  the
         appellant's evidence was in fact correct.

     47.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  decision  the  FtTJ  conscientiously
         considered the evidence that  the  appellant  had  relied  upon  to
         discharge the evidential burden  on  her.  This  consisted  of  the
         medical report and the issues arising from that.

     48. The case advanced on behalf of the appellant was that the  previous
         findings could be departed from because she could  now  provide  an
         evidential explanation  for  her  replies  given  in  the  marriage
         interview and any later evidence  which  had  led  to  the  earlier
         findings made by the 2 previous judges. This was described  by  the
         FtTJ as "some hitherto unknown medical condition or  vulnerability"
         (at paragraph [12]). This was addressed by the FtTJ  at  paragraphs
         [12]-[21] of the decision.

     49. The FtTJ summarised the medical report at paragraphs [12]-[13]. The
         judge reached the conclusion on the evidence that there was nothing
         in the report  to  support  the  appellant's  contention  that  the
         evidence before the tribunal in 2017 (or 2019) should be considered
         retrospectively  to  cure  the  defects  in  the  appeal   in   the
         appellant's favour or in other words in the  medical  evidence  did
         not undermine or provide any explanation for the previous  negative
         factual findings.

     50. The judge found that the doctors report did not provide any opinion
         or assessment as to what her mental state might have been  in  2017
         when she gave evidence. Nor did the medical  evidence  explain  the
         factual discrepancies which arose in the marriage  interview  which
         had been conducted earlier. The decision of Judge  Pickup  set  out
         the discrepancies in the marriage interview and in  her  subsequent
         evidence which in his view went to the core of the appeal.  As  the
         judge stated in the current appeal,  the  medical  report  did  not
         indicate any mental health difficulties going back that far or that
         any mental health issues may have affected her responses  given  in
         the Home Office marriage interview.

     51. As the present judge identified, those interview  responses  formed
         "the backbone of the 2017 tribunal making adverse findings on which
         the appellant sought  to  challenge  unsuccessfully  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal and then in  her  witness  statement  dated  29/9/18"  (at
         paragraph [14]).

     52. The report confirmed her  current  mental  health  issues  and  the
         recent past history but it was open to the FtTJ to find the medical
         report failed to show why any of that was relevant to  the  last  2
         tribunal hearings such the judge should  depart  from  the  earlier
         factual findings and conclusions reached.

     53. The judge properly identified at paragraph [15] that it was unclear
         why the appellant who  had  been  represented  by  competent  legal
         representation in 2017 and  2019  was  unable  to  advance  medical
         issues relevant to the unreliability of the marriage interview that
         had taken place  at those earlier hearings.

     54. The FtTJ also considered the  claim  relating  to  the  infertility
         issue. The medical report refers to the appellant's  account  where
         she claimed to the doctor that the relationship floundered in  2013
         due to infertility issues. The judge contrasted that evidence  with
         the appellant's witness statement which stated  that  the  marriage
         ended in February 2013 and that her husband moved out  in  February
         2013 (see paragraph  14-17).  The  judge  invited  the  appellant's
         representative to identify any medical evidence  which  showed  the
         appellant's husband as being involved in such treatment. However as
         set out at paragraph [18] the appellant's husband was not mentioned
         in any  of  the  material  but  that  at  A68  (AB),  the  evidence
         demonstrated that the appellant had  been  attempting  a  pregnancy
         with a new partner in  2019.  The  judge  also  observed  that  the
         medical records relied upon only went to Page 6 of 23 and  observed
         that that was of concern if reliance has  been  placed  on  partial
         records that the  full  run  of  those  records  should  have  been
         provided.

     55. At paragraphs [18- 19] the FtTJ set out the evidence concerning the
         claim relied upon by the appellant relating to infertility and that
         this was evidence the appellant sought to  advance  to  demonstrate
         that the previous adverse findings were incorrect. In the light  of
         the evidence before the tribunal the judge was  entitled  to  reach
         the conclusion that the appellant's evidence was contradictory  and
         did not support the claim and that her claim  that  all  the  years
         they went through trying for a baby, there  was  no  such  evidence
         before the tribunal and that the evidence post -dated her  marriage
         breakup. As a judge observed at paragraph [20] the tribunal in 2017
         was told that the marriage got into difficulties in 2012  and  that
         her ex-husband moved out in February 2013  and  that  if  that  was
         correct, as now asserted that  she  had  been  having  problems  of
         infertility with her husband, it had not been explained  why  those
         infertility problems had not formed part of the hearing before  the
         First-tier tribunal in 2017. That  was  in  my  view  a  legitimate
         question for the tribunal to ask and the judge considered that  the
         evidence did not correlate with the marriage breakup.

     56. The judge granting permission  did  not  grant  permission  on  the
         grounds as drafted having concluded they amounted to no more than a
         disagreement with the findings of the FtTJ and  as  an  attempt  to
         reargue the appeal. Mr Emezie did not seek to argue  those  grounds
         and sought to rely on the issue raised by judge Keane as to whether
         there had been a legal misdirection on the burden of proof.

     57. I have  set  out  the  FtTJ's  factual  assessment  because  in  my
         judgement it demonstrates that the conclusion reached by the  judge
         upon the appellant's evidence that it did not displace the  earlier
         findings or constituted evidence for the judge to depart from the 2
         earlier   findings   was   correct.   Against   that    background,
         notwithstanding what the judge had stated at paragraphs  22  -  23,
         the judges approach taken overall  and  in  accordance  with  those
         findings was entirely correct.

     58. In my judgment whilst the phraseology used  by  the  judge  in  the
         concluding  paragraphs  could  have  been  better  expressed,  when
         considering the decision as a whole and  on  the  particular  basis
         upon which the appeal was conducted,  there  is  no  error  of  any
         materiality or one to demonstrate that the outcome would have  been
         any different given those factual findings  made  on  the  evidence
         advanced on behalf of  the  appellant  and  when  set  against  the
         earlier decisions of the FtTJ's in 2017 and 2019.

     59. As  Mr  Emezie  submitted  an  important  consideration  is  public
         confidence in the administration of justice  and  where  there  had
         been 2 previous adverse decisions, the judge was right to  consider
         the evidence advanced at the later hearing but was also entitled to
         reach the conclusion that that evidence failed for lack of  cogency
         and credibility and  as  such  failed  to  undermine  the  previous
         decisions  of  the  FtT  when  deciding  that  the  respondent  had
         discharged the overall legal burden that the marriage  was  one  of
         convenience.

     60. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that  the  decision  of
         the FtTJ did not involve the making of an error on a point  of  law
         such that the decision should be set aside and the decision of  the
         FtTJ shall stand.




    Notice of Decision.

     61. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law such that the decision should be  set
         aside and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated 29/7/ 2021.






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

