
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02220/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2019                      |On 7 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    A [O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria,  born  on  28  June  1988.   Her
    husband, [WM], is a citizen of the UK, born on 11 September 1982.  They
    married on 18 May 2013.  They have a son, born on 31 May 2014,  also  a
    UK citizen.

 2. From November 2015 until June 2016 the appellant and her husband  lived
    and worked in Ireland.  They returned to the UK towards the end of that
    month.

 3. The Brexit referendum took place on 23 June 2016.

 4. On 29 June 2016, the appellant applied for a residence card in terms of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 5. The respondent refused that application by a letter dated  14  February
    2017.  At page 2 of 5, the respondent said, "...  it  is  not  accepted
    that you and your ... sponsor's residence in the EEA host  country  was
    genuine and it is considered that the purpose ... was  as  a  means  of
    circumventing the UK's domestic immigration rules or other  immigration
    law."

 6. FtT Judge David C Clapham SSC dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 20 June 2018.  He thought that  it  would  have
    been irrational for the appellant and sponsor to panic over the  impact
    the referendum result might have on their status, and so did not accept
    their evidence about the reasons why they gave up their jobs in Ireland
    and returned to the UK.  He concluded that the family had not moved the
    centre of its life to Ireland, and that if they had,  they  would  have
    stayed there, hoping for a favourable  ["remain"]  referendum  outcome,
    and in the event of  an  unfavourable  ["leave"]  outcome,  would  have
    waited to see "what the position was going to be" for UK citizens,  and
    their non-British dependents, living and working in Ireland.

 7. UT Judge Kebede granted permission to appeal to the UT  on  7  November
    2018, on the view that the judge arguably focused on one aspect of  the
    appellant's circumstances, without regard  to  relevant  considerations
    set out  in  the  grounds,  and  arguably  failed  to  make  a  rounded
    assessment.

 8. The other considerations mentioned in the grounds are that  in  Ireland
    the appellant and sponsor had jobs with good  salaries  and  prospects,
    rented their own flat, bought a car, had  their  son  in  nursery,  and
    joined the local church; they had no home or jobs to which to return in
    the UK; and these were factors relevant in terms  of  the  respondent's
    guidance.

 9. One error of fact emerged during submissions.  The evidence in the  FtT
    was that the appellant and sponsor decided to move once the  referendum
    result was known.  The judge was wrong to think that the  decision  was
    made in advance of the result (apparently as a result of the line taken
    by the presenting officer in the FtT).  This is not crucial, but it had
    some bearing on the outcome.

10. It would have been irrational for the appellant and sponsor to react to
    the referendum result as they claimed they did.  The  judge's  analysis
    of that issue is correct.  However, does that  justify  the  conclusion
    that they never genuinely moved the centre of their lives  to  Ireland?
    All the other indications in the evidence are that they had.

11. People do fail to take professional advice when it would be  very  much
    in their interests to do so, and they do  make  irrational  spontaneous
    decisions.  If it is not accepted that the appellant and sponsor made a
    silly choice, what would that reveal?  It appears even more far-fetched
    that they took the referendum as a convenient pretext to "cash in" on a
    false impression they had set up of moving to Ireland, using  panic  as
    an explanation, knowing it had never been well-founded,  but  expecting
    the respondent, or a tribunal, to fall for the ruse.

12. I am persuaded by the grounds and submissions that the  judge  did  not
    take account of all material considerations, and did not give  adequate
    reasons for the conclusion reached.

13. In remaking the decision, I find it  more  likely  than  not  that  the
    appellant and sponsor did panic over the referendum  result,  and  more
    likely than not that between November  2015  and  June  2016  they  had
    genuinely moved their centre of life to Ireland.

14. The decision of the FtT  is  set  aside.   The  appeal,  as  originally
    brought to the FtT, is allowed.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      5 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




