
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02604/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided on the papers                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2017                       |On 17 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                       MISS ANGELIQUE ANDRADA ANGELES
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a national of the Philippines who  applied  for  a
    residence card as the extended family  member  of  her  EEA  (Romanian)
    national sponsor  who  is  said  to  be  her  unmarried  partner.   The
    Appellant appeals against the Respondent's decision  dated  31  October
    2015 refusing to issue her with  a  residence  card.   Her  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull in a decision  promulgated
    on 23 August 2016 ("the Decision").

 2. The Judge did not accept that the  Appellant  had  been  in  a  durable
    relationship and living with her partner since  February  2015  as  she
    claimed.  Her partner did not attend the hearing to give evidence.  The
    Appellant also claimed that she and her  sponsor  shared  accommodation
    with friends but those friends did not provide any evidence in  support
    of the Appellant's claim.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the  Decision  on  the  basis
    that the Decision was "wrong and not in accordance with the  law".   It
    is asserted that the decision was unfair, failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons and that the Appellant's evidence  was  consistent  and  should
    have been accepted.  It was also asserted that the  Judge  had  decided
    the appeal using the wrong standard of proof.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E  M
    Simpson by a decision sent on 14 March 2017.  The terms of the  refusal
    so far as relevant are as follows:-
         "[2] Permission to appeal is refused because:
          i) There was variously asserted that the Judge failed to consider
             the Appellant's "case fully", that the Decision was brief  and
             lacking detail, there had  been  furnished  a  sufficiency  of
             evidence, and that the correct standard of proof, the  balance
             of probabilities, had not been applied;
         ii) On careful reading of the Decision  there  was  not  disclosed
             basis to the asserted grounds, more particularly, the standard
             of proof ground was not particularised;
        iii) Albeit a short Decision, nevertheless the Judge was  shown  to
             weigh  the  evidence  before  them  and  concluded,  after  an
             adequacy  of  reasoning,  that  it  was  found  wanting,  more
             especially, with reference to a lack  of  material  supporting
             oral  and  documentary   evidence   concerning   the   claimed
             relationship, including against a a background of the  parties
             having not been interviewed, the  Appellant's  partner  having
             not been in  attendance  at  the  hearing  nor  any  of  their
             flatmates;
         iv) The burden of proof had been on the Appellant and  simply  she
             was found to fail to discharge that burden."

 5. Permission to appeal was  sought  from  this  Tribunal  by  application
    received  on  23  January  2017.   The  grounds  in  support  of   that
    application are those before the First-tier Tribunal and those did  not
    seek to grapple with Judge Simpson's reasons for refusing permission.

 6. I granted permission in this case on the basis that the  Judge  had  no
    jurisdiction to make the Decision and this amounts to an arguable error
    of law.  If a Judge lacks jurisdiction to make  a  decision,  then  the
    decision  is  wrong  in  law  and  should  not  be  allowed  to  stand.
    Accordingly, I granted permission by decision dated 28  March  2017  in
    the following terms (so far as relevant):-
         "[2] This is an appeal which is  affected  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
         decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC).
         In that case, the Upper Tribunal decided that there is no right  of
         appeal in extended family member cases  such  as  this.   As  such,
         there is an arguable error of law disclosed by the Decision because
         the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear and  decide  this  appeal.
         In this case, Sala had been promulgated although not reported prior
         to the Decision which may explain why the Judge did  not  refer  to
         it.  Sala is not mentioned in the refusal of permission to  appeal.
         Although the First-tier Tribunal (and indeed  the  Upper  Tribunal)
         did not have jurisdiction to substantively decide  the  appeal,  it
         retains jurisdiction to  decide  whether  the  appeal  is  a  valid
         one..."

    I then gave directions as follows:-
         "Unless either party files and serves objections in writing  to  be
         received within 14 days from the date when this decision is sent, I
         propose to find an error of law in the Decision on the  basis  that
         the Judge lacked jurisdiction to make it.  I then  propose  to  set
         aside  the  Decision  and  re-make  it  dismissing  the  appeal  as
         invalid."

 7. By letter dated 13 April 2017 I received the  following  response  from
    the Respondent (again so far as relevant):-
         "[2] The Respondent does not oppose the Direction proposed by Upper
         Tribunal Judge Smith dated 28th March 2017 and invite the  Tribunal
         to re-make the Decision dismissing the appeal as invalid."

 8. There has been no response  from  the  Appellant  to  my  decision  and
    directions.  As indicated in my grant of permission, the Judge made the
    Decision after the decision in Sala was promulgated.    The decision in
    that case was promulgated on 19 August 2016.  I do not need to go  into
    the  substance  of  that  decision  in  detail  because  neither  party
    challenges the decision on the basis that it was wrongly  decided.   In
    short, the Upper Tribunal (Mr CMG  Ockelton,  Vice  President  and  UTJ
    Grubb) concluded that in a case such as this involving the  refusal  to
    issue a first residence permit to an extended family member there is no
    right of appeal against that refusal.  In that case, the Tribunal found
    for that reason that there was an error of law  because  there  was  no
    right of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The Tribunal  therefore
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and  substituted  its  own
    decision finding that there was no valid appeal.

 9. As I indicate, neither party challenges the correctness of the decision
    in Sala in this appeal.  For the same reasons as given in Sala, I  find
    that the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision.   I  therefore
    set aside the Decision for that reason.  Since there  is  no  right  of
    appeal to the Tribunal, I have no jurisdiction to decide the appeal.  I
    therefore substitute my own decision finding that there was and  is  no
    valid appeal.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull discloses an  error  of  law
because he made the decision when he had no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
appeal as the appeal was not valid.  I therefore set aside the  decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull and substitute a  decision  that  there  was
and is no valid appeal in this case.


Signed[pic]                         Dated:  15 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
