
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02953/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                              |On 07 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr joseph frimpong-manso jr
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Vidal, counsel instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lal, promulgated on 5 December 2018. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 18 January 2019.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The respondent entered the United  Kingdom  in  February  2010  as  the
    family member of his father who is a Spanish national. He was issued  a
    residence card, valid until 25 October  2015.  His  application  for  a
    permanent residence card  was  refused  and  his  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed in October 2017.

 4. On 20  March  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  remove  the
    respondent from the United Kingdom. He appealed that decision under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 on the basis that
    he was the family member of his father, a Spanish national and entitled
    to permanent residence as well as human rights grounds.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer took instructions as to the scope of the appeal  and
    accepted that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to consider the Regulations
    as  well  as  Article  8  ECHR.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    respondent, his father and the respondent's partner with whom he has  a
    child. The appeal was allowed under  the  2016  Regulations,  with  the
    judge concluding that  the  respondent  was  entitled  to  a  permanent
    residence card as well as Article 8.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge's reasoning was  inadequate
    in relation to the issue of the respondent's dependency on his  father;
    that the judge should have  considered  whether  the  respondent  truly
    needed the support of his father and that the judge erred in concluding
    that the respondent was entitled to a  permanent  residence  card.  The
    Secretary of State nonetheless accepted that the judge was entitled  to
    allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds and did  not  seek  to  challenge
    that conclusion.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge  may  have  materially  erred  regarding  the  assessment  of
    dependency.

The hearing

 8. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds. Referring  to  the  2017  decision  of
    Judge Birk, he asked me to take into consideration  that  she  did  not
    accept that the respondent was dependent upon his father  or  that  the
    property was  rented.  Judge  Lal  made  no  findings  to  support  his
    conclusion that the respondent  was  continuously  dependent  upon  his
    father for a period of five years. The finding of Judge Birk  was  that
    the respondent could not be considered a family member at all.

 9. Mr Tarlow confirmed that there was no challenge to the judge's  Article
    8 findings and that the respondent would be granted  leave  to  remain.
    The sole issue being whether he was entitled to permanent residence.

10. Ms Vidal argued that there was evidence of dependency before the  judge
    in the form of an IS96, the conditions of which  prevented  employment.
    Furthermore, the judge found the appellant and his father  credible  at
    [16]. She drew my attention to [9] of the  decision,  where  the  judge
    noted the findings of the previous judge. The issues before  the  judge
    were narrow and the judge was mindful  of  the  lacunae  noted  in  the
    previous decision. Ms Vidal argued that it was open  to  the  judge  to
    make findings regarding dependency.

11. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the judge materially  erred
    in allowing the appeal on the basis that the respondent was entitled to
    a permanent residence card. That part of his decision is set aside  for
    remaking, with all his findings preserved. There is no challenge to the
    Article 8 decision and that stands. In remaking the decision, I allowed
    the appeal on the basis that the appellant is dependent upon his father
    for his essential needs and thus would be entitled to a residence card.



Decision on error of law

12. The respondent challenged  the  removal  directions  on  both  EEA  and
    Article 8 grounds. His previous appeal against a decision  refusing  to
    issue him with a permanent residence card was dismissed by  Judge  Birk
    in a decision promulgated on 13 November 2017. In short, Judge Birk did
    not accept that the respondent was dependent upon his father because he
    was working with a reasonable  income  and  there  was  an  absence  of
    evidence showing that his father was paying his rent.  Judge  Lal  took
    the decision of Judge Birk as his starting point at [9] but found  that
    reliable evidence regarding the rental property had now  been  produced
    [10] and that the respondent no longer had the right  to  work  and  as
    such succeeded under Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) of  the  2016  Regulations.
    This is a reference to the respondent being a family member of  an  EEA
    national and no more. Indeed, this is the basis on which the  case  was
    argued before the judge. The Secretary of State  is  correct  to  argue
    that there is no support in the body of the decision  for  the  judge's
    conclusion in the notice of decision that the appellant is entitled  to
    a permanent residence card.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  reference  to
    permanent residence was a slip of  the  pen,  given  the  lack  of  any
    reference to the instant appeal  being  based  on  such  a  premise.  I
    therefore substitute a decision allowing the EEA appeal  on  the  basis
    that the respondent has provided reliable evidence to demonstrate  that
    he is entitled to a residence card.

Conclusions


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law in relation to the EEA appeal.

I set aside the EEA decision to be re-made.

I substitute a decision allowing the EEA appeal.

No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason  to  make  such  a
direction.


Signed                                  Date : 01 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided a to make a fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the  following  reason.
The appeal succeeded under Article 8  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
there was no challenge to that decision. The appeal has  also  succeeded  on
EEA grounds before the Upper Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date:  01 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

