
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: EA/02814/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 July 2021                    |On 3 August 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     AK

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr M Ul-Haq, instructed by Dicksons Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who is a Pakistani national with date of  birth  given  as
   25.9.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 20.9.19  (Judge  Raikes),
   allowing her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent,  dated
   31.5.19. However, the appeal was allowed on the alternative  basis  of  a
   derivative right to reside, the judge rejecting the claim to a  right  of
   permanent residence, pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2016,
   as amended (the Regulations). A derivative right of residence  cannot  be
   counted towards the period of time necessary to acquire a permanent right
   of residence.


2. The grounds of application for permission to appeal argue that:


   i. The judge was wrong to conclude that  the  appellant's  continuity  of
      residence was broken three months before the prerequisite  five  years
      as a result of the sponsor's imprisonment for  unlawful  wounding  and
      threats to kill, and his subsequent deportation.  It  is  argued  that
      imprisonment did not stop the clock  for  the  purpose  of  continuous
      residence, but even if it did, it should have been disregarded because
      of the "important reason" for it pursuant  to  article  16(3)  of  the
      Citizen's Directive 2004/38/EC (CD);


  ii. The judge was wrong to conclude that the respondent's  decision/policy
      is not discriminatory under EU law on grounds of nationality/race  and
      or immigration status;


 iii. The judge was wrong to conclude that  the  application  was  one  made
      under regulation 17 and that the  respondent  exercises  a  discretion
      such that the Tribunal's jurisdiction is fettered on appeal;


  iv. The judge was wrong not to consider the appellant's  protected  rights
      with reference to the Charter, relying on the best  interests  of  the
      child principle pursuant to article 24.


3. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  18.3.20,
   the  judge  granting  permission  considering  that  "Whilst  the   judge
   considered whether the appellant was the family  member  of  a  qualified
   person for  the  requisite  period  and  whether  she  thereafter  had  a
   derivative right of residence (which is not residence in accordance  with
   the EEA Regulations for the purpose of acquiring permanent residence), he
   or she does not appear to have considered whether  the  appellant  was  a
   family member with retained rights (in  which  capacity  residence  could
   contribute to the acquisition of permanent residence rights)."


4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


5. The relevant background is that of the appellant's  five  children,  four
   are Italian nationals like their father. The fifth  child  is  a  British
   national who, of course, needs no permission to reside  in  the  UK.  The
   children are now aged between 7 and 17 years of age. The Italian children
   are not appellants in their own right but dependants on  the  appellant's
   application and subsequent appeal.  The  children  are  all  enrolled  at
   school in the UK.  In  December  2003,  the  appellant  and  the  Italian
   children were all issued with EEA Residence Cards as,  respectively,  the
   spouse and children of their EEA national sponsoring husband/father.  The
   appellant last entered the UK in  July  2013  and  for  the  purposes  of
   permanent residence, the requisite five-year period expired in July 2018.
   It is not contested that the appellant and to some  degree  the  children
   were all victims of serious and sustained domestic violence. Prior to the
   end of the five-year period, on 10.4.18, the  sponsor  was  convicted  of
   violent crimes and sentenced to a term of immediate imprisonment  and  on
   20.9.18 he was deported to Italy.


6. The retained right of residence referred to in the  grant  of  permission
   can  lead  to  a  right  of   permanent   residence   under   Regulations
   15(1)(f)(ii), for a person who "was, at the end of the period,  a  family
   member who has retained the right of residence." A family member who  has
   retained the right of residence is defined in Regulation 10 and must meet
   one of the conditions there set out. Amongst those conditions, Regulation
   10(4) provides for a person who is the parent with actual  custody  of  a
   child who satisfies the condition in paragraph (3).  This  would  require
   the child to be the direct descendant of a qualified  person  or  an  EEA
   national with a right of permanent  residence  who  has  either  died  or
   ceased to be a qualified person on ceasing to reside in the UK, where the
   child was attending an educational course in the  UK  immediately  before
   the death or cessation of qualification, and continues to attend  such  a
   course. Contrary to the  view  of  the  judge  granting  permission,  the
   appellant cannot avail herself of this provision, as Mr Ul-Haq  conceded,
   as the sponsor did not acquire a permanent right of residence  before  he
   was imprisoned. If he does not have a permanent right  of  residene,  the
   appellant cannot have a retained right of residence.


7. In submissions, the grounds set out above were consolidated by Mr  Ul-Haq
   into two essential grounds. In essence, the first is that the appellant's
   argument is that the Regulations do not properly transpose  the  CD.  The
   second is that the Regulations discriminate against the appellant in that
   the third-country  member  does  not  have  the  same  safeguard  against
   domestic violence as the partner of a British citizen under the  domestic
   violence concession. Mr Tan's submission is that  it  is  beyond  dispute
   that continuity of residence is broken by imprisonment  and  furthermore,
   detention during a  sentence  of  imprisonment  cannot  come  within  the
   definition of legal residence in Article 16 for the purpose  establishing
   a right to permanent residence for a EEA citizen or  their  third-country
   family member.


8. For the reasons set out below, I entirely reject both arguments  advanced
   at some length by Mr Ul-Haq. In  summary,  the  arguments  depend  on  an
   interpretation of the CD  which,  in  my  view  cannot  be  sustained  or
   justified.


9. As established in MG (Portugal) EU:C 2014.9, and case  378/12  Onuekuiere
   ECU EC 2.2 01413, imprisonment breaks continuity  of  residence.  Mr  Ul-
   Haq's argument to the contrary is unsustainable.


10. Mr Ul-Haq accepted that he had to establish that  the  appellant  had  a
   right of residence, either dependent on the sponsor, or in her own right,
   over the 3 month gap between her partner's imprisonment and  the  end  of
   the five-year period of lawful residence necessary to establish  a  right
   of permanent residence.


11. Mr Ul-Haq took me carefully through the relevant  articles  of  the  CD,
   evidently in the same way as the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  taken
   through them. However, I do  not  accept  that  CD  can  be  purposefully
   interpreted to encompass the appellant's circumstances. Article 13 refers
   to the protection of the rights of family members in the event of  death,
   divorce,  annulment  of  marriage,  or  termination   of   a   registered
   partnership. For the reasons stated above the sponsor cannot comply  with
   the requirement of residence for a continuous period of five years.


12. Mr Ul-Haq relied particularly on the provision  in  Article  16(3)  that
   continuity of residence shall not be affected by temporary  absences  for
   'important reasons' such as pregnancy and  childbirth,  serious  illness,
   study or vocational training, or a posting in another Member State  or  a
   third country. It was submitted that this provision should be interpreted
   to include the victims of domestic violence and prevent the 'stopping  of
   the clock' where the perpetrator is sentenced  to  imprisonment.  It  was
   argued that rejecting such an interpretation would  compel  a  victim  to
   remain with the abuser until she had completed  the  necessary  five-year
   period. I do  not  accept  that  Article  16(3)  can  be  interpreted  as
   suggested; it would require importing entirely different wording and  for
   a different purpose. Article 16(3)  is  intended  to  provide  protection
   where  there  are   'temporary   absences'   for   'important   reasons.'
   Imprisonment is not a temporary absence from the host Member State and  I
   cannot see that the appellant's circumstances can be  stretched  to  come
   within the classification of important reasons such as those set  out  in
   Article 16(3). The 'important  reasons'  provision  was  transposed  into
   Regulation 3. Mr Ul-Haq was effectively seeking to  expand  the  CD  into
   contexts not even contemplated  in  the  CD.    In  the  premises,  I  am
   satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was correct to consider  the
   sponsor's  imprisonment  as  breaking  both  his  and   the   appellant's
   continuity of residence for the purpose of the Regulations. I also do not
   accept the argument that the Regulations have  not  correctly  transposed
   the CD; Mr Ul-Haq's argument would require a wholesale re-writing of  the
   CD. There has been no failure of transposition.


13. The alternative  argument,  that  the  appellant  retained  a  right  of
   residence in her own right, independently of the sponsor, also fails.  Mr
   Ul-Haq argued that if the departure of the Union Citizen did  not  affect
   the right of the third-country family member, then  incarceration  should
   not affect that right, as, in Mr Ul-Haq's submission, it would  otherwise
   run counter to the purpose of the CD. However, I am  satisfied  that  the
   sponsor's imprisonment cannot properly be brought within Article  12(3)'s
   reference to death or departure of the Union Citizen from the host Member
   State. Once again, the loss of a right of residence  referred  to  cannot
   confer a right the appellant did not have at the point of  the  break  in
   continuity of the sponsor's own period of residence. In this argument,  I
   have not addressed Mr Tan's argument that there was in fact  no  evidence
   that the sponsor's residence in the UK was qualifying residence, but have
   taken Mr Ul-Haq's argument at its highest. The  appellant's  argument  is
   one  that  is  impossible  to  bring  within  the  CD  by  any   sensible
   interpretation. In consequence  I  reject  both  grounds,  rejecting  the
   argument that the Regulations did not properly transpose the CD  and  the
   argument that the  Regulations  or  the  actions  of  the  respondent  in
   refusing the application improperly discriminate against her.


14. The second ground alleging discrimination was also taken at  the  First-
   tier Tribunal and adequately dealt with by the judge.  Mr  Ul-Haq  argued
   that without interpreting the CD in the way he contended for would be  to
   create a whole category of persons who are not safeguarded  in  the  same
   way as the victims of domestic violence perpetrated by a British citizen,
   as opposed to a Union Citizen. However, the argument  fails  because  the
   Union Citizen,  the  sponsor,  did  not  acquire  a  right  of  permanent
   residence, neither could it be said that the appellant was on the path to
   settlement as is the case for those falling within the concession, which,
   it is clear from  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  Regina  (FA)  v
   Secretary of State [2021] EWCA Civ 59, provided only a temporary  respite
   for those on a pathway to settlement. There is no  proper  comparison  or
   equivalence between the appellant's circumstances and those for whom  the
   DV concession was intended. It cannot be argued that the appellant was on
   a pathway to settlement and to argue that she would have been entitled to
   permanent residence is mere speculation. I am satisfied that there is  no
   gender/sex, ethnic, nationality, or other discrimination as  argued  for.
   Article  13(2(c),  which  was  transposed  into   Regulation   10(5)(iv),
   including   the   important   reference   to   "particularly    difficult
   circumstances, such as having been a victim of  domestic  violence  while
   the marriage or registered partnership  was  subsisting."  However,  once
   again, as the sponsor did not have a right of  permanent  residence,  the
   appellant had no right to be retained in the circumstances of  being  the
   victim of domestic violence. This is not a case where she lost  something
   that she  had  acquired.  As  a  third-country  national,  her  continued
   residence depended entirely on the sponsor's right to remain,  which  was
   lost.


15. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.


      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 July 2021




Anonymity Direction


I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:


      "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.  This  direction
      applies to, amongst others, both the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 July 2021


