
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/02945/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14th November 2018                   | On 20th December 2018              |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               Khatera Alkozai
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes, promulgated on 20th April 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham  on  6th  April  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the  Appellant  sought
    to reapply for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and he was  born  on
    7th June 1991.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.  The essence  of  the  difficulty  in  this  appeal
    arises from exactly which decision is in issue here.  This  is  because
    there were two decisions.  First there was a decision  headed  "reasons
    for refusal letter" and this shows that its deemed date of delivery was
    8th March 2016.   Second,  there  was  a  decision  headed  "notice  of
    immigration decision" and its deemed date of  delivery  was  8th  March
    2017.  The reality, however, is that  those  decisions  are  dated  6th
    March 2017.  If this is the case, then the  former  decision,  that  in
    which the deemed date is 8th March 2016, could not have  been  correct,
    in circumstances where the actual date of the decision  was  6th  March
    2017.

 3. The decision by Judge Parkes makes it clear that reference is made  (at
    paragraph 1) to the fact that his  Tribunal  papers  referred  to  "the
    notice of immigration decision and the refusal  letter  are  dated  8th
    March 2017 ...".  This would appear to suggest that both decisions were
    before the judge at the time of the appeal hearing.

Submissions

 4. In his submissions before me, Mr Jafferji stated that it was not  clear
    whether both decisions were before  the  judge.   This  is  because  in
    rejecting the  Appellant's  appeal,  the  fundamental  question  to  be
    resolved was whether the Appellant had actually been  in  this  country
    lawfully resident, and whether  he  had  contrived  to  circumvent  the
    immigration provisions.  The first decision, where the deemed  date  of
    service was 8th March 2016, made  no  reference  whatsoever  to  these
    issues.  The second decision, where the deemed date of service was  8th
    March 2017, did do so.  More importantly, the  Appellant  had  actually
    responded to the Secretary of State's questionnaire by  giving  answers
    to sixteen questions, which demonstrated the history of the couple  and
    their time together, and this is expressly referred to in  the  "notice
    of immigration decision in the fourth  and  fifth  paragraphs  of  that
    decision.  It is not referred to at all in  the  "reasons  for  refusal
    letter".  Similarly, the "notice of immigration decision" also goes  on
    to recognise that, "having carefully considered the evidence  provided,
    it is accepted that you resided with your British  citizen  Sponsor  in
    the EEA host country".  In the next paragraph, however, it goes  on  to
    then say that

         "Having considered all of the evidence and information provided  in
         support of your application, and applying the civil standard of the
         balance of probabilities, it is accepted that you and your  British
         citizen Sponsor residence in the EEA  host  country  was  genuine".
         (See page 2 of 6).

    That is not recognised at all in the "reasons for refusal letter".

 5. It is against this background, submitted Mr Jafferji, that the decision
    of the judge needs to be considered because what is stated at paragraph
    22 was that

         "So far as the refusal letter is  concerned  the  reference  to  it
         being accepted that the residence was genuine that  was  clearly  a
         typing error.  These can happen innocently and unhealthily and  was
         demonstrated by the need for Mr Ahmed [appearing on behalf  of  the
         Appellant] to correct identical errors in the witness statements of
         the Appellant and the Sponsor.  Given the overall contents  of  the
         refusal letter and associate documentation and the  fact  that  the
         appeal was resisted there  can  be  no  real  claim  for  confusion
         regarding what was meant and  nothing  turns  on  the  point.   The
         Appellant cannot show any prejudice for the error  or  reliance  on
         it............".

 6. Mr Jafferji submitted that this cannot be right because the application
    to treat the recognition of there being lawful residence  as  an  error
    was an application made by the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  before
    the judge, and it was accepted by the judge, without any evidence being
    provided for it.  The fact that such an application was made, may  well
    have arisen from there being  in  the  court  bundles  a  copy  of  the
    "reasons for refusal letter", because otherwise it would not have  been
    made.  This is because the "notice of immigration  decision"  expressly
    recognised that the Appellant had been in the EEA host country residing
    in a genuine manner, and that had also resided with his British citizen
    Sponsor in the EEA host country in a lawful manner.

 7. Yet, the outstanding issue still to be made, namely, as to whether  the
    Appellant had sought to circumvent the Immigration Rules,  and  nowhere
    in  the  immigration  decision  by  Judge  Parkes  was  this   question
    considered, but it was the right question if  one  has  regard  to  the
    "notice of immigration decision" (where the deemed date of service  was
    8th March 2017), and if it was  not  addressed  by  Judge  Parkes,  one
    explanation for this could be that he did in fact only have before  him
    the "notice of immigration decision".  Whatever  is  the  position,  Mr
    Jafferji submitted, that the  confusion  was  one  that  could  not  be
    resolved except  by  returning  this  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined again afresh.

 8. For her part, Miss Aboni submitted that she would have  to  agree  with
    this.  She certainly did have in her own documentation a  reference  to
    both the "notice of immigration  decision"  and  to  the  "reasons  for
    refusal letter", both of which  were  dated  6th  March  2017  (but  in
    respect of the latter it had curiously been stated that the deemed date
    of service was 8th March 2016, which could plainly not  have  been  the
    case).  She agreed that the matter needed to be remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for there to be a  proper  consideration  of  these
    issues.

Error of Law

 9. Given the agreement between the parties before me, I find that there is
    an error of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA  2007)  such  that  this
    decision should be set aside.   The  relevant  letter  is  plainly  the
    "notice of immigration decision" which was decided on 6th  March  2017,
    with the deemed date of service 8th March 2017, and  not  the  "reasons
    for refusal letter".

10. In this relevant letter, it is accepted that the Appellant did  respond
    to the questionnaire and it is accepted that he had  resided  with  his
    British citizen Sponsor in the EEA host country and the residence was a
    genuine one.

11. The decision to refuse has been considered in  that  context,  together
    with the question as to whether there had been an attempt to circumvent
    the Immigration Rules.





Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This  appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than  Judge  Parkes  pursuant  to  practice
    statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions.

13. No anonymity direction is made.

14. The appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018

