
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02866/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at a remote hearing via Skype  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2021                     |On 29 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     FD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Shaw, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant,
FD.


Introduction

       1. This is a 're-making' decision following a  resumed  hearing.   In
          an 'error of law' decision dated 28 January 2020,  Upper  Tribunal
          ('UT') Judge  Coker  gave  reasons  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          ('FTT') made an error of law in allowing FD's appeal  pursuant  to
          the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ('the
          EEA  Regulations'),  such  that  the  decision  must  be   remade.
          Although the SSHD appealed against this decision to the UT, FD  is
          now once again the appellant and I shall refer to her as such.


       2. The  appellant,  a  dual  citizen  of  Portugal  and  Brazil,  and
          therefore an EEA citizen, appealed against  a  decision  dated  29
          May 2019, in which the SSHD refused to admit  her  (when  she  was
          returning to the UK after a visit to  Portugal)  and  revoked  her
          registration certificate on grounds of public  policy  ('the  2019
          decision').  This was  based  upon  the  appellant  having  become
          subject to a Slavery and Trafficking  Risk  Order  ('STRO')  valid
          from 1 November 2018 to 31 October  2020.   This  was  granted  by
          Norfolk Magistrates Court  while  the  police  carried  out  their
          investigations.  The SSHD  contended  that  the  appellant  was  a
          person  "concerned  with  the  trafficking  and  exploitation   of
          others" and that this demonstrated  "a  present  and  sufficiently
          serious  threat"  to  the  United  Kingdom  ('UK')  supportive  of
          "preventative grounds".

Background

       3. The appellant was issued with an EEA registration  certificate  on
          9 October 2017 when she was working as a cleaner  at  a  gym.   At
          the time she was residing with her British  citizen  husband,  who
          she married in 2016, and her son,  a  Brazilian  citizen,  from  a
          previous relationship.  I shall refer to the  appellant's  husband
          as H.  On 1 November 2018 the appellant was issued with a STRO  at
          Norwich Magistrates Court, valid  until  31  October  2020.   This
          prohibited  the  appellant  from,   inter   alia:   arranging   or
          facilitating transport, travel,  work  or  accommodation  for  any
          persons other than family members; possessing identity  or  travel
          documentation for anyone other than herself  or  immediate  family
          members;  advertising  for,   recruiting   or   employing   staff;
          advertising for services on 'vivastreet'  or  'adultwork'  or  any
          similar website;  using a mobile device in particular  ways.   The
          STRO was upheld by Norwich Crown Court on 22 February 2019.


       4. Following this, the appellant returned to Portugal  to  visit  her
          elderly parents but was refused re-entry  to  the  UK  on  29  May
          2019, for reasons set out in the SSHD's decision of that date,  as
          summarised above.  The appellant was granted bail and admitted  on
          temporary admission with reporting restrictions.  She  voluntarily
          departed to Portugal on 29 June  2019.   It  is  noted  in  a  'HO
          minute sheet' dated 25 June 2019 that the appellant's  mother  was
          very ill at the time and the appellant  wished  to  visit  her  in
          Portugal.

       5. The appellant was charged with human trafficking  and  controlling
          prostitution for gain for a period  covering  1  May  2017  to  31
          August 2018.  Her first appearance following charge  was  at  York
          Magistrates Court on 13 August 2020.  The exact date that she  was
          charged is not known but it is undisputed that this took place  in
          around the summer of 2020.

Hearing

       6. In accordance with directions I gave at a hearing  on  2  December
          2020 adjourning the matter,  both  parties  submitted  and  relied
          upon updated bundles of evidence and skeleton arguments.


       7. At the beginning of  the  hearing  the  representatives  confirmed
          that the applicable law was not in dispute.   In  particular,  the
          question for me to determine is whether the SSHD was  entitled  to
          rely upon the 2019 decision refusing to admit the appellant as  an
          EEA   citizen   pursuant   to   the   EEA    Regulations.     Both
          representatives agreed that the appellant could give her  evidence
          via video link from Portugal.

       8. Ms Shaw requested an  anonymity  order  on  the  basis  that  this
          decision might be a 'reported decision' and the  appellant  has  a
          criminal  trial  pending.   I  declined  to  make   an   anonymity
          direction at the hearing.  Upon reflection, I  have  decided  that
          an  anonymity  direction  is  appropriate  because  Ms  Shaw   has
          submitted  that  the  appellant  herself  may  be  a   victim   of
          trafficking (see [31] below).  In addition, out  of  an  abundance
          of caution anonymity may also serve to prevent  anything  that  is
          said in this decision, which  will  be  publicly  available,  from
          inadvertently prejudicing the pending criminal proceedings.   This
          can be reviewed upon completion of the criminal trial.

       9. The appellant confirmed the truth of her witness  statement  dated
          16 December 2020.  She accepted that she has worked as  an  escort
          alongside other women, but denied that she  was  involved  in  any
          form of  trafficking  of  others.   She  confirmed  that  she  had
          pleaded not guilty and intended to maintain her innocence  at  her
          criminal trial due to begin in the UK in November 2021.

      10. H confirmed the truth of his witness statement dated  16  December
          2020.  He described the challenges that he had faced  over  recent
          years and more recently, and the  assistance  that  the  appellant
          has given him over this time.


      11. Mr Bates relied upon the  respondent's  Guidance  on  Slavery  and
          Trafficking Prevention Orders and  Slavery  and  Trafficking  Risk
          Orders under Part 2 of the Modern Slavery Act  2015,  dated  April
          2017 ('the STRO guidance') in support of his  submission  that  at
          both the date of decision and the date of the  hearing,  the  2019
          decision was open to the SSHD.   Ms Shaw relied upon her  detailed
          skeleton argument and invited me to find that  the  appeal  should
          be allowed.  I address  the  submissions  in  more  detail  below.
          After hearing from the representatives,  I  reserved  my  decision
          which I now provide with reasons.

Legal framework

      12. The applicable law, set out in the  EEA  Regulations,  was  not  a
          matter of dispute between the parties.  The appellant  is  an  EEA
          national and the lawfulness of the 2019  decision  to  refuse  her
          admission  and  revoke  her  registration  certificate  is  to  be
          determined by reference to the EEA Regulations.  Regulation  11(1)
          provides that an EEA national must be admitted to the  UK  subject
          to regulation 23(1), which provides that  a  refusal  to  admit  a
          person may be justified on grounds of public policy in  accordance
          with regulation 27.   Regulation  27  sets  out  various  criteria
          which apply to  decisions  taken  on  grounds  of  public  policy,
          public security and public health, including at ss (5):


                 "The public policy and public security requirements of  the
                 United  Kingdom  include   restricting   rights   otherwise
                 conferred by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the
                 fundamental interests of  society,  and  where  a  relevant
                 decision is taken on grounds of  public  policy  or  public
                 security it must also  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
                 following principles-
                 (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle   of
                 proportionality;
                 (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;
                 (c) the personal conduct of the  person  must  represent  a
                 genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
                 one of the fundamental interests of  society,  taking  into
                 account past conduct of the person and that the threat does
                 not need to be imminent;
                 (d) matters isolated from the particulars of  the  case  or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;
                 (e) a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                 themselves justify the decision;
                 (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
                 in the absence of a previous criminal conviction,  provided
                 the grounds are specific to the person."


      13. When read together, regulations 11,  23  and  27  thus  require  a
          proportionality  exercise,  i.e.  an  assessment  of  whether  the
          adverse impact to an EEA citizen is  proportionate  when  compared
          with the adverse impact to the  public  interest  that  her  being
          admitted and / or remaining in the UK would have  with  regard  to
          public policy, public security and public  health.   I  must  also
          have regard to the considerations set out in  Schedule  1  of  the
          EEA Regulations, and I have done so.

      14. The appellant has a  right  of  appeal  against  the  decision  to
          refuse  to  admit  her.   By  virtue  of  regulation  36(10),  the
          provisions in the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
          ('the 2002 Act') referred to in Schedule 2 to the EEA  Regulations
          have effect in any appeal under the EEA Regulations.   This  means
          that an appeal under the EEA Regulations  is  treated  as  "if  it
          were" an appeal against a decision under  s.  82(1)  of  the  2002
          Act.  S. 85(4) of the 2002 Act states that  "on  an  appeal  under
          section   82(1)...against   a   decision    the    Tribunal    may
          consider...any matter which it thinks relevant  to  the  substance
          of the decision, including...a matter arising after  the  date  of
          the decision."

      15. The parties agreed that I must consider all  matters  relevant  to
          the substance of  the  2019  decision  including  matters  arising
          after the date of the  decision.   Mr  Bates  specifically  agreed
          that in assessing the proportionality  of  the  decision  I  could
          take into account the  factual  matrix  since  the  2019  decision
          including the decision to prosecute and the fact  of  the  pending
          trial in November 2021.  He invited  me  to  find  that  the  2019
          decision was proportionate at the time it was made and as  at  the
          date of hearing.  Mr Bates also agreed that this is not a case  in
          which the appellant sought to raise any new matter.

Findings of fact

      16. I am satisfied that both the appellant and H gave honest  evidence
          that has been consistent  and  straightforward  over  time.   They
          have provided evidence, which I  accept,  that  demonstrates  that
          they married in 2016 and have  been  living  together  since  this
          time, albeit the appellant has also  spent  considerable  time  in
          Portugal looking after her parents.  H has been working in a well-
          paid job as an engineer for a lengthy period.   H  was  very  open
          and emotional about the difficulties he has faced over  and  above
          matters  relevant   to   the   appellant's   STRO   and   criminal
          proceedings.  He was measured and did not  exaggerate  the  extent
          of his difficulties, but it is clear that he  has  been  suffering
          mentally, emotionally  and  physically  for  many  years  and  has
          depended upon the support provided by the appellant.   As  he  put
          it: "she helped me a massive amount.  I would not be here  without
          her."  These difficulties include the suicide of his  first  wife,
          juggling  his  fragile  emotional  health  with  a  full-time  and
          demanding job and caring for his elderly parents.


      17. Mr Bates  invited  me  to  find  that  there  was  little  medical
          evidence to support the claims of the appellant and  H.   However,
          significantly, the witnesses' evidence was  consistent  with  each
          other not just before me but over time.   Although  Mr  Bates  was
          correct to point out  that  the  appellant  did  not  provide  any
          documentary  evidence  of  her  caring  responsibilities,   I   am
          prepared to accept her evidence that she returned to  Portugal  to
          care for her parents  and  has  been  supportive  of  her  husband
          during  his  own  health  concerns.   This  is  supported  by  the
          appellant's own evidence together with H's evidence.  I  therefore
          accept that the appellant's mother  has  Alzheimer's  disease.   I
          accept that the appellant has spent time between Portugal and  the
          UK for reasons relating  to  caring  responsibilities  toward  her
          parents, at a time when she was entitled to remain in the  UK  (on
          bail) pending the outcome of these proceedings. I entirely  accept
          the  straightforward  account   that   both   witnesses   provided
          regarding  the  caring  responsibilities  they  have  with   their
          respective parents and that they wish  to  spend  more  time  with
          each other but have been unable to do so for reasons  relating  to
          this, together with  the  pandemic.   Prior  to  the  pandemic,  H
          joined  the  appellant  in  Portugal  at  times  when   his   work
          commitments enabled him to do so.


      18. I note the appellant refused to engage with the opportunity of  an
          interview offered by the SSHD  on  29  May  2019  but  accept  her
          evidence that this was upon the advice of her criminal  solicitors
          at the time.   However  since  the  imposition  of  the  STRO  the
          appellant  has  been  entirely  compliant  with  the  restrictions
          imposed by the STRO, bail conditions and by  the  SSHD.   She  has
          demonstrated respect for the criminal  process,  immigration  laws
          and the immigration proceedings.   Other  than  the  matters  that
          gave rise to the STRO and the  charge  against  her  there  is  no
          evidence before me to indicate that the appellant is dishonest  or
          untrustworthy.  She has demonstrated a  clear  commitment  to  her
          family life with her husband and son in the UK and her  mother  in
          Portugal.

Assessment

      19. I must first consider whether  the  appellant's  personal  conduct
          represents a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
          affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society,  in  the
          context of preventative grounds relied  upon  by  the  SSHD.   The
          prevention of trafficking and  modern  slavery  is  undoubtedly  a
          fundamental  interest  of  society.   Furthermore,  as  Mr   Bates
          submitted, the public interest factors at  paragraphs  7(a),  (c),
          (g) and  (i)  of  Schedule  1  to  the  EEA  Regulations  are  all
          relevant.


      20. It is clear from s. 23(2) of the Modern  Slavery  Act  2015  ('the
          2015 Act') that a STRO may only be made if the court is  satisfied
          that the person has acted in a way which means that:

                 "(a) there is a risk  that  the  defendant  will  commit  a
                 slavery or human trafficking offence, and
                 (b) it is necessary to make the order for  the  purpose  of
                 protecting persons generally, or particular  persons,  from
                 the physical or psychological harm which would be likely to
                 occur if the defendant committed such an offence."

      21. The court was clearly satisfied that the relevant  test  was  met,
          and this was upheld upon appeal.  It follows from the fact that  a
          court imposed a STRO that the SSHD was entitled  to  consider  the
          appellant as posing a potentially sufficiently serious threat  for
          the purposes of regulation 27.  As noted within the STRO  guidance
          at [2.3.7], "STROs  enable  action  to  be  taken  where  this  is
          necessary to prevent serious harm to  the  public  notwithstanding
          the absence of conviction".  In this  regard  I  note  the  SSHD's
          guidance on  public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health
          decisions, dated 31 December 2020  ('the  EEA  guidance')  to  the
          effect that pending prosecutions generally  constitute  a  barrier
          to removal and by analogy  a  barrier  to  refusing  admission  in
          respect of a person like this appellant, who was residing  in  the
          UK pursuant to a registration certificate.  However,  as  the  EEA
          guidance makes plain "in  some  cases  there  will  be  sufficient
          evidence or other  prior  conduct,  to  justify  taking  a  public
          policy or public security decision before the  conclusion  of  any
          outstanding criminal proceedings".  In my judgment the  imposition
          of the STRO meant that this was  a  case  with  the  potential  to
          justify taking a public policy decision prior  to  the  conclusion
          of criminal proceedings, subject  to  the  threat  posed  in  this
          particular case  being  "genuine  and  present".   This  therefore
          needs to be explored further.

      22. Mr Bates submitted that STROs are intended as an  additional  tool
          available to law enforcement agencies and  are  not  a  substitute
          for prosecution.  He argued that by analogy the refusal  of  entry
          of a non-settled resident was a further additional tool  available
          to the SSHD.   That may well be so, but it was only  available  as
          an additional tool in relation to an EEA citizen in this  context,
          where  a  decision  to  refuse  entry  is  consistent   with   the
          principles set out at regulation 27(5) including:

           - the principle of proportionality;
           - the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious  threat  taking  into  account
             past conduct, albeit the threat need not be imminent;
           - the decision may be taken on preventative grounds.

      23. In my judgment, the appellant's risk of  engaging  in  trafficking
          or  modern  slavery  or  any  related  activity  contrary  to  the
          fundamental interests of society has been  (since  the  imposition
          of  the  STRO),  and  remains  capable  of  being,  managed  by  a
          combination of factors, such that the risk of any threat  is  very
          low and cannot be said to be "genuine and  present".   That  is  a
          decision I reach in relation to the circumstances appertaining  at
          the time of the 2019 decision and at  the  date  of  hearing.   In
          particular:

             i) The terms of the STRO  itself  forbade  the  appellant  from
                getting involved in specific types of conduct for a two-year
                period in comprehensive and stringent terms  (as  summarised
                above), with breach being  a  criminal  offence.   There  is
                nothing to indicate anything other than full compliance with
                the terms of the STRO on the part of the appellant.  By  the
                time of the 2019 decision, the  appellant  had  demonstrated
                full compliance with the STRO over the course of some  seven
                months.  Although the STRO was imposed because the court was
                sure that it was necessary, the terms of the  STRO  achieved
                the aim sought, such that the serious threat posed  by  this
                appellant could no longer be said to be genuine and  present
                at the time of the 2019 decision, and it was  not  necessary
                to  refuse  to  admit  her  or   revoke   her   registration
                certificate on preventative grounds at that stage.  I do not
                accept that in the particular circumstances of this case, in
                which the appellant demonstrated  complete  compliance  with
                the terms of the STRO, that public  policy  or  preventative
                grounds required the SSHD to employ the additional  tool  of
                refusing  to  admit   the   appellant   and   revoking   her
                registration certificate.


            ii) Matters arising after the 2019 decision are relevant to  the
                substance of the decision because they shed  light  upon  my
                assessment at the time and further demonstrate that that the
                appellant did not pose a genuine and present serious  threat
                to the safety of others or the public interest.

               a) The appellant continued to fully comply with the terms of
                  the STRO.
               b) I note that there is specific power to renew  a  STRO  in
                  s.27 of the 2015 Act, but the appellant's  STRO  was  not
                  renewed upon its expiry on 31 October 2020.   This  tends
                  to indicate  that  it  was  considered  that  there  were
                  sufficient measures in place to  manage  the  appellant's
                  risk  pending  her  trial.   Indeed,  by  that  time  the
                  appellant had been charged with a  criminal  offence  and
                  was subject to court bail conditions.
               c) The appellant has fully complied with the bail conditions
                  imposed by the criminal court.  I note that the appellant
                  has been temporarily admitted to the UK on bail to attend
                  criminal and immigration proceedings and has  voluntarily
                  departed to Portugal.
               d) The appellant has clearly been aware since  the  charging
                  decision was made in the summer of 2020 that  she  awaits
                  an imminent criminal trial and is under the glaze of  not
                  just the immigration authorities but also law enforcement
                  agencies.  There is no evidence  before  me  to  indicate
                  that she has been anything other than entirely  compliant
                  since the imposition of the STRO and is likely to  remain
                  compliant.
               e) The appellant has  been  residing  and  can  continue  to
                  reside with her husband and son in the UK at a known  and
                  settled address.  H has stable employment in  the  UK  to
                  support both himself and the appellant.

      24. I am therefore satisfied that any risk posed by the  appellant  as
          demonstrated by the imposition of the STRO  and  the  decision  to
          prosecute was  and  can  be  effectively  managed  such  that  the
          prospects of  the  appellant  actually  posing  a  threat  to  the
          fundamental interests of society during this period are low.


      25. Even if I am wrong as to the nature and the extent of  the  threat
          posed by the appellant, I am satisfied that a decision based  upon
          preventative grounds in all the circumstances  of  this  case  was
          disproportionate at the time of the 2019 decision and remains  so,
          for a combination of reasons.  In addition to the low  risk  level
          of the threat because it was  being  effectively  managed  by  the
          terms of the STRO, there are  further  relevant  factors  in  this
          case.

      26. First, the  appellant  has  clearly  faced  challenging  times  in
          looking after her parents in Portugal.  Her father died last  year
          and her mother remains ill.  She has  had  to  balance  this  with
          supporting her husband, who has faced his  own  difficult  medical
          and family concerns in  the  last  few  years.   Their  respective
          priorities and attention are firmly directed in favour  of  caring
          for their  parents  and  in  supporting  one  another  during  the
          pandemic, albeit by necessity, from a distance.

      27. Second, although family life  could  be  enjoyed  in  Portugal  in
          principle, this would not be reasonable or  proportionate  at  the
          date of the 2019 decision or now.  H carefully explained  that  he
          has significant commitments in the UK including his  long-standing
          employment and his parents.  His employment  involves  managing  a
          team using specialist machinery and I  accept  his  evidence  that
          this specialist job would not be available  to  him  in  Portugal.
          His elderly parents have become increasingly dependent  upon  him,
          which has become even more stark during the pandemic.  It is  also
          clear that H has struggled with his mental health since his  first
          wife died and he continues to  find  life  very  difficult  for  a
          combination of reasons.  To  his  credit,  he  has  been  able  to
          continue to work hard  at  his  job  during  this  period.   I  am
          satisfied that there are significant obstacles which  prevent  H's
          relocation to Portugal.


      28. Third, Mr Bates accepted that the appellant will be  permitted  to
          re-enter the UK for the purposes of preparing for  her  trial  and
          attending the trial itself.  The trial is only a few  months  away
          in November 2021.  The outcome of the trial  is  likely  to  be  a
          significant factor  in  any  decision  regarding  the  appellant's
          immigration status, and the matter  will  inevitably  have  to  be
          reconsidered in more depth after the trial.   The  outcome  of  my
          decision will accordingly have a relatively limited impact  for  a
          relatively short period of a few months.

      29. While I acknowledge the seriousness of the imposition of the  STRO
          and  the  prosecution  faced  by  the  appellant,  and  that  this
          constitutes a threat to  fundamental  interests  of  society,  the
          risk of harm posed  by  the  appellant  has  been  low  since  the
          imposition of the STRO.  The need to prevent  that  harm  in  this
          case is outweighed by the strength of the family life between  the
          appellant  and  H  in  circumstances  wherein  there  are  serious
          obstacles to H relocating to  Portugal.   Consequently,  the  2019
          decision was disproportionate, and remain so.


      30. Mr Bates raised the concern  that  the  appellant  was  granted  a
          registration certificate based upon her then lawful employment  as
          a cleaner but she subsequently undertook unlawful employment as  a
          sex worker, which meant  that  she  was  no  longer  "a  qualified
          person".  However, it is not  unlawful  to  pay  for  sex  if  the
          person has not been  forced  into  sex  work.   Mr  Bates  further
          submitted that the appellant would not be a qualified  person  now
          because  of  her  caring  responsibilities   in   Portugal.    The
          situation at present is hugely complicated by the pandemic, and  a
          degree of  flexibility  is  required.   In  any  event,  the  2019
          decision did not cite the appellant's employment or lack  thereof,
          as a reason justifying the decision.  This was solely  based  upon
          public  policy  /  preventative  grounds,  which  I  have  already
          addressed.


      31.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  I  do  not  consider  it  to  be
          appropriate   to   engage   in   speculation   as    to    whether
          (notwithstanding the appellant's clear evidence  to  the  contrary
          in her witness statement), she was trafficked or  forced  to  work
          as a sex worker in the UK.  Ms Shaw made  detailed  submission  on
          this issue within her skeleton argument and  invited  me  to  find
          that the appellant's denial that she was trafficked or  forced  to
          work as a sex worker is unreliable.  It is not necessary  to  make
          findings on this issue in the light of the other findings  I  have
          made.  I note s. 45  of  the  2015  Act  provides  a  defence  for
          victims of trafficking who commit an offence.  That  is  a  matter
          that may be explored in more  detail  during  the  course  of  the
          criminal proceedings, and in my view  it  is  both  premature  and
          unnecessary to enter into  any  analysis  of  the  issue  at  this
          stage.

Decision

      32.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  under   the
          Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.


Signed:  UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
19 March 2021

