
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number
EA/02389/2016

                                               EA/02391/2016

                                               EA/02393/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 14th February 2018                                                  On
11th May 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              MD AFZALUR RAHMAN
                               MAHMUDA FAHMIN
                              MOHAMMED IBTEHAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr M Aslam (Counsel, instructed by PGA
Solicitors LLP (Mile End Road)
For the Respondent:       Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is the appeal of the Appellants. They had applied for residence
   cards as the extended family members (EFMs) of an EEA national exercising
   treaty rights in the UK. That application was made under the EEA
   Regulations 2006. The appeal was first heard by Judge Saffer at Bradford
   on the 13th of June 2017. He applied the case of Sala (EFMs: right of
   appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) to the effect that in such cases as these
   there was no right of appeal. He found that there was no jurisdiction to
   hear the appeals and accordingly the cases were dismissed for want of
   jurisdiction.

2. The Judge added correctly that the Appellants were erroneously relying
   on article 8. That has been pursued in the grounds of application to the
   Upper Tribunal but ignores the decision in Amertymour and others (EEA
   appeals, human rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC). This case is solely
   concerned with the position with the position under the EEA Regulations
   2006.

3. If the Appellants meet the regulations then the Appellants will succeed.
   If the Appellants do not meet the requirements of the regulations then by
   paragraph 5 of the Immigration Rules the Immigration Rules will then
   apply. In this case in the Refusal Letter there was a requirement for the
   Appellants to make a paid application for human rights to be considered
   and that is in accordance with paragraph 400 of the Immigration Rules.
   That needs to be borne in mind when this case come back before the First-
   tier Tribunal.

4. The case of Sala was overturned in the case of Khan [2017] EWCA Civ
   1755. In that case the Court of Appeal held that the reasoning in Sala
   was erroneous and that in EFM cases there is a right of appeal. In the
   circumstances I set aside the decision of Judge Saffer who innocently
   erred in finding that there was no right of appeal. In remitting this
   case to the First-tier Tribunal I note that no findings were made on the
   merits of the appeal and there is no reason that the case cannot be
   listed before Judge Saffer is he is available.


5. I apologise for the delay in the promulgation of this decision which is
   the result of a technical issue with my computer failing to save the
   original version of the decision.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

These appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all
issues arising under the EEA Regulations 2006. The case can be heard by any
Judge.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

I no fee award which remains for the First-tier Tribunal at the conclusion
of the remitted appeal.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 8 May 2018

