
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/02234/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd April 2017                        |On 3rd May 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

                           JOSHUA OSAHENOMA EVBOTA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mrs Abonie, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 28th June,  1993,
    and who made application for a residence card to  the  respondent.   On
    29th January, 2016 the  respondent  refused  the  application  and  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   On 15th July, 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge R G  Handley  decided  the
    appeal in the absence of an oral hearing and refused the same.  In  his
    determination the judge pointed out  that  it  was  necessary  for  the
    appellant to show that he had been dependent on his mother prior to his
    arrival in the United Kingdom, but his application pointed out that  he
    had been living at an address in Spain for two years while  his  mother
    was working in the United Kingdom.  The appellant gave no indication in
    his application form that he was presenting any documents  which  would
    show that he was in receipt  of  financial  support  from  his  mother,
    either now in the United Kingdom or previously when he  was  living  in
    Spain.

3.   The judge noted that he  had  before  him  a  letter  from  a  firm  of
    solicitors in which they advise that the appellant was emotionally  and
    financially dependent on his mother, but they adduced  no  evidence  to
    show the nature and  extent  of  that  support.   Although  there  were
    documents attached to that letter, the judge pointed out that  none  of
    the documents supported the claim that the appellant had been receiving
    financial support from his mother prior to his arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  As far as the judge was  able  to  determine  from  the  bank
    statements supplied, there were no transfers of money to the  appellant
    in Spain.

4.   Additionally, the judge noted that in the appellant's Notice of  Appeal
    the appellant had actually stated that while he was living in Spain  he
    was living with his aunt and that he  had  been  working,  consequently
    there had been no need for his mother to send him any money.  The judge
    found that in the circumstances he could  not  be  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of the EEA Regulations had been met.

5.   The appellant gave Notice of Appeal but, failed to identify  any  error
    of law in the judge's determination.  He merely pointed out that he was
    fully dependent  on  his  mother  and  brother  and  they  are  Spanish
    citizens.

6.   In granting permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott-
    Baker says that a reading of the decision,  "displays  an  insufficient
    consideration of Regulation 7 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area)  Regulations  2006  and  the   necessity   to   establish   prior
    dependency".  It goes on to suggest that the judge failed to  make  any
    adequate findings as to the issue of dependency in the United  Kingdom.



7.   At the hearing before me today the appellant failed to attend.   I  was
    satisfied that he had been given notice of the  date,  time  and  place
    fixed for the hearing of the appeal on 24th February,  2017  by  notice
    which was sent to him by first-class post.  Not having given any reason
    for his non-attendance, I concluded that I was required to proceed with
    the hearing in his absence.

8.   I have concluded that there is no error in this determination of  Judge
    R G Handley.  He has, with respect to the judge who granted  permission
    to appeal, made a clear finding that in the two year  period  prior  to
    arriving in the United Kingdom, the appellant was not being financially
    supported by his mother.  In Oboh and Others v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department;  Halauder  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 152 it was confirmed that the claimants  had
    to show that they were dependants or members of the household of the EU
    citizen in the country from which they had come and the  words  of  the
    Directive should be given their literal meaning even though it excluded
    relationships formed within a Member State from the scope,  of  Article
    3(2).

9.   It was incumbent upon the appellant to  demonstrate  that  he  met  the
    requirements of the Regulations.  However, he has failed  to  discharge
    that burden because he has failed to demonstrate the nature and  extent
    of the support he received (if any) from his mother, an  EEA  national,
    which is  merely  described  as  being  "emotional  and  financial"  by
    solicitors acting on behalf of the  appellant,  without  providing  any
    evidence of it.  In any event, the appellant could not qualify because,
    as the judge pointed out, on the available evidence it is clear that in
    the two year period  prior  to  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
    appellant was not being financially supported by his mother.

10.  The making of the decision by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R  G  Handley
    did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the
    appeal.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal                                     Date  30th
April 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

