
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02048/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 18 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                Zaheer Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    respondent on 19 October 2015 refusing him a  Residence  Card.  In  May
    2015 the appellant applied for a permanent residence  document  on  the
    basis that he had retained a right of residence as the former unmarried
    partner of an EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Previously he had been given a Residence Card as  an  extended
    family member "in a durable relationship with a European Economic  Area
    (EEA) national" but the durable relationship had broken down  in  about
    March 2015.

 2. The rules do not provide for former partners to have a  Residence  Card
    as former partners but (broadly) a former partner will be entitled to a
    residence card if he has established 5 years  continuous  residence  in
    accordance with the rules. The respondent decided  that  the  appellant
    did not qualify  on  the  basis  of  5  years'  residence  because  his
    residence in accordance with the rules did not start until he was given
    a residence card as an extended family  member  in  July  2010  and  he
    ceased to  be  an  extended  family  member  in  March  2015  when  the
    partnership broke down. This was about 4 months short of  the  required
    time.

 3. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal make it plain that the
    appellant had applied for a "retained right of residence" as the former
    unmarried partner of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

 4. In outline it was the appellant's case before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the appellant had previously applied for a Residence  Card  as  an
    unmarried partner in a durable relationship and he had been given  such
    a card following an  appeal.  The  appellant  said  that  the  relevant
    relationship began some time before 2006.  He made an application for a
    Residence Card as an unmarried  partner  on  3  October  2008  but  the
    application was not decided until 20 July 2010.  He was  then  given  a
    Residence Card confirming his right to reside until 20 July 2015 on the
    basis of that partnership.  He had been  in  a  relationship  with  his
    partner for more than nine years but his  partner  left  him  in  March
    2015. If he had still been a partner in July  2015  he  would  probably
    have been  entitled  to  permanent  residence  because  he  would  have
    completed five years residence in accordance with the  regulations.  He
    argued that the start date of the five years qualifying  period  should
    be backdated to commence when the Appellant applied for  his  residence
    card as a partner on 2 October 2013 or, possibly, 12 October 2013  when
    the respondent issued a Certificate of Application.

 5. Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant additionally claimed  that
    he had been the victim of  domestic  violence  and  he  was  wrongfully
    treated less favourably than a married partner in similar circumstances
    and that the decision was contrary to his rights under article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  These  arguments  failed  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and were not pursued before the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal are  not  signed.   In
    the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  was  represented  by  Ms  Jane
    Heybroek of Counsel who  served  a  skeleton  argument.   The  skeleton
    argument is not based closely on the grounds.

 7. Ms Heybroek's skeleton argument then drew attention to the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Macastena v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1558.   It  was
    the respondent's case that, following Macastena, an appellant does  not
    become an extended family member simply by being a durable partner.  He
    had to apply for a Residence Card.

 8. Ms Heybroek argued that the decision in Macastena  determined  that  an
    extended family member had no status until an application had been made
    but she argued that the  relevant  date  for  qualification  under  the
    Regulations was the date of the application.  Her point  was  that  the
    date on which the application was made was the date when  the  evidence
    supporting the application was disclosed and the decision to allow  the
    application was made on the facts at the time that the application  was
    made.  She said at point 11:

         "It could arguably lead  to  legal  uncertainty,  and  is  arguably
         absurd, to contend - especially in circumstances where  there  has
         been a long period of delay on the part of the  respondent  -  that
         lawful leave only begins at the date of issue of the Residence Card
         and it is not retrospectively applied to the date  the  application
         is made or, at the very least, to the date at which the  respondent
         issues a Certificate".

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did not address the argument that the  relevant
    date was the date of application. That  is  the  substantial  criticism
    made in the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Indeed,  before
    me, Mr Richardson emphasised that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was
    not based on any human right, disproportionality or unfairness argument
    but on the clear assertion that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  deal
    with the main point in the appeal and, at least by implication, that if
    the judge had dealt with the point it would have been resolved  in  the
    appellant's favour.

10.  Correctly,  in  accordance  with  his  professional  obligations,   Mr
    Richardson drew my attention to the case of Kunwar (EFM  -  calculating
    periods of residence) [2019] UKUT 63 (IAC).   This  is  a  decision  of
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb.   Mr  Richardson  particularly  drew  my
    attention to the fourth paragraph of the judicial headnote saying:

         "Consequently, a person in a 'durable  relationship'  with  an  EEA
         national can only be said to be residing in the UK  'in  accordance
         with' the Regulations once a residence document  is  issued.   Only
         periods of residence following the issue of the documentation  can,
         therefore,  count  towards  establishing  a  'permanent  right   of
         residence;'  under  Reg  15  based  upon  five  years'   continuous
         residence 'in accordance with' the Regulations."

11. Mr Richardson argued that  although  the  headnote  was  drawn  by  the
    Tribunal and was part of the decision it was wider than  the  ratio  in
    the case of Kunwar  and,  he  submitted  respectfully,  it  was  wrong.
    I have reflected on this.  I have come to the conclusion that it is Mr
    Richardson's submissions that are misconceived.

12. Building on the  skeleton  argument  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mr
    Richardson argued that the relevant date for the purpose of calculating
    the length of residence is the time either when the application is made
    or when a formal acknowledgment is received.

13. In Kunwar Judge Grubb had made much of the  provisions  of  rule  17(5)
    requiring the Secretary of State on receipt of an application  from  an
    extended family member to "undertake an extensive  examination  of  the
    personal  circumstances  of  the  applicant".  It  is  only  when  that
    examination had been carried out that the applicant became entitled  to
    a card.

14. Mr Richardson argued that the decision to issue a card was based on the
    facts at the date of the application and so must reflect the  state  of
    affairs at the time of the application, and therefore, for the purposes
    of assessing the length of residence in the United  Kingdom,  the  time
    should run from the time disclosed in the evidence, that  is  from  the
    date of the application.

15. Mr Richardson did not need to distinguish between  the  date  when  the
    application was made and the date  that  it  was  acknowledged  because
    there is only  something  like  ten  days  between  them  and  for  the
    appellant's purposes either date would suffice.  However the  delay  in
    making the  2008  application,  which  would  probably  have  succeeded
    earlier if it had been processed  earlier,  means  that  the  appellant
    cannot not satisfy the requirements of the Rules  when  he  asserted  a
    retained  right  of  residence.   Mr  Richardson  submitted  that   the
    contention that the Appellant's retained right  of  residence  depended
    not on his making an application but on the Respondent  considering  it
    has such obviously absurd consequences that the contention  was  likely
    to be wrong.

16. Surprisingly I was not referred to SSHD v Aibangbee [2019] EWCA Civ 339
    (07 March 2019) where the Court of Appeal  approved  the  reasoning  in
    Kunwar.

17. As is clear  from  Macastena,  and  reinforced  in  Kunwar,  two  quite
    different categories  of  people  are  entitled  to  benefit  from  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   These  rules
    have now been succeeded by the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 but the argument here would apply equally to  a  cause
    under the 2016 Regulations.

18. Under EU treaties various people who are not British nationals have  an
    unqualified right to be in the  United  Kingdom.   Typically  they  are
    nationals of EEA states exercising their treaty rights.  Such people do
    not need to have a Residence Card to be in the United Kingdom but  some
    such people find it convenient or reassuring to have one.

19. However the Regulations also contemplate people who do not have such  a
    right but who can be treated as if they have such a right.  Such people
    are typically "extended family members" and that  very  often  means  a
    person who is a partner in a durable relationship with an EEA national.
     However, as is explained in Kunwar, the right of the  extended  family
    member does not exist until it is recognised by the Secretary of  State
    issuing the prescribed documentation.

20. As is explained in Kunwar, an applicant's rights as an extended  family
    member are not created by the  relationship  but  by  the  relationship
    being recognised in a decision following an application of  the  Rules.
    It is clear from the 2006 Regulations that  there  are  certain  rights
    extended to family members.  However there are also rights extended  to
    people who are treated as family  members  under  the  Regulations  and
    typically these are extended family members who are partners in durable
    relationships.

21.  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  (Citizens'  Free
    Movement) recognises the need to maintain "unity of  the  family  in  a
    broader sense" and anticipates "family members" who are not included in
    the definition of that phrase under the Directive, and who do not enjoy
    an automatic right of entry or residence  under  the  Directive,  being
    entitle to reside in  an  EEA  state  where  they  are  not  nationals.
    Paragraph 6 requires the member state to make provisions under its  own
    legislation for such people to be admitted.   The  United  Kingdom  has
    done just that. Paragraph 8 of the 2006 Regulations is  concerned  with
    "extended family members".  These are defined and they are  people  who
    meet certain specific characteristics.   Paragraph  8(5)  provides  the
    meaning of extended family member includes a person who  shows  himself
    to be in a durable relationship with an EEA  national.   The  procedure
    for issuing a Residence Card is prescribed under Regulation  17.   This
    obliges the Secretary of State to issue a Residence Card  to  a  person
    who is a "family member" who has retained the  right  of  residence  on
    application and production of a valid passport and proof that he is  an
    entitled person.  Significantly Regulation 17(5)  provides  that  where
    the Secretary of State receives an application "he shall  undertake  an
    extensive examination of the personal circumstances  of  the  applicant
    and if he refuses the application shall  give  reasons  justifying  the
    refusal unless this is contrary to the interests of national security".

22. The difficulty for this appellant is that Regulation 7(3) sets out  the
    circumstances in which a person who is an extended family member  shall
    be treated as a family  member  of  the  relevant  EEA  national.   The
    relevant words of the regulation are that a person:

         "who is an extended family member and has been issued with  an  EEA
         family permit, a registration certificate or a Residence Card shall
         be treated as a family member".

23. The conjunctive "and" is crucial. In order to be a  family  member  for
    the purpose of the  regulations  it  is  not  sufficient  to  have  the
    necessary cohabitation and partnership.  In order to be  treated  as  a
    family  member,  an  extended  family  member  must  have  obtained  an
    appropriate Residence Card or similar document.  The "right",  if  that
    is the word to use, is only created when the  card  is  issued  however
    much a person might be entitled to a card on an earlier occasion.  This
    is the clear  meaning  of  Regulation  7(3)  and  the  point  has  been
    emphasised in the cases that I have indicated.

24. Regulation 15(1)(b) provides that a "family member of an  EEA  national
    who is not himself an EEA national but who as  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom with the EEA national in  accordance  with  these  regulations"
    shall, by reason of regulation 15(1) acquire the right to reside in the
    United Kingdom permanently".

25. Mr Richardson argued that once the applicant has  made  his  claim  his
    alleged status is known to the Secretary of  State  and  the  applicant
    will not (normally) be removed until the application has been  decided.
    It, must, he argued, follow that such a person is living in  accordance
    with the Regulations and therefore the relevant date is the  date  that
    the application was made, or at least received.

26. I do not agree. A person is  not  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  "in
    accordance with the regulations" merely by making  an  application.  An
    applicant could hardly expect to be treated  as  living  in  accordance
    with the regulations  merely  by  my  making  an  application,  however
    misconceived, weak or even dishonest it might be.

27. Further, regulation 15(1)(b) applies to a  "family  member  of  an  EEA
    national" but the phrase "family member" is defined and in the case  of
    an extended family member it means someone who has a Residence Card.

28. Even if I agreed with Ms Heybroek and Mr Richardson's  suggestion  that
    there is something profoundly unsatisfactory about  time  running  from
    the date of decision rather that the date of  application  I  would  be
    against  them.  The  plain  meaning  of  the  rules  permits  no  other
    interpretation.

29. However I do not accept that there is anything unsatisfactory  in  time
    beginning to run when, and only when, the decision maker has considered
    the evidence and has decided  in  the  applicant's  favour.  Any  other
    interpretation would undermine the  recognised  need  to  give  careful
    consideration to an application.

30. I am satisfied that there is at the heart of this appeal an essentially
    a simple point and it has to be resolved in the  Secretary  of  State's
    favour.  It follows therefore that  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred by not engaging with the point the error is immaterial because if
    it had been considered the result would have been the same.

Notice of Decision

31. I dismiss this appeal.




|                                     |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 June 2019                   |

