

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber              Appeal Number:  EA/02851/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |     Decision and Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                       |
|On 15 October 2018                  |     On 18 October 2018           |
|                                    |                                  |
|                                           |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                               Mildred Renner
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                         Secretary of State for the
                               Home Department
                                                           Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:             Ms E Lanlehin, of Counsel, instructed  by  JF
                       Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms A Fijiwala, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

                          Determination and Reasons

Background

   1.       The appellant is a Ghanaian national born on 23  May  1994.  She
      seeks a permanent residence card as  the  family  member  of  her  EEA
      sponsor, her father. The respondent refused  her  application  on  the
      basis that she had failed to establish that she had been  a  dependant
      of her father for five years. Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) applies.

   2.       The appeal was decided on the papers on the appellant's  request
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall and was dismissed  by  way  of  a
      determination promulgated on 4 July 2018.

   3.       The grounds argue that the judge misdirected himself in  failing
      to appreciate that dependency had to be assessed at the point of entry
      and that a subsequent independence  did  not  alter  that  assessment.
      Reliance was placed on Reyes [2014] ALL  ER  (D)  223.   It  was  also
      argued that the judge was wrong to have found that Reyes only  applied
      to cases of entry. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 15 August 2018.

   4.       There has been no Rule 24 response from the respondent.

The hearing

   5.       I heard submissions from both parties at the hearing  before  me
      on 15 October 2018.

   6.       Ms Lanlehin elaborated on the two grounds by relying on extracts
      from Reyes. She argued that having employment and living independently
      did not mean the appellant was no longer a  dependent  family  member.
      She added an additional point; she maintained that the  appellant  was
      in fact still reliant upon her father for her rent and  for  emotional
      support.

   7.       In response, Ms Fijiwala submitted that there  was  no  material
      error.  There had been no error of law. The judge  had  addressed  all
      the points in the skeleton argument and gave  reasons  as  to  why  he
      found Reyes did not apply to the appellant's circumstances and was not
      authority for what the appellant argued. Moreover, the  appellant  had
      entered as a minor, so the issue of dependency  did  not  have  to  be
      established on entry. It was only after the age of 21 in May 2015 that
      this became an issue. There was no evidence at all  of  any  financial
      support after  December  2016.  The  judge  had  also  considered  the
      judgment in Lim  (Manila)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1383  which  had  itself
      referred to Reyes and concluded that the family member must  need  the
      support from his/her relative in order to meet  his/her  basic  needs.
      Emotional dependency of which no evidence had been  provided  was  not
      enough. The IDI guidance had not been met either.

   8.       Ms Lanlehin replied. She argued that the  Regulations  permitted
      dependants to work. If she had to remain  financially  dependent  upon
      the sponsor then the rules which allowed her to  work  would  have  no
      relevance.

   9.       That completed submissions. I  then  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give with reasons.

Findings and conclusions

  10.       I have carefully considered all the evidence before me  and  the
      submissions that have been made by both parties.
  11.       The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was a simple  one;  had
      the requirements of the Regulations been met; that is to say, had  the
      appellant shown that she had been  residing  in  accordance  with  the
      Regulations for a five-year period.

  12.       The judge found that this had  not  been  shown.  The  appellant
      argues that he was wrong.  Her case, as now  put,  is  that  she  does
      remain dependent upon her father for basic needs but that even if this
      is not accepted, it does not matter as dependency does not have to  be
      shown.

  13.       The judge considered the evidence in  the  context  of  relevant
      case law. He took account of Reyes and he also  considered  Lim.   Lim
      post-dates Reyes and takes it into account.  Notwithstanding  what  is
      said by the judge about Reyes (at paragraphs  17-19)  with  which  the
      appellant disagrees, the  position  of  dependency  is  clarified  and
      confirmed in Lim. There the court held that  it  was  not  enough  for
      financial support to be provided by the EEA sponsor; the family member
      was rqd to show that the support was needed to meet  basic  needs  (at
      25). It was held that "it is  still  necessary  to  determine  that  a
      family member is dependent in the  sense  of  being  in  need  of  the
      assistance" (at 29) and that "the concept of dependency must mean that
      the claimant is not financially  independent  and  therefore  requires
      support" (at 30). I do not therefore accept Ms  Lanlehin's  submission
      that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  dependency  needed  to  be
      established.

  14.       It is  also  worth  pointing  out  that  despite  Ms  Lanlehin's
      submissions about dependency only having  to  be  established  at  the
      point of entry, the appellant did not  of  course  have  to  show  any
      dependency at that time as she was under 18 years of age and fell  for
      consideration under reg. 7(1)(b)(i). This requirement arose after  she
      reached the age of 21. The judgment of Rahman C-83/11  [2013]  OB  249
      referred to in the grounds accepts that a member state may impose  its
      own  particular  requirements  as  to  the  nature  and  duration   of
      dependence.

  15.       Turning then to the new ground that the appellant  was  in  fact
      dependent upon her father, the sponsor, I note  that  the  appellant's
      own evidence to the respondent was that she  had  not  been  dependent
      upon him since she found work in November 2014, having  moved  out  of
      the family home in September 2014. The appellant  maintains  that  her
      father paid the rent for her accommodation after  she  moved  out  and
      rental receipts were  adduced  but  as  the  judge  found  these  only
      continued until December 2016. From that date onwards,  there  was  no
      evidence of financial support. The judge  remarked  on  this  lack  of
      evidence at paragraphs 14 -16. Given that the appeal  was  decided  in
      May 2018, the period without evidence of dependency was lengthy. It is
      also noteworthy that the appellant's own evidence  to  the  respondent
      was that she was not dependent on her father  other  than  emotionally
      (at paragraph 10). This was later clarified in her statement as  going
      on outings, having him listen to  her  and  to  ensure  she  had  iron
      supplements (at 6.3). This claim was properly considered by the  judge
      at paragraphs 21 and 23. Even if dependency  was  established  by  the
      rental payments, it was only shown until December 2016.

  16.       It follows that I conclude that the  judge  properly  considered
      the evidence that had been adduced and that he made no errors  of  law
      in his examination of  that  material.  If  the  appellant  has  fresh
      evidence she wishes to put forward, it is open to her to make a  fresh
      application to the respondent.

Decision

  17.       There are no errors of law in the determination  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Anonymity order

  18.       There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
      and I see no reason to make one.

      Signed:


      [pic]
      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      Dated 15 October 2018




