
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02899/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2018                         |On 23rd February 2018         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                 Rameez Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Kelly of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 22nd June 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 14th May 1990  who  applied
    for a residence card as the extended family member of an EEA  national.



 3. The application was refused on 25th February  2016  with  reference  to
    regulations 8(2) and 17 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 4. The Appellant appealed to the FtT.  Although the Appellant requested an
    oral hearing, the FtT decided the appeal on the papers having  notified
    the parties that it was proposed to deal with the appeal on the  papers
    in the light of the decision in Sala [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

 5. On 21st June 2017 the FtT, following the decision  in  Sala,  dismissed
    the appeal for want of jurisdiction, finding that the FtT did not  have
    the jurisdiction to hear an appeal from an extended family member.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    contending that the FtT should have stayed the proceedings pending  the
    outcome of a reference to the European Court of Justice.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chamberlain of the FtT in the
    following terms;

         1.   The Appellant, who is not  represented,  seeks  permission  to
             appeal, in time, against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Kelly who, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 22nd
             June 2017,  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  want  of
             jurisdiction.   The  Appellant  had   appealed   against   the
             Respondent's decision to refuse to issue a residence  card  as
             an extended family member.

         2.   The grounds allege that by refusing to stay  the  proceedings,
             the judge fell into a material legal error.

         3.   Subsequent to this application being made, the Court of Appeal
             has held in the case of Khan  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755  that  a
             decision to refuse to issue a residence card  to  an  extended
             family member is an EEA decision and thus can be  appealed  to
             the First-tier Tribunal in the ordinary way.  The Tribunal has
             jurisdiction to hear such appeals.

         4.   Permission to appeal is granted.

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  did  not  submit  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

 9. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.  I was satisfied that  proper
    notice of the hearing had been given  to  the  Appellant  at  the  last
    address notified to the Tribunal.  There  was  no  application  for  an
    adjournment and no explanation for the Appellant's  non-attendance.   I
    decided, in the circumstances, that it was appropriate to  proceed  and
    consider whether the FtT had erred in law.

11. Mr Avery submitted that it would be appropriate to adjourn the hearing,
    to await the decision of the Supreme Court, in Khan.  I  did  not  find
    that to be appropriate.  My view was that Khan has been decided by  the
    Court of Appeal, and is binding authority upon the Upper  Tribunal  and
    therefore it was appropriate to proceed.

12. I set aside the decision of the FtT and indicated that I would issue  a
    written decision providing reasons.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. I find that the FtT erred in law.  The FtT cannot be blamed, as it  was
    obliged to follow the decision in Sala.  However the Court of Appeal in
    Khan found that Sala was wrongly decided.  Therefore the Appellant  did
    have a right of appeal to the FtT against refusal of his residence card
    application as an extended family member.  The  FtT  erred  in  law  in
    finding that it did not have jurisdiction.

14. I find the error of law to be material, and the decision needs to be re-
    made.   I  have  taken  into  account  paragraph  7.2  of  the   Senior
    President's Practice Statements.  The effect of the FtT error has  been
    to deprive the Appellant of a fair hearing and an opportunity  for  his
    case to be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  FtT.   It  is  therefore
    appropriate to remit this appeal back to the FtT to be decided  afresh.



15. The parties will be advised of the venue, time and date of the  hearing
    in due course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than
    Judge Kelly.

16. It should be noted that the Respondent has not submitted  a  bundle  of
    documents, and a bundle of any documents  to  be  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent must be lodged with the FtT at  least  28  days  before  the
    hearing date.  Within the same timescale the Appellant must also  lodge
    any documentation to be relied upon.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT to be heard afresh.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.





Signed                              Date 13th February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.






Signed                              Date 13th February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
