
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/02762/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 March 2018                           | On 4 April 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                             dawood shueb mapara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R J-P Seeboruth, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Row,  who  in   a   determination
    promulgated on 9 May 2017, allowed the appeal of Mr Dawood Shueb Mapara
    against a decision to refuse him a permanent residence card as a person
    who had a retained a right of residence  as  the  former  spouse  of  a
    French national exercising EEA Treaty rights in Britain.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly, I will refer  to  Mr
    Dawood Shueb Mapara as the appellant as he was  the  appellant  in  the
    First-tier.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of India,  born  on  13  January  1985.   He
    entered Britain in 2007 and married the sponsor, a French  national  in
    July 2009.  In October that year he was granted a residence card  valid
    to 20 October 2014.  The appellant and the  sponsor  were  divorced  in
    September 2014.  In October that year the appellant made an application
    for a permanent residence card.  In January 2015 the sponsor was  named
    as the sponsor on a residence card application of a Tauseef Akram.   In
    February 2015 a letter was sent to the appellant inviting him  and  the
    sponsor to a  marriage  interview  in  March  2015,  a  response  being
    requested by 23 February 2015.  No response was received.  On  8  March
    2015 a letter was again  sent  to  the  appellant  inviting  him  to  a
    marriage interview on 8 April 2015, confirmation  of  attendance  being
    requested by 25 March 2015. He did not attend.  On 26  March  2015  the
    appellant was invited to attend a marriage interview on 28 April  2015,
    confirmation of  attending  being  requested  by  14  April  2015.   No
    response having been received, a  letter  was  sent  to  the  appellant
    informing him that, following his  failure  to  confirm  attendance  at
    three consecutive interviews the case would be passed to  a  caseworker
    for a decision.  On 24 April 2015 the appellant  was  issued  with  the
    refusal letter because he had failed to attend two  interviews  without
    good reason and that under  Regulation  2  -  that  is  the  provisions
    relating  to  a  marriage  of  convenience  -  and  with  reference  to
    Regulation 20B (4) and (5), failure to attend interviews as well as the
    sponsor's involvement in another application was  sufficient  to  merit
    refusal.

4.   In May 2015 the appellant made an out of  time  application  to  appeal
    which was struck out as being out of time in August 2015.  In July 2015
    the sponsor was named as the sponsor on a residence card application of
    a Chaitanya Pradip Chani.  In August 2015 a second  application  for  a
    permanent right of residence was made and a judicial review application
    was lodged in November  that  year  against  a  decision  to  refuse  a
    permanent right of residence, that being the refusal made on  24  April
    prior to the date of the third interview.

5.   An Acknowledgment of Service  was  lodged  in  December  2015  and  the
    judicial review  application  was  refused  in  August  2016.   In  the
    meantime, however, there  had  been  a  further  refusal  of  a  second
    application made by the appellant on the same grounds as  the  previous
    reasons for refusal.

6.   The third application made by the appellant in September  2016  led  to
    the refusal dated 3 March 2017 on the same grounds as the previous  two
    refusals.  In May 2017  Judge  Row  allowed  the  appeal  against  that
    refusal.

7.   Judge Row, who considered the appeal on the papers  and  therefore  did
    not have the benefit of representation on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State, considered the issue of the failure to  attend  two  interviews.
    He stated that the appellant asserted that  he  could  not  attend  the
    first interview and had notified the respondent and said that he  could
    attend the second interview and had arranged to do so but on  24  April
    had been told by the appellant -  it  is  clear  the  judge  means  the
    respondent - that his application  had  been  refused  for  failure  to
    attend the interview which was due to take place four days  later.   In
    paragraph 9 the judge wrote:

         "This seems almost unbelievable but appears  to  be  correct.   The
         appellant has  produced  a  letter  from  the  respondent  dated  9
         February 2015 and a copy of his reply to that letter saying that he
         could not attend the first interview.   The  appellant  produced  a
         letter from the respondent  dated  26  March  2015  confirming  the
         second interview on 28 April 2015 and a copy of his response  which
         indicated that he would attend.  The appellant produced a  copy  of
         the letter from the respondent dated 24 April 2015 and  a  decision
         attached to it saying that his application had been refused because
         he had not attended the interviews on 9 March and 28 April 2015."

8.   The judge went on to say that he found the appellant had not failed  to
    attend two interviews without good reason as he was  unable  to  attend
    the first and was willing and able to attend  the  second.   There  was
    evidence, moreover, that the sponsor was qualified as an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights as the judge had seen original copies  of  the
    sponsor's P60s for the years ending 5 April 2009 to 2016 and there  was
    a P45 for the sponsor dated 20 September 2013 as well as original  wage
    slips for the sponsor between 2009 and August  2012.   The  judge  also
    referred to further wage slips of the sponsor.  He then found that  the
    appellant had been employed and said that there were three reasons  for
    the refusal and that each of  the  reasons  was  wrong.   He  therefore
    allowed the appeal.

9.   The grounds of appeal lodged by the Secretary  of  State  set  out  the
    chronology to which I have referred above.  They pointed out  that  the
    reasons for refusal related to two requests to attend  interview  where
    the appellant had not attended  and  that  on  the  third  request  the
    appellant had been  told  that  he  must  respond  by  14  April.   The
    appellant had not done  so  and  that  was  the  principal  reason  for
    refusing the application.   A  further  reason  was  that  the  sponsor
    appeared to have sponsored multiple applications.  It was  pointed  out
    that the judge had not engaged with the  reasons  for  refusal  of  the
    application.  He  had  erred  in  stating  that  there  were  only  two
    invitations to interview when in fact there had been three and  by  not
    realising that the letter of refusal had been written after  there  had
    been no response from the appellant and he had not attended  the  first
    two interviews.  Furthermore, the judge had not engaged with  the  fact
    that the sponsor had sponsored a number of applications. Moreover,  the
    judge had not had not been informed by the appellant  that  a  judicial
    review application had been made which had been refused on the  papers.
    The judge had therefore erred in his consideration of the facts.

10.   Mr Wilding relied on the grounds of appeal and asked me to  find  that
    the judge had based his decision on various mistaken findings  of  fact
    and that the judge had erred by not finding that the Secretary of State
    had discharged the burden of proof upon her as there had been good  and
    cogent reasons for concluding that this was a marriage of convenience.

11.    In reply Mr Seeboruth referred to a  number  of  documents  which  he
    said assisted the appellant.  These had been  produced  shortly  before
    the date of hearing before me.
     Firstly, there was a form completed by the appellant  stating  that  he
    would not be able to attend the interview on 9 March but secondly there
    was a form completed by the appellant,  although  not  signed  and  not
    indicating whether or not an interpreter was required, stating that  he
    would be able to attend for interview.  Mr Seeboruth stated  that  this
    had been sent to the Secretary of State and referred to the  fact  that
    there was a photocopy of a recorded delivery number  on  the  response.
    The recorded delivery number is EZ772083383GB.  It gives no  indication
    as to when that letter was posted nor indeed that it was a letter  that
    was posted to the  respondent.   Mr  Seeboruth  also  argued  that  the
    Secretary of State had been wrong  to  refer  to  the  judicial  review
    application being refused.  He said that that was not the case and that
    the judicial review application  had  been  resolved  by  consent.   He
    therefore argued that the appellant met the requirements of  the  Rules
    and there was no material error of law  in  the  determination  of  the
    judge.

Discussion

12.  I consider that there  are  clearly  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge.  He did not engage with the  reasons  given
    by the Secretary of State for  the  refusal  of  the  application.   In
    particular, he ignored the fact that there had been  three  invitations
    to interview and that the appellant had not attended on the  first  two
    and with regard to the third invitation, he had been told to respond by
    14 April and had not done so. The judge had erred in fact  in  thinking
    that there had only been two invitations  to  interview  and  that  the
    invitation to attend on the 28th April was for the second interview.  I
    consider there to be no weight placed  on  the  form  submitted  by  Mr
    Seeboruth at the hearing before me, to which I have referred above,  as
    there is no indication as to when that was sent or indeed  to  whom  it
    was sent.  Moreover, the judge did not engage with the  fact  that  the
    sponsor had attempted to sponsor two further  partners.   I  find  that
    these are material errors of law in the determination of the  judge  in
    that he had not engaged with the chronology in this case which  I  have
    set out above and to which reference is made in the letter  of  refusal
    and not engaged with the clear allegations of the  Secretary  of  State
    that this was a marriage of convenience.  I  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge.

 13. Moreover, with regard  to  the  assertion  of  Mr  Seeboruth  that  the
    judicial review proceedings had been settled by consent, a  perusal  of
    the consent order shows that the applicant in the order produced was Mr
    Chaitanya Pradip Jani who was the sponsor's third claimed partner.  The
    documents relating to those judicial review proceedings which include a
    marriage certificate of the sponsor  and  Mr  Jani  as  well  as  other
    correspondence relating to him had possibly been put in error, or  more
    worryingly, submitted in an attempt to mislead the court.

14.  Having set aside the determination of the Judge in  the  First-tier  it
    is appropriate that I go on to reconsider the  appeal.   I  am  clearly
    able to do so taking into account the evidence before  me.   The  clear
    evidence is that not only did the sponsor not attend two  requests  for
    interview but he did not respond by the due date to the  third  request
    and, further, that the Secretary of State had clear evidence  that  the
    sponsor was complicit in multiple applications for residence cards.   I
    consider that on that evidence the Secretary of  State  had  discharged
    the burden of proof upon her to  show  that  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  The reality is that the  appellant  who  did  not  attend
    before the First-tier Judge - he considered the appeal on  the  papers-
    did not attend before me and has put forward no evidence that this  was
    a genuine marriage.  Although there  is  financial  evidence  that  the
    sponsor was working as indeed was the appellant, there is  no  evidence
    whatsoever to show that they were living in the same house  nor  indeed
    that the appellant and the sponsor were ever  living  together.   I  am
    also concerned by the possible attempt to mislead the court by  putting
    in a consent order which did not relate to the appellant.

15.  For these reasons I find that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    to refuse to grant a permanent right of residence to the appellant  was
    correct and having set aside the decision of the judge  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]                          Date: 28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

