
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02433/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2020                   |On 3 November 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                          ADEOLUWA OLREWAJU AKANDE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ojukotola of SLA Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Trevaskis ('the Judge') promulgated on the 19 November
       2019 in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal.




Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  2  June  1983.  He
       appealed the respondent's refusal, dated 7 May 2019, to recognise his
       right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
       national pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.
    3. The application for a residence card was refused  as  the  respondent
       was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was  lawfully  married  to  a
       qualified EEA national as he had not proved that  the  claimed  proxy
       customary marriage was legally accepted in Nigeria.
    4. The Judge's findings are set out between 17 - 21 of the  decision  in
       the following terms:

           "17.   The appellant has addressed the reasons  for  refusal  in
                his witness statement. He has used  his  birth  certificate,
                identifying his father whose name is the same as  the  maker
                of the affidavit of attendance at the marriage  ceremony.  I
                am satisfied to the required standard that the appellant was
                represented by his father at the ceremony.


           18.    No affidavit has been provided by the  representative  of
                the bride who attended the wedding, and no  explanation  has
                been provided for the lack of such evidence. No evidence has
                been provided to confirm that the validity of the  customary
                proxy marriage is recognised in the country of  domicile  of
                the sponsor, the Netherlands.


           19.    With regard to the registration marriage,  appellant  has
                not addressed the concern of the respondent arising from the
                fact  that  the  registration  of  the  marriage   and   the
                confirmation of the traditional marriage  under  native  law
                are signed by the same person. Since the appellant relies on
                documentary evidence in support of his appeal, it is not  in
                his interests failed to  address  concerns  regarding  those
                documents.


           20.    The appellant and the sponsor failed to  attend  marriage
                interviews on both occasions, and no  explanation  has  been
                provided for those failures. Bearing in mind the  burden  of
                proof, I find  that  the  unexplained  failures  damage  the
                appeal.


           21.    Accordingly I find that does not  meet  the  requirements
                for recognition in CB (validity of marriage; proxy marriage)
                Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080."

    5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  refused  by
       another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but  granted  on  a  renewed
       application by the Upper Tribunal, the operative part  of  the  grant
       being in the following terms:

           "1.    It was arguably erroneous to state at paragraph 18 of the
                decision that no explanation had been provided for the  lack
                of an affidavit from a representative  of  the  bride  when,
                arguably, an explanation was given, which is  that  Nigerian
                law only required one affidavit.


           2. It was arguably erroneous for the judge to state at paragraph
                20 that no explanation  was  given  for  not  attending  two
                marriage interviews when, arguably, the  appellant  gave  an
                explanation, which was that he had not been  made  aware  of
                the interviews.


           3. It was arguably inconsistent with Awuku v Secretary of  State
                for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178 to (in paragraph
                18) treat as relevant that there was  no  evidence  provided
                confirming the validity of the marriage in the Netherlands."

    6. In her Rule 24 response dated 8 September 2020 the respondent writes:

           "2.     The  respondent  opposes  the  appellant's  appeal.   In
                summary, the respondent will  submit  inter  alia  that  the
                judge of the First-tier Tribunal  (FTTJ)  appropriately  and
                there is no material error  of  law  that  would  alter  the
                outcome of the appeal.


           3.     Whilst it is accepted at [18] the FTTJ refers to the lack
                of evidence from  the  Netherlands  that  the  marriage  was
                recognised there, it is clear that the FTTJ recognised  this
                as not being required at [16] in line with the  findings  in
                Awuku. The FTTJ within [10-16] clearly  directs  himself  to
                the legal focus being on the  recognition  of  the  marriage
                within the contracting  state  rather  than  an  EEA  member
                state. It is simply a reference to the absence  of  evidence
                on this point and in the context of an absence of persuasive
                evidence overall.


           4.     As noted at [6]  the  burden  of  proof  remains  on  the
                appellant to show that the customary marriage was recognised
                in law.


           5. As noted above, the FTTJ was entitled to note the  Tribunal's
                consideration and findings with Kareem since they related to
                the recognition of customary marriages in  Nigeria.  As  set
                out in Kareem at para 68 of the headnote:


                    "g.     It  should  be   assumed   that   more   without
                    independent and reliable evidence about the  recognition
                    of the marriage under the laws of the EEA country and/or
                    the country where the marriage took place, the  Tribunal
                    is likely to be unable to find that sufficient  evidence
                    has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.  The
                    production of legal material from  the  EEA  country  or
                    country where the marriage took place will be sufficient
                    evidence because they will rarely show how such  law  is
                    understood or applied in those countries. Mere assertion
                    as to the effect of such laws will, for similar reasons,
                    carry no weight."


           6. As observed by First-tier  Judge  Froom  in  the  refusal  of
                permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   the
                documents referred to in the grounds and  notice  of  appeal
                were not extracts of law,  or  indeed  independent  evidence
                about the recognition of the marriage.  As  such  they  were
                mere assertions that as per Kareem and thus carry no weight.


           7. As set out in Kareem at paras 54 - 55, the recognition  of  a
                customary marriage requires a dowry and evidence of consent,
                capacity to marry and a formal giving away of the bride, and
                the presence of a member from both families present  at  the
                ceremony:


                    "54.   The balance of the evidence before us is  that  a
                    dowry is  a  requirement  of  a  customary  marriage  in
                    Nigeria, and indeed there appears to be no  evidence  to
                    the  contrary.  Similarly,  and  to  the  contrary,   we
                    conclude  on  the  balance  of  probabilities   that   a
                    customary marriage will not be regarded as a marriage in
                    Nigerian law unless there is evidence  of  the  parties'
                    consent, that they have the capacity to marry  and  that
                    there has been a formal giving away of the  bride  (i.e.
                    parental  consent  to  the  marriage).  Unless  evidence
                    demonstrates that these requirements do not apply in the
                    relevant community these  criteria  will  be  the  usual
                    starting point for  deciding  if  a  marriage  has  been
                    contracted.


                    55.    We recognise that this cannot  be  an  exhaustive
                    list because, as the Nigerian case  law  indicates,  the
                    requirements for a marriage to  be  accepted  as  having
                    been contracted by custom and native law  varies  within
                    Nigeria. We  are  aware  from  other  sources  that  the
                    parents or at least a  member  of  both  the  bride  and
                    groom's families should be present at the proxy marriage
                    ceremony because a customary marriage is a union between
                    two families rather than just two individuals. But  this
                    point has not arisen in the  appeal  before  us  and  we
                    merely mention it as an observation that the list in the
                    preceding  paragraph   should   not   be   regarded   as
                    exhaustive."


           8. There is no evidence of a dowry - the reference to  'assorted
                gifts' on form  MCM.1  -  Registration  of  Native  Law  and
                Customs Marriage, a form completed and signed by the  person
                claiming to be the father of the appellant is not in  itself
                evidence of a dowry. Nor is it evidence of capacity to marry
                or that there has been a formal giving away  of  the  bride.
                Indeed the same form  refers  to  'Non  Applicable'  in  the
                section  'date  of  betrothal'.  There  is  no  evidence  in
                relation  to  the  person   who   is   declared   as   being
                representative of the bride, no indication that Ms Priscilla
                Hooker is related to  the  bride,  or  was  present  at  the
                marriage ceremony. Whilst the decision letter  of  the  SSHD
                refers to an affidavit from the bride's family  the  purpose
                of any affidavit would be to attest  these  matters,  namely
                consent to marriage and evidence of a formal giving away  of
                the bride. A parallel can be drawn  with  the  appellant  in
                Kareem, where it was claimed at the proxy marriage was valid
                having been conducted in Lagos State, likewise there was  an
                absence of  detailed  evidence  of  a  dowry,  and  consent.
                Certainly there is no evidence emanating  from  the  bride's
                family which is surprising given  as  identified  above  the
                marriage is considered a union of two families  rather  than
                just two individuals. An explanation of there being no  need
                for an affidavit does not eradicate the requirement to  show
                that the marriage was conducted in accordance with the law.


           9. In relation to the matter of not attending the two interviews
                as requested, it is noted that the  email  address  detailed
                for  the  appellant   as   per   the   grounds   lodged   is
                'slasolicitors@hotmail.co.uk'. This  being  the  same  email
                address provided to the SSHD as part of the application  for
                a  Residence  Card  and  detailed  on  the  representative's
                letter. The invitations  to  interview  were  sent  to  this
                address,  therefore  it  is  rather  surprising   that   the
                representative on the behalf of the  appellant  assert  that
                the invitations for both  the  appellant  and  sponsored  to
                attend an interview were not received, since it was sent  to
                the representatives acting on their behalf. It is not  clear
                if the evidence in relation to the interview invitations was
                before the FTTJ, but for convenience they  are  attached  to
                this correspondence. If the Tribunal were to  conclude  that
                this  evidence  was  not  before  the  FTTJ,  and  the  FTTJ
                materially erred an application is made under Rule  15  (2A)
                for it  to  be  admitted  into  evidence.  It  is  submitted
                therefore  that  the  claim  to  have   not   received   the
                invitations is not considered persuasive.


Error of law

    7. On behalf of the appellant  Mr Ojukotola argued, inter alia, that  as
       the customary marriage undertaken by the appellant was registered  in
       Nigeria under the valid rules of law it should have been accepted  by
       the Judge that all relevant requirements of the law had been  met  as
       evidenced by the documentation provided.
    8. In relation to the issue of  bridal  consent  it  was  submitted  the
       evidence included relevant marriage documents including those showing
       the father of the groom had moved a motion in the High Court  to  the
       effect that all the formal requirements had been  satisfied.  It  was
       also argued that the fact  the  proxy  customary  marriage  had  been
       registered meant the Registrar would have been satisfied that all the
       requirements of the law had been met. It was submitted the  Registrar
       would have dealt with all relevant  issues  and  that  there  was  no
       formal requirement for there to be a sworn  affidavit  filed  by  the
       appellant's wife or her family as the same is not needed.
    9. Mr Ojukotola submitted that it was not for the Secretary of State  to
       say that the documentary evidence was not sufficient.
   10. In relation to the dowry, Mr Ojukotola submitted that  the  entry  in
       form MCM.1 did  refer  to  an  item  with  a  tangible  value  namely
       'assorted gifts'. It was argued that the requirement varies from  one
       community to another and that the rules relating  to  the  dowry  had
       changed that in the south-west  of  Nigeria  referring  to  'assorted
       gifts' was sufficient, no matter how  small.  It  was  submitted  the
       change came about so as not  to  dissuade  people  from  marrying  by
       saying that something had to be given. It was argued  that  the  gift
       was in the form completed before the marriage was registered and that
       the Registrar was the person with the competent authority to register
       the marriage and so the Registrar would have been satisfied.
   11. It was argued if the respondent wished to raise issues they  must  be
       within the ambit of Nigerian law and that it  was  not  open  to  the
       Secretary of State to raise issues without setting out which parts of
       the law have been violated.
   12. The submission made by both parties are noted.
   13. The reference in the refusal notice to the lack of  an  affidavit  is
       not an assertion that Nigerian law requires an  affidavit  from  both
       parties but a reflection of the fact that the only evidence  provided
       with the application  was  an  affidavit  purportedly  sworn  by  the
       appellant's father with nothing from the bride or the bride's family.
   14. There are a number of  formal  requirements  for  a  valid  customary
       marriage in Nigeria.  It  is  not  disputed  such  marriages  can  be
       recognised as valid within Nigeria whether conducted by the bride and
       groom being present or by proxy, provided the requirements have  been
       satisfied. Those requirements are, in summary, (a)  parental  consent
       to reflect  the  status  of  marriage  as  an  alliance  between  two
       families, (b) consent of the  parties  as  it  will  be  contrary  to
       natural justice if a person was compelled to marry, (c)  capacity  to
       marry (d) Dowry/ bride price, item or items to reflect  the  tangible
       value being placed upon the woman transferred from her family to that
       of the groom, (e) formal handing over of the bride  at  the  marriage
       ceremony.
   15. The Secretary of State  in  the  refusal  did  not  accept  that  the
       documents relied upon by the appellant established this was  a  valid
       proxy marriage. It is specifically stated in  the  refusal  that  the
       decision-maker was not satisfied that the  proxy  marriage  had  been
       carried out in accordance with Nigerian Law.
   16. Despite this clearly having been a matter of concern which would have
       been known to the appellant, the Judge's  finding  that  insufficient
       evidence had been provided to address the respondent's concerns is  a
       finding within the range of those  available  to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence. Nothing further had  been  provided  to  show  whether  the
       bride's family had consented. Providing the documents relied upon  by
       the appellant did not arguably discharge the burden upon him to prove
       the marriage was valid. Before the Judge the  appellant  relied  upon
       the same documents he provided with the application without  provided
       anything further which, if  the  marriage  was  valid  and  had  been
       registered as such, must have been provided to the Registrar to prove
       the requirements of a customary marriage had been complied with.  The
       failure to provide what should have been readily  available  supports
       the Judge's concerns.
   17. In relation  to  the  submissions  made  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
       concerning changes in local practice concerning the dowry, there  was
       no evidence that such a claim was made known to the Judge and  indeed
       Mr Ojukotola conformed that such evidence had not been  provided.  As
       shown above, the issue  of  the  dowry  is  a  relevant  matter  when
       considering the validity of a customary  marriage  and  the  evidence
       provided to the Judge did not establish that the formal  requirements
       had been met.
   18. The assertion by Mr Ojukotola that the respondent should have made  a
       clear reference to Nigerian law if believing the document  signed  by
       the competent authority was not sufficient is noted, but it  was  not
       made out the respondent was unable to raise concerns on the basis  of
       the material provided to her  in  support  of  the  application.  The
       appellant claimed to have been married to his wife.  This  claim  was
       rejected in the refusal and the appellant clearly put  on  notice  of
       the concerns that arose in the mind of  the  decision-maker.  Despite
       that nothing further was provided and the finding by the  Judge  that
       insufficient  evidence  had  been  provided  to  establish  that  the
       requirements of a valid customary marriage had been complied with has
       not been shown to be a finding outside the range of  those  available
       to the Judge on the evidence. The weight to be given to the  evidence
       was a matter for the Judge.
   19. Mr Ojukotola did not address the question of the appellant's  failure
       to  attend  the  marriage  interview  on  three  occasions   in   his
       submissions. There was no challenge to the statement in the  Rule  24
       reply that the invitations were sent  to  the  email  address  of  Mr
       Ojukuotola's firm and no indication that they were not passed  on  to
       the appellant. The respondent's guidance makes it clear that  failure
       to attend an interview will not, in isolation, justify refusal but it
       is clearly a material factor that the  appellant  and  the  woman  he
       claims to have married failed to avail themselves of the  opportunity
       to attended the marriage interview where any concerns could have been
       put to them, giving them the  opportunity  to  reply.  The  fact  the
       appellant also elected to have the merits of the appeal determined on
       the papers, whilst an option open to him in law, also  prevented  the
       Judge being able to discuss his concerns with him.
   20. I find the appellant has failed to establish the Judge's decision  is
       outside the range of those reasonably open to him  on  the  evidence.
       The reference to the marriage not being recognised in the Netherlands
       at [18], whilst an error of law, has not been shown to be material to
       the decision to dismiss the appeal.




Decision

   21. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson                  Dated the 28 October 2020
