
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02377/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2019                |On 15th November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                MIRABELLE [N]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, of Counsel, instructed by Atlas Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born in 1984. She  arrived  in
       the UK in 2010 as a student, in 2011 she met a  German  citizen  with
       whom she had a child, HN, born in  July  2012.  HN,  the  appellant's
       child, is also a German citizen. In 2014 the appellant applied for  a
       residence card on the basis that HN was self-sufficient in the UK and
       she was entitled to remain as her primary carer so she could exercise
       Treaty rights. This application was refused in November 2014, and the
       appeal against that refusal was dismissed in a decision of  Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal A Cresswell promulgated on 28th May 2015.

    2. In November 2015 the appellant was granted  a  residence  card  as  a
       family member of an EEA national, HN's German  father.  In  2017  her
       relationship with him broke down, and her residence card was revoked.

    3. In January 2019 she applied to remain based on  derivative  right  of
       residence as the primary carer of an EEA national, her child HN,  who
       is also a person in education in  the  UK.   On  1st  May  2019  that
       application  was  refused.  Her  appeal  against  the  decision   was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Carroll  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 18th July 2019.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Chohan on 25th September 2019 on the basis that it was arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law in  failing  to  give  adequate
       reasons why the appellant's child would be able to remain in  the  UK
       if she was forced to leave,  and  thus  why  the  appellant  did  not
       qualify under Regulation 16  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
       2016.

    5. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    6. The grounds of appeal contend, in summary as follows. The  First-tier
       Tribunal found that the appellant was  her  daughter,  HN's,  primary
       carer and that she was a single mother. The First-tier Tribunal erred
       in law however in not finding that HN would be forced to leave the UK
       with the appellant as it was wrong to criticise the appellant for not
       bringing HN's father as a witness and complaining  about  a  lack  of
       evidence of his identity when the  respondent  had  clearly  accepted
       this in the past when granting the appellant a residence card as  his
       family member. It is also said that the best interests of  the  child
       assessment by the First-tier Tribunal is entirely inadequate.

    7. Mr Avery accepted  that  the  best  interests  of  HN  had  not  been
       considered when finding that she would not be forced to leave the  UK
       if the appellant was compelled to go, and also that there was a  lack
       of consideration of the appeal in relation to the application for  HN
       to remain based on her being in full time education  in  the  UK.  He
       argued that it was possible that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  found
       that the oral evidence of the appellant was vague (a reason given for
       finding that the appellant could be cared for by her  father  in  the
       UK), but accepted that this oral evidence was  not  set  out  in  the
       decision nor any evidence or example of that vagueness provided.

    8. At the end of the submissions I informed the parties that I found the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred in law, and it was agreed that we could
       proceed immediately to remake the appeal. I preserved the findings of
       the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant was a  single  mother  and
       the primary carer for HN as there was no challenge to the validity of
       these findings.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    9. To qualify for a derivative right of residence to reside  in  the  UK
       under Regulation 16(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016  the
       requirements are, firstly, that the appellant is the primary carer of
       an EEA national, and secondly that the EEA national would  be  unable
       to remain in the UK if the appellant left for an indefinite period of
       time. The First-tier Tribunal  addresses  both  of  these  issues  at
       paragraph 12 of the decision. The  first  issue  is  decided  in  the
       appellant's favour: she is found to  be  HN's  primary  carer  and  a
       single parent.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal finds against the appellant with  regards  to
       the second matter as it is found there is insufficient evidence  that
       HN's father would not care for her  as  there  is  only  a  statement
       without any form of identity document attached to it from the father,
       and the appellant's evidence is said to be very vague and lacking  in
       concrete detail. I find that this is insufficient  reasoning  and  on
       the face of the available evidence irrational as in fact the  written
       statement at pages 11 to 13 of the appellant's  bundle  is  detailed,
       for instance giving examples of how the  appellant  tried  to  engage
       HN's father in her upbringing, and there is no example or account  of
       the oral evidence supporting it being vague. Further, the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred as there is a failure to engage in a consideration  of
       the best interests of the child, which ought to have informed whether
       HN would have to leave the UK so as to  be  able  to  stay  with  her
       mother given the finding that she has been her  primary  carer  since
       the breakdown of her parent's relationship in 2017 and in the context
       of HN being just 7 years old.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

   11. The appellant's evidence, in summary, is as follows. That she came to
       the UK as a student, and met her partner, a German citizen, in  March
       2011. Their daughter HN  was  born  in  July  2012,  and  has  German
       citizenship through her father. She was granted a residence  card  as
       the partner of HN's father valid from November 2015 to November 2020,
       but in January 2017 she separated from him and he has  since  married
       another woman, and they have a child. HN returned to Cameroon between
       December 2016 and August 2018 as the appellant was  studying  in  the
       UK, but returned at that point as her parents were no longer  willing
       to care for her in Cameroon. HN has been in school in  the  UK  since
       November 2018. HN's father continues to work  in  the  UK  as  a  gas
       engineer.

   12. HN's father does not play a significant  role  in  her  life.  He  is
       obliged by the Child Support Agency to provide for  her  financially,
       and only sees her occasionally. He last saw her in August  2019,  and
       sees her less than once every three months. When HN  saw  her  father
       last the visit was only for about 1 hour and the  appellant  remained
       there with her throughout the visit.

   13. The appellant believes that it would be very traumatic for HN if  she
       left the UK without her as she is HN's primary carer, and as a result
       she would be  detrimentally  psychologically  affected  if  she  were
       abandoned in the UK to live with a father and step-mother she  hardly
       knows and who have not expressed a  desire  or  willingness  to  have
       regular and close contact  with  her.  As  a  result,  the  appellant
       argues, if she were forced to leave the UK HN would also be forced to
       leave too. Further it would not be in HN's best interests  to  return
       to Cameroon as there would be no free education and  only  inadequate
       healthcare, and further she, the appellant, would  struggle  to  find
       work to support her and accommodation in that country, and  she,  the
       appellant, would be without her network of good friends  who  provide
       her with psychological support as a single mother in the  UK.  HN  is
       doing  well  at  school  in  the  UK,  and  her  education  would  be
       detrimentally impacted by transferring to Cameroon.

   14. Mr Avery submitted that he relied upon the refusal  letter,  although
       he accepted that the evidence had moved on since the time when it was
       written. The refusal letter  contests  that  the  appellant  is  HN's
       primary carer and contends that the appellant had failed to show that
       HN would be unable to continue to attend school in the UK if she left
       for an indefinite period of time, because her father remains  in  the
       UK and pays maintenance for her, and so  it  was  believed  that  she
       could remain in the UK with her father.

   15. Ms Radford submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  as  the
       appellant can show that she  meets  the  requirements  of  Regulation
       16(3) and Regulation 16(4) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.
       It is accepted that HN's father is a German citizen who has worked in
       the UK, and that there is clear evidence that HN is at primary school
       in the UK. It is accepted that the appellant is HN's  primary  carer,
       and she argues that HN would not be able to continue in education  in
       the UK if the appellant left the UK for an indefinite period of time.

   16. The reason why HN would not be able to continue in education  in  the
       UK if the appellant left is  because  she  could  not  reasonably  be
       expected to join her father and his  new  wife  as  she  has  had  no
       substantial contact with that family, and the evidence  is  that  her
       father is not willing to allow her to join them.  Further  given  her
       age and the close relationship with the appellant,  her  mother,  she
       would have to leave the UK if  the  appellant  were  not  allowed  to
       remain as it would not be in her best interests to be separated  from
       her mother and because she is, and  has  been  for  many  years,  her
       primary carer.

Conclusions - Remaking

   17. I find that the appellant is a credible witness. She has  provided  a
       detailed written witness statement, and answered all questions put to
       her orally in a direct way. There was no submission by Mr Avery  that
       her evidence should not be treated as reliable.

   18. It is uncontested that the appellant can  meet  the  requirements  of
       Regulation 16(3) of EEA Regulations 2016. Her  father  is  a  Germany
       national who was granted a residence permit on the basis of his being
       a worker, a gas engineer, by  the  respondent,  and  the  appellant's
       evidence is that he continues to work  in  this  country,  and  as  a
       result is in a position to  fulfil  his  obligations  via  the  Child
       Maintenance Service to pay her maintenance for HN. These payments are
       documented by a letter from the Child  Maintenance  Service  and  the
       appellant's bank statement showing payments from HN's father. A  copy
       of HN's father's German passport also  appears  in  the  respondent's
       bundle, along with a copy of her own German passport. There  is  oral
       and documentary evidence that HN  has  attended  [~]  Primary  School
       since November 2018.

   19. In relation to Regulation 16(4) of the EEA Regulations  2016  I  have
       preserved the findings from First-tier Tribunal that the appellant is
       a single mother, and HN's primary carer. The only live issue in  this
       appeal is whether, under Regulation 16(4)(b), HN would be  unable  to
       continue with her education in the UK if the appellant were to  leave
       the UK for an indefinite period of time.

   20. I find that this would be the case as I accept the written  and  oral
       evidence of the appellant that HN's father is not willing to care for
       her or have more to do with her than  a  short  contact  visit  every
       three months or so as he has moved on and has a new wife  and  child.
       This is supported by the witness  statement  HN's  father  submitted,
       which is signed with  the  same  signature  as  that  on  his  German
       passport. It is also supported by the fact that the appellant has had
       to use the Child Maintenance Service to obtain financial support from
       HN's father and the fact that there is  no  arrangement  for  regular
       contact with HN.

   21. Further I find that it would not be in HN's best interest to be cared
       for in the UK solely by a father (and possibly his new wife) whom she
       has spent very little time with in the absence of her mother who  has
       been her primary carer, and with whom she has  her  primary  parental
       bond. I find that for the appellant to leave the UK without HN  would
       be detrimental to HN's psychological well-being as a seven  year  old
       child, as it is in  the  best  interests  of  all  children  to  have
       continuity of care and care, if  possible  and  where  there  are  no
       counterindications as in this case, from both parents particularly at
       this young age. If the appellant were to return to  Cameroon  I  find
       that HN would have at least an extended  period  of  time  where  she
       would have no face to face contact with the appellant whilst she  re-
       established herself in employment  and  found  accommodation  so  she
       could afford to sponsor HN to visit her there in  that  country,  and
       that this would be upsetting and disturbing to HN, and would probably
       impact negatively on her education.

   22. On the basis of all of the evidence  I  therefore  conclude  that  HN
       would not be able to continue in education in the UK if the appellant
       were to be forced to leave the UK for an indefinite period  of  time,
       as she would have to leave with the appellant, and that therefore the
       requirements of Regulation 16(4) of the EEA Regulations are also  all
       met.




    Decision:

 1. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 2. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 3. I re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.



Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   12th  November
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley








