
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/02223/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th April 2018                            |On 14th May 2018              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                        mr omotayo raphael fadojutimi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J L Blair, Counsel instructed by Babs and Co,
                  Legal Practitioners
For the Respondent:  Mrs H Abosie, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese to dismiss the  Appellant's  appeal  against  refusal  of  his
    application for a permanent residence card based upon what  he  claimed
    to be a retained  right  of  residence  following  dissolution  of  his
    marriage to a citizen of the European Economic Area.  It  is  right  to
    say that the judge also dismissed a non-existent appeal against refusal
    of an application which had not been made (and which had not  therefore
    been refused) for leave to remain on private and family  life  grounds.
    However, that error was not of itself material to the  outcome  of  the
    appeal and I shall not therefore make any further reference to it.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 8th August  1975.
    He had entered the United Kingdom in dubious  circumstances  which,  by
    his own admission, included using false documents. The judge  therefore
    understandably made adverse credibility findings.  However, one of  the
    questions that I shall have to address is whether his  credibility  was
    relevant to the issues that fell to be determined in the appeal.

 3. I begin by summarising the reasons given by the Secretary of State  for
    refusing the application for a  Residence  Card.  These  are  contained
    within a letter dated 27th February 2016.  The letter begins by setting
    out the various documents that the Appellant had submitted  in  support
    of his application.  It then sets out what it was  that  the  Appellant
    needed to prove to obtain the residence card for which he had  applied.
    It is not suggested that the relevant legal requirements are other than
    accurately  stated  in  the  letter.   Firstly,  the  Appellant  needed
    evidence to show  that  his  EEA  former  spouse  was  exercising  free
    movement rights in the United Kingdom  at  the  time  of  the  divorce.
    Secondly, evidence was required to show that the  marriage  had  lasted
    for at least three years and that both he and  his  former  spouse  had
    been resident in the United Kingdom together  for  at  least  one  year
    during that period.  Thirdly, evidence was required to  show  that  the
    Appellant himself was currently employed, self-employed or economically
    self-sufficient.  Additionally, given that the  Appellant  had  applied
    for a permanent residence card,  he  needed  to  demonstrate  that  his
    residence in the  United  Kingdom  had  been  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of at least five years. This meant,
    amongst other things, that the Appellant would have to prove  that  (a)
    his former spouse had continuously exercised free movement rights up to
    the point of the dissolution of the marriage, (b)  he  (the  Appellant)
    had  been  employed,  self-employed  or   self-sufficient   since   the
    dissolution of the marriage,  and  (c)  that  the  combination  of  the
    periods of (a) and (b) above were equal to a continuous  period  of  at
    least five years.

 4. It was accepted by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  marriage  had
    subsisted for at least three  years.   It  was  also  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that at least one of  those  years  had  been  spent
    together in the United Kingdom. What was  not  accepted,  however,  was
    that the Appellant's former spouse had been in employment at  the  date
    of the dissolution of their marriage.  The reason  for  this  was  that
    although documents were  submitted  as  evidence  of  that  claim,  the
    Secretary of State took  the  view  that  they  were  copies  and  thus
    incapable of verification.  For the same reason, the Secretary of State
    also found that the Appellant had failed to  prove  that  he  had  been
    working since the divorce.  Had those been the only reasons for refusal
    of the application, then I suspect that the subsequent  confusion  that
    has arisen could have been avoided.

 5. However, the Secretary of State went on to note  that  the  Appellant's
    immigration history included illegal entry into the United Kingdom  and
    use of deception in giving various false names to the Respondent,  both
    in the past and in the present application.   The  appellant  had  also
    given different dates of birth.  The  Appellant  accepts  making  these
    false  statements  and  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  consider  his
    explanations for doing so save to observe that they do him  no  credit.
    Those facts, which were not  in  dispute,  led  the  decision-maker  to
    suspect that the Appellant had solely entered  into  his  marriage  for
    immigration purposes, and that he accordingly "did not have a right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom".

 6. Based on the above, the decisionmaker invoked the Secretary of  State's
    powers under Regulation 20B(1)(b) and 20(B)(2)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended)  to  invite  the
    Appellant to attend for an interview in order to "verify"  his  claimed
    right of residence.   The  Appellant  thereafter  failed  to  keep  two
    appointments for such an interview.  His explanation at the hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal was  that  he  had  been  too  ill  to  attend,
    providing a doctor's 'sick note' as support for that claim.

 7. It is necessary to set out precisely how the Secretary of State reacted
    to the above failures before turning to consider the  judge's  approach
    to these issues on appeal. The Secretary of  State's  letter  reads  as
    follows:

         "Where two invitations to interview have been made under regulation
         20(2)(b) and the person  invited  has  failed  to  attend  on  both
         occasions, regulation 20B(4) states:

             '(4) If, with  good  reason,  A  or  B  fail  to  provide  the
                  additional information requested  or  fail  to  attend  an
                  interview on at least two occasions  if  so  invited,  the
                  Secretary of State may draw any factual  inferences  about
                  A's entitlement to a right to reside as appear appropriate
                  in the circumstances'.

         As it is considered  that  you  failed  to  attend  two  interviews
         without good reason,  regulations  20B(4)  and  20B(5)  allows  the
         Secretary of State  to  draw  any  factual  inferences  about  your
         entitlement to a right to reside as may appear appropriate  in  the
         circumstances and to decide, following such an inference, that  the
         person does not have, or ceased to have a right to  reside  in  the
         UK.

         In your particular case, the reasons for inviting you and your  EEA
         national Sponsor for  interview,  combined  with  your  failure  to
         attend two interviews to verify your right,  implies  that  you  do
         not, have a right to reside  under  regulation  14(1)  of  the  EEA
         Regulations.

         Consequently, your application has been refused  under  regulations
         15(1)(f), 10(3) and 2 with reference  to  20B  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations (as amended)."

 8. Pausing there, it is necessary to clarify the reference in the  reasons
    for refusal letter to the invitation  to  attend  for  interview  being
    extended to the Appellant's former  wife.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    reason for this was  that  the  letters  sent  to  the  Appellant  were
    designed for those seeking to have their right of residence  recognised
    on the basis that they  are  currently  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marital relationship.  In such circumstances, it is not surprising that
    the Secretary of State should wish to interview  both  parties,  albeit
    separately.  I reach this conclusion because the letters refer only  to
    the "spouse or partner". They do not however refer to a former  spouse.
    I therefore infer from this that these letters  were  not  intended  to
    cover applicants, such as the Appellant, who are seeking to establish a
    retained right of residence following divorce. In  such  circumstances,
    it would clearly be outside the control of the applicant to secure  the
    attendance of his or her  former  partner  at  an  interview  with  the
    Respondent.  It would thus be wholly inappropriate to draw any  adverse
    inference from the failure of the Appellant's  ex-wife  to  attend  the
    interview, and it is clear from the letter of refusal that the decision-
    maker confined his adverse conclusions to the Appellant's  own  failure
    to attend.

 9. Turning now to the decision of the judge, I begin  by  summarising  his
    findings.  He found that the Appellant was not a credible witness given
    his illegal entry  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  subsequent  use  of
    deception (above).  He  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not  given  a
    credible explanation for either  for  his  own  non-attendance  at  the
    interviews or that  of  his  former  spouse  (again,  see  above).   He
    thereafter considered whether the marriage had been  a  sham  from  the
    outset. Then, at paragraph 32, he said as follows:

         "After careful consideration of all of the evidence  I  accept  the
         case of the Respondent that with a combination  of  all  the  above
         mentioned factors that the sole purpose for the Appellant  entering
         into the marriage with his former  spouse  was  to  facilitate  him
         remaining in this country contrary to  Regulation  2  which  states
         that  "spouse"  does  not  include  a  party  to  a   marriage   of
         convenience."

10. The first problem with the above finding is that the decisionmaker  had
    not explicitly stated that the marriage was one of convenience. Rather,
    in exercise of powers reserved exclusively to the  Secretary  of  State
    under regulations 20B(4) and 20B(5), the  decisionmaker  had  concluded
    that the combination of  circumstances  "implies  that  [the  Appellant
    does] not have a right to reside under  regulation  14(1)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations" [emphasis added].  It was thus not appropriate in my  view
    for the judge to make a finding that the Appellant had entered  into  a
    marriage of convenience in the absence of an explicit  allegation  made
    by the Respondent to that effect. However, even if I am wrong in  this,
    the judge's finding is problematic in other ways.

11. Firstly, and fundamentally,  it  is  far  from  clear  that  the  judge
    appreciated that the legal burden of proving the allegation  (if  made)
    would be upon the Secretary of State and that the standard is a balance
    of probabilities. Mere suspicion (or 'implication')  would  accordingly
    be insufficient.

12. Secondly, there was in any event a considerable  body  of  evidence  of
    cohabitation between the parties to the former marriage which the judge
    appears to have ignored.  Indeed, it was  accepted  by  the  Respondent
    that the parties had cohabited for at least three years as one  of  the
    elements that the Appellant had  to  prove  in  order  to  establish  a
    retained  right  of  residence.   The  fact  of  cohabitation  over   a
    relatively lengthy period should therefore have been factored into  the
    equation when determining the supposed issue of  whether  the  marriage
    had been a 'sham'.

13. The judge also took into account an immaterial matter in having  regard
    to the fact that the Appellant's former spouse had failed to attend for
    interview "to support his application" [paragraph 26 of the  Decision].
    As I noted at paragraph  8  (above)  whilst  the  letter  inviting  the
    Appellant to attend for interview had on the face of it  been  extended
    to his "wife", the Secretary of State had very  sensibly  not  make  an
    issue of it in giving reasons for refusing the application.  The judge,
    on the other hand, wrongly took it into account in  his  assessment  of
    the Appellant's overall credibility. This too was a material  error  of
    law.

14. By contrast with the  power  given  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    Appellant's own failure to attend for interview did not of itself  give
    rise to  a  discretion  exercisable  by  the  Tribunal  to  refuse  the
    application. It was nevertheless a relevant factor  in  the  Tribunal's
    overall assessment of the Appellant's credibility. However, the judge's
    rejection of the explanation given by the Appellant  for  this  failure
    was erroneous in two material respects.  Firstly, the judge  discounted
    the Appellant's 'sick note' on account of the fact that  it  post-dated
    the interviews.  However, he appears to have overlooked  the  fact  the
    sick note  was  backdated  to  cover  the  date  of  those  interviews.
    Secondly, the judge noted that whilst the  Appellant  claimed  to  have
    attempted to  buy  tickets  online  in  the  hope  of  attending  those
    interviews, he had not produced any evidence of such attempts by way of
    relevant  reference  numbers.   However,  the  Appellant's  bundle   of
    documents did in fact contain such evidence [see pages 141 to  147  and
    page 152].

15. In considering the materiality of the above errors to the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal, I remind myself that the Appellant bore the  burden
    of proving the matters set out in paragraphs 3 and 4 (above), and  that
    his overall credibility was at least to that extent  relevant.  I  have
    ultimately concluded, however, that the determination of  the  relevant
    issues was largely dependent upon whether the Secretary  of  State  had
    been right to reject the documents that the Appellant had submitted  in
    support of his application  as  mere  copies  that  were  incapable  of
    verification.  The  documents  in  question  concerned  the  employment
    history of the Appellant and his wife, and one of the central questions
    that fell to be determined was whether those documents were genuine and
    reliable.  It was the Appellant's case that, contrary to the  assertion
    of the Secretary of State, those documents were original documents that
    were capable of verification. That was an issue which, if  resolved  in
    the Appellant's favour, would suffice to establish a crucial element of
    his claim quite independently of his standing as  a  credible  witness.
    At paragraph 31 of his decision, the judge made a passing reference  to
    the fact that  the  Appellant  has  provided  payslips  and  employment
    details to support his application.  There is however no finding at all
    as to whether he accepts  those  documents  are  genuine  and  original
    documents and thus capable of verification. Moreover, the judge  failed
    to make any finding upon the potentially critical question  of  whether
    the Appellant's former wife had been working at the date of dissolution
    of the marriage. Thus, the judge not only made a significant number  of
    immaterial findings,  but  also  failed  to  make  findings  that  were
    potentially critical to the determination of the appeal.

16. I am thus reluctantly forced to conclude that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is so infected by error that it  cannot  stand  and  must
    accordingly be set aside with  none  of  its  findings  preserved.   It
    follows that this is one of those comparatively rare cases where it  is
    appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    matter to be determined afresh.  I  therefore  remit  it  for  complete
    rehearing by a judge other than Judge Abebrese at Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

 1. The appeal is allowed.
 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and is remitted to
    be made afresh at Taylor House by a judge other than Judge Abebrese.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 9th May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly








