
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02962/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 29 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                  Mary [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Ms [M] against the Secretary of State's  decision
    of 24 February 2017 refusing to issue a derivative residence  card.   I
    won't go into the history in any detail.  There was  a  hearing  before
    the First-tier Judge, I set that decision aside following a hearing  on
    17 April 2019 because the judge had, in essence, taken  the  view  that
    the Appellant had to show was the  sole  primary  carer  of  her  child
    rather than, as is now clear from the decision of the Court of  Justice
    in Chavez-Vilchez and  as set out in amendments to the Immigration  EEA
    (European  Economia  Area)  Regulations   2016   amendment   to   those
    Regulations enshrining the conclusions in Chavez-Vilchez, that being  a
    primary carer is sufficient.

2.   The point of concern was that it was not at all clear before the First-
    tier Judge whether she had shown  that  she  had  responsibility  as  a
    primary carer rather than having to be the primary carer  for  her  son
    and therefore matters adjourned for a further hearing to  give  her  an
    opportunity to provide further evidence.  She  had  not  attended  that
    hearing on the basis that there were difficulties in affording the cost
    of travel and getting childcare and she has not  attended  the  hearing
    today.  There has been no application for an adjournment and indeed  no
    further communication from the appellant.  I am satisfied  that  notice
    of the date, time and place of the hearing were sent  to  her  and  her
    representatives, so in my view it is appropriate to go ahead  and  deal
    with the matter today.

3.   Things have moved on somewhat as Mr Lindsay, who appeared on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State has helpfully provided me with  a  copy  of  the
    letter to the appellant on 25 July 2019, granting her a  period  of  30
    months' limited leave to remain on the ten year parent route and it may
    very well be that she has decided that that is the  route  to  go  down
    rather than the EEA route.  The main difficulty that she would face  in
    any event under EEA law, since it is clear that she now has this period
    of leave, is that one can see from the guidance of 1 August 2019, again
    helpfully provided by Mr Lindsay, it is clear that a person  cannot  be
    considered a person with Zambrano right to reside  if  they  have  been
    granted a period of leave to enter or remain and that of course is  now
    the position of the appellant  and  it  is  clear  from  Chavez-Vilchez
    itself that such a circumstance will preclude  a  derivative  right  of
    residence because it is clear  that  in  that  circumstance  where  the
    parent has got leave in the United Kingdom the child would not become a
    Zambrano child and there would be  no  pressure  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  An issue might arise again subsequently after the  period  of
    leave had come to an end, but that, if it ever arises, is  an  argument
    for another day as things stand.  That immediacy which is required  for
    a Zambrano positive decision for an appellant does not  exist  in  this
    case.

4.   As Mr Lindsay says, in the alternative it is difficult to see  how  the
    claim could succeed, there just is not the necessary  evidence  of  the
    appellant being a primary  carer  for  her  child,  there  is  somewhat
    elderly evidence that was produced for the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Judge but  there  has  been  nothing  subsequently  and  certainly
    nothing up-to-date.  That of course does not in any  sense  impinge  on
    her rights in relation to the limited leave to remain that she  has,  I
    simply find that she has not produced evidence to show that  she  is  a
    primary carer and again, as I say, if  the  issue  ever  arose  in  the
    future it would be open to her to produce such evidence, but as matters
    stand she is a person with 30 months'  limited  leave  to  remain,  she
    cannot satisfy the requirements of European law on a derivative  rights
    basis and nor has she shown in the alternative that she  is  a  primary
    carer for her child and therefore the appeal against  the  decision  to
    refuse a residence card is dismissed.

5.   No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              16 August 2019
