

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/02593/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                          Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On 4 October 2018                                  On 11 October 2018

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                               MR ENOCH QUAYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           PJM Hollingworth on 1 August 2018 against the dismissal  of  the
           Appellant's EEA permanent residence card  appeal  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Randall, in a decision and reasons promulgated on
           6 June 2018.  The Appellant is a national of Ghana, born  on  21
           June 1970.  He relied on retained rights  of  residence  as  the
           former spouse of an EEA national. The appeal was  heard  on  the
           papers as had been requested.


      2.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that  the  judge  had  proceeded  without  all  of  the
           evidence which should  have  been  available.  The  Respondent's
           bundle was missing.


      3.    There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant at  the
           Upper Tribunal hearing.  The usual enquiries were  made  of  his
           solicitors but contact could not be established.   The  tribunal
           decided to proceed in the Appellant's absence, which appeared to
           be the Appellant's intention.


      4.    The Appellant had earlier filed and served two large bundles  of
           documents, under cover of  a  letter  dated  5  September  2018.
           Neither bundle had been submitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge and the tribunal declined to admit them for the purpose of
           deciding whether or not there had been a material error of  law.




      5.    Mr Lindsay for the Respondent  submitted  in  summary  that  any
           error of law had not been material, as  the  Appellant  had  not
           produced sufficient evidence on any view to show that he met the
           Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.  It had not  been  clear  at
           what stage the Respondent's  bundle  had  been  filed  with  the
           tribunal, but the copy now available showed that  the  documents
           produced by the Appellant with  his  EEA  application  had  been
           sparse indeed, and far  from  sufficient  to  prove  his  claim.
           There were, for example, only a few  payslips  from  the  former
           spouse, and nowhere near enough to cover a 5-year period. If the
           Appellant had now obtained additional documents, as appeared  to
           be the position, it  was  open  to  him  to  make  a  fresh  EEA
           application so that they could be considered by the Secretary of
           State for the Home Department.


      6.    Complaint is frequently made to the Upper Tribunal that a First-
           tier Tribunal "papers" hearing has in some way  been  defective.
           While the choice of a "papers" hearing is  open  to  appellants,
           they must accept the consequences of not being present in person
           or through a representative to deal with queries or  to  explain
           their case.  Here  the  judge  took  the  sensible  decision  to
           proceed with determining the appeal despite the absence  of  the
           Home Office bundle.  The burden of proof was on the Appellant at
           all stages and there was no reason for the Appellant  to  assume
           that because a document or documents was or  were  in  the  Home
           Office  bundle,  that  bundle  had  been  served  and  would  be
           available to the  judge,  and  would  be  complete.  That  would
           constitute a dangerous assumption, given the  large  numbers  of
           files with which the Home Office has to deal, the risk of  human
           error and the limited extent of resources.   The  Appellant  was
           legally represented and practitioners in this  field  should  be
           well aware of such matters.  What, too, if there was  a  dispute
           about what had in fact been sent to the Home Office?   That,  of
           course, was precisely the situation here, as the  judge  pointed
           out at [9] of his decision.


      7.     The  judge  went  on  to  produce  a   thorough   and   careful
           consideration of the evidence which the Appellant had chosen  to
           provide, within the correct legal framework.  He  accepted  that
           the  Appellant  had  proved  his  former  wife's  identity.   He
           explained  why  the  evidence  of  economic  activity  had  been
           insufficient, in the course of a full and clear decision.  As Mr
           Lindsay pointed out, even if the Home  Office  bundle  had  been
           available, it would have changed nothing because  the  documents
           produced with the EEA application  were  sparse  and  failed  to
           cover the necessary period.


      8.    The tribunal accepts Mr Lindsay's submissions and concludes that
           the judge was entitled to proceed  as  he  did.   There  was  no
           unfairness.  The Appellant failed to produce sufficient evidence
           to prove his case when seeking a "papers" determination.   There
           was  no  error  of  law  and  the  decision  and  reasons  stand
           unchanged.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


      The original decision stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated 4 October 2018




      Deputy         Upper          Tribunal          Judge          Manuell














































































































































































































































































































