


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/02682/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                       |
|On 16 March 2018                      |      On 20 March 2018            |
|                                      |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                           CHITRAKALA SUBRAMANIAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        appellant in person
For the Respondent:     M D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Shimmin promulgated on 29  June  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal for want of jurisdiction.



Background


3. The Appellant was born on 21 April 1973 and is a national of  Sri  Lanka.
On  23  February  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for certification of a right to permanent  residence  under  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Shimmin ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision for want of jurisdiction, relying on Sala (EFMs: Right  of  Appeal)
[2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  14  December  2017  Judge  O'Garro
granted permission to appeal.

The hearing

6. The appellant was present and represented herself. She moved the  grounds
of appeal. The Home Office presenting  officer  immediately  indicated  that
the appeal will not be resisted.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge  failed  to
consider regulation 7(3) & (4) of the 2006  Regulations,  and  that  in  any
event the Court of Appeal has  found  that  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)
[2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) was wrongly decided.

Analysis

7. The appellant was issued a residence card as  the  dependent  of  an  EEA
national  on  25  August  2010.  She  applied  for  a  document   certifying
entitlement to permanent residence on 25 August 2015. Regulation  7  of  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  therefore  applies  to  this  appellant.
Regulation 7(3) & (4) say

      (3) Subject to paragraph (4), a  person  who  is  an  extended  family
      member and has been issued with an EEA family permit,  a  registration
      certificate or a residence card shall be treated as the family  member
      of the relevant EEA national for as long as he  continues  to  satisfy
      the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation to that
      EEA national and the permit, certificate or card has not ceased to  be
      valid or been revoked.


      (4) Where the relevant EEA national is a student, the extended  family
      member shall only be treated as the family  member  of  that  national
      under paragraph (3) if either the EEA family permit was  issued  under
      regulation  12(2),  the  registration  certificate  was  issued  under
      regulation 16(5) or the residence card  was  issued  under  regulation
      17(4).

8. In Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 the Court of Appeal held that Sala  (
EFMs: Right of Appeal ) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) was wrongly decided  and  that
the decision whether to grant an extended family  member  a  residence  card
was a decision which concerned an entitlement as it was a  decision  whether
to grant such an entitlement and hence an "EEA decision" for the purpose  of
the 2006 regulations. Extended family members do therefore, under  the  2006
regulations have  a  right  of  appeal  to  the  tribunal  from  an  adverse
decision.

9. The Judge's decision contains a material error of law. The  Judge  relied
on Sala to reach the conclusion that the appellant  did  not  have  a  valid
right of  appeal.  That  is  clearly  wrong.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
jurisdiction to consider the appeal. Regulation 7 of  the  2006  Regulations
should have been considered.

10. Because the decision contains a material error of law I set it aside.  I
find that I cannot substitute my own decision because  this  is  a  case  in
which the judicial fact-finding exercise has not yet been carried out.

 Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

11. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. I have determined that the case should be remitted because  the  initial
fact-finding exercise is required.  A complete re-hearing is necessary.

13. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Shimmin.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

15.  The Judge's decision promulgated on 29 June  2017  is  set  aside.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 19 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

