
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/02175/2019
                                                           EA/02163/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 July 2021                      |On 16 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                           O A O (first Appellant)
                         M V T O (second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants have been anonymised by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith on 26
    March 2020.   There  is  no  reason  for  me  to  interfere  with  that
    direction.  The first named Appellant is the father of  the  second,  a
    minor.  Their respective dates of birth are 11 December  1980  and  24
    April 2014.  I shall refer to the first Appellant as the Appellant.

 2. On 8 December 2018 the Appellant made an application  for  a  residence
    card as a family member of a  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the 2016  Regulations).  The
    Appellant's application was  based  on  his  marriage  by  proxy  to  a
    Portuguese national, JPG.  The application was refused by the Secretary
    of State on 6 February 2019.  He appealed. His appeal was determined on
    the papers at the Appellant's request. The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Foudy) dismissed the appeal.

 3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on 14  February  2020  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Welsh.  Thus, the matter came before me to determine whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred.

The decision of the SSHD

 4. The Secretary of State's refusal letter states as follows:-

         "The Secretary of State has therefore considered whether a marriage
         contracted by proxy is lawful and valid within Nigeria and  whether
         the evidence of the marital relationship provided is sufficient  to
         demonstrate it was properly executed as to satisfy the requirements
         of the law of the country in which it took place.

         The Nigerian Country of Origin Information (COI) Report,  dated  14
         June 2013, states  that  legal  advice  in  Nigeria  confirms  that
         customary marriage  performed  by  proxy  in  Nigeria  is  "legally
         binding where celebrated in accordance  with  the  native  law  and
         custom of the particular  community".   However,  polygamy,  whilst
         permissible  under  Nigerian  native  and  customary  law,  is  not
         accepted under Nigerian civil law.

         As clearly stated in the fourth schedule to the  1999  Constitution
         of the Federal Republic of Nigeria

         The main functions of a local government council are as follows:

         (i)  registration of all births, deaths and marriages;

         Section 63(g) of the Local Government Edict, 1976 ("LGE")  empowers
         local government to register customary  marriages.   As  a  result,
         some  local  governments  have  bylaws  for  the  registration   of
         customary law marriages and some of these bylaws make  registration
         of customary law marriages compulsory and prescribe a  penalty  for
         failure to register such marriage.

         In addition to the foregoing, the Birth,  Death,  etc.  (Compulsory
         Registration) Decree No. 69 1992 Act CAP.B9 laws of the  Federation
         of Nigeria, 2004 (the "Act") also stipulates that a  customary  law
         marriage  be  registered  within  a  specific  period   after   its
         celebration.  Specifically, Section  30  of  the  Act  provides  as
         follows:

         Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in   any   enactment,   every
         customary marriage contracted in  or  dissolved  in  Nigeria  shall
         immediately after the  commencement  of  this  Act,  be  registered
         within 60 days in the area  court  or  customary  court  where  the
         marriage was contracted or dissolved.

         This means that customary marriages contracted in Nigeria  must  be
         registered within 60 days  and  must  be  in  accordance  with  the
         relevant local government bylaws.  Part VI, Section 42 of the  same
         Act  lays  out  the  provisions  for  registration   of   customary
         marriages.

         (i)  The solemnisation of a  customary  marriage  in  any  part  of
             Nigeria shall be registered within 60 days in the  area  court
             or customary court where the marriage was contracted.

         (ii) Whenever a customary marriage is to be registered,  the  chief
             registrar will require the following information, that is -

             (a)  in respect of the bridegroom -

                  (i)  his full names;

                  (ii) his marital status;

                  (iii)    his occupation;

                  (iv)     his age;

                  (v)  the state of origin;

                  (vi)     the address of his usual place of residence;

                  (vii)    his nationality;

                  (viii)   the name of the person who has consented  to  the
                      marriage; and

                  (ix)     his relationship with the bridegroom,

             (b)  in respect of the bride;

                  (i)  her name;

                  (ii)     her marital status;

                  (iii)    her occupation;

                  (iv)     her age;

                  (v)  her state of origin;

                  (vi)     the address of her usual place of residence;

                  (vii)    her nationality;

                  (viii)   the name of the person who has consented  to  the
                      marriage; and

                  (ix)     the relationship with the bride,

             (c)   such  other  information  as  the  registrar  may   deem
                  necessary for the registration of the marriage.

    (iii)    The  form  CM.1  set  out  in  the  first  schedule  to  those
         Regulations or any similar form as  may  be  used  for  giving  the
         information required under paragraph (2) of this Regulation.

         You have provided evidence of your marriage by proxy in Nigeria  in
         the form of a marriage certificate dated 15 September 2018.  As you
         have been issued a marriage certificate, it is considered that  you
         are also asserting that your marriage  was  registered  in  Nigeria
         within the local state of Lagos on 20 September 2018.

         In consideration of whether your proxy marriage has  been  properly
         executed as to satisfy the requirements of the law of  the  country
         in which it took place, the following has been noted;  as  evidence
         of your claimed  legal  registration  you  have  provided  a  sworn
         affidavit or statutory declaration signed by your uncle and by your
         EEA Sponsor's uncle dated 20 September 2018 stating [OAO] and [JPG]
         married on 15 September 2018 and the marriage  was  conducted  with
         the consent of both family members.

         You have provided a document claiming  to  be  from  the  customary
         court dated 20 September 2018 stating your  uncle  moved  an  oral
         motion on that day the marriage occurred and was supported  by  the
         affidavit submitted to the court.

         It is noted the claimed customary court  document  that  states  an
         oral motion was  provided  by  only  one  family  member  would  be
         considered as insufficient evidence that  your  customary  marriage
         was registered correctly in accordance with the Birth,  Death  Etc.
         (Compulsory Registration) Decree Number 69 1992 Act CAP.B9 laws  of
         the Federation of Nigeria,  2004,  as  incomplete  information  was
         submitted to legally register your customary marriage with the area
         court or customary court based in the  area  that  you  claim  your
         marriage to (sic) place.  Moreover by providing  this  document  it
         indicates that the claimed court registrar  is  not  aware  of  the
         requirements of the Birth, Death,  Etc.  (Compulsory  Registration)
         Decree Number 69 1992 Act CAP.B9 laws of the Federation of Nigeria,
         2004 and therefore casts significant doubt on the genuine nature of
         this document.  On that basis and without significant  verification
         evidence to the contrary, it  is  deemed  that  the  claimed  court
         registrar stated is not a competent authority with legal  power  to
         create or confirm the facts it attests.

         The marriage certificate you have provided  has  been  stamped  and
         signed by a claimed registrar, but no evidence has been provided to
         confirm that the person stated has the authority with  legal  power
         to create or confirm the facts it attests.  On  the  basis  of  the
         evidence provided this department does not accept that the  claimed
         marriage certificate has been issued by a competent authority.

         It is also noted that the claimed registrar  has  signed  both  the
         marriage certificate and the customary court  document.   It  is  a
         requirement that the customary  court  document  is  issued  by  an
         independent third party to the marriage.  As this claimed registrar
         has signed and issued both documents this information further leads
         this department to doubt that these documents have been issued by a
         competent authority.

         You have not provided any evidence that your  marriage  certificate
         has been issued by a competent authority in Nigeria and it  is  not
         therefore accepted that your  marriage  certificate  is  a  validly
         issued document.

         On the basis of  the  above,  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  be
         satisfied that your claimed marriage by  proxy  has  been  properly
         executed as to satisfy the requirements of the law of  the  country
         in which it took place and that the  claimed  marriage  certificate
         has  been  issued  by  a  competent  authority  in  Nigeria.   Your
         application is refused with reference to Regulation 7  of  the  EEA
         Regulations 2006 ...".

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge stated as follows:

         "7.      The marriage that took place between the  first  Appellant
             and [JPG] was a proxy marriage that was registered in Lagos on
             20 September 2018.  In order to prove  that  the  registration
             complied with Nigerian civil  law,  the  first  Appellant  has
             produced  a  document   from   the   customary   court   dated
             20 September 2018 stating that the Appellant's uncle [AO], had
             himself moved an oral motion that day.   It  appears  to  have
             been signed by  the  customary  court  registrar,  one  [BSA].
             However the same [BSA] is the  official  who  has  signed  the
             proxy marriage certificate itself and who has  registered  the
             marriage with the Lagos state government.  It appears  strange
             indeed that the same official would  be  responsible  for  all
             aspects of the proxy marriage; this would appear to  undermine
             the whole registration process.

         8.   In the Appellants' bundle  [pages  26  and  27]  is  a  letter
             written by the Appellants' representatives  to  the  customary
             court registrar seeking further  information.   It  singularly
             fails to address the real  issue  raised  by  the  Respondent,
             namely the fact that the customary court registrar went on  to
             formally register the proxy marriage at  state  level.   [BSA]
             therefore failed to deal  with  the  point  in  issue  in  her
             replies, merely asserting that proxy marriage  is  allowed  in
             Nigeria and the marriage was registered.

         9.   I am not satisfied on the evidence before me that the marriage
             is properly registered in accordance with Nigerian civil  law,
             that recognises proxy marriages only in certain circumstances.



         10.  Taking all of the above into account, the Appellant has failed
             to discharge the burden of proving that he is  married  to  an
             EEA national and entitled to a residence card under  the  2016
             Regulations.  It follows that both appeals fail".

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal that were before  Judge  Welsh  assert  that  the
    judge erred in law as he misdirected himself as to the relevant law and
    failed to make the relevant assessment as to what constitutes  a  valid
    foreign marriage recognised in the UK.  They state as follows about the
    judge:-

         "Failed to appreciate the fact that it is outside his  jurisdiction
         for him  to  ascertain  how  a  country  should  have  conducted  a
         marriage, and as such it is only the relevant  competent  authority
         of that country that could establish if a marriage is valid or not,
         and that once those authority ascertain that the said  marriage  is
         valid, the lexi-loci principle applies and such  marriage  must  be
         recognised in the United Kingdom as valid".

 7. The case of Awuku and Secretary of State [2017] EWCA Civ 178 is  relied
    on, specifically paragraphs 15.

 8. It is  asserted  that  the  Appellant  provided  an  adequate  marriage
    certificate and the judge failed to attach due weight to this  and  the
    other cogent documents. It is asserted that the judge  took  irrelevant
    matters into  account.   It  is  asserted  that  the  judge  "misguided
    himself."

 9. It is asserted that the decision is ill-founded, flawed  and  unlawful.
    The judge is misguided when he finds that the letter at page 26 of  the
    AB fails to deal with the issue (at para 8). It is not correct  because
    pages 24 and 26 of the  AB  confirm  that  the  that  registration  was
    properly done pursuant to relevant law.  The  judge  failed  to  "avail
    himself of the detailed grounds of appeal" which give a detailed  legal
    explanation of what constitutes a customary marriage in  Nigeria.   The
    judge created a supposedly (sic) rule on  how  the  Nigerian  customary
    marriage should have been conducted. The following is asserted  in  the
    grounds:-

         " ...case further turned upon  the  IJ  at  paragraph  6  where  he
         asserts that it is  The  Appellant's  duty  to  adduce  before  him
         reliable evidence, this was what the Appellant placed before the IJ
         but unfortunately, the IJ  was  not  interested  in  according  due
         weight despite the fact that the response from the customary  court
         lends credence to the Appellant's marriage to a spouse".

10. It is asserted that the Appellant successfully discharged the burden of
    proof however the Respondent failed to "proof (sic) its case."   It  is
    asserted that there has been a "serious mishandling of his case and the
    use of assumptions and hearsay by the Respondent and its agents".

Written submissions

11. The written submissions are similar to the grounds in content and tone.



12. It is asserted that the judge erred in "overlooking  material  evidence
    re marriage certificate and confirmation from the relevant authority in
    Nigeria".  It is asserted that the Appellant provided a valid  marriage
    certificate and in addition the registrar who is the authorised  person
    to register marriages wrote a confirmation letter  enclosing  the  form
    MCM1 and affirming that the marriage had indeed complied with  all  the
    requirements and had been registered as required by the relevant law.

13. The  grounds  state  that  the  Appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    customary court on 28 June 2019 (post the  date  of  the  decision)  in
    preparation for the appeal. The following is stated,

         "It is submitted that the FtJ had no jurisdiction to  rule  on  the
         procedure of 'how' and 'why' the marriage certificate was issued if
         there is  no  counter  evidence  before  him  from  the  Respondent
         asserting that there is an issue with the  documents  or  that  the
         said customary court  had  denied  issuing  any  of  the  documents
         contained in pages 13 to 27 of the  Appellant  bundle  showing  the
         Appellant's valid marriage  certificate  and  confirmation  letters
         from the relevant registrar who registered the marriage".

14. It is claimed that the judge made an error of law at  paragraph  7  for
    the following reasons:-

         "In creating his own law in regards to how the marriage should have
         been registered, the law as it is applied in Nigeria is not in  the
         jurisdiction of the IJ and in the absence of any  counter  evidence
         from the Respondent,  the  IJ  has  acted  ultra  vires  and  taken
         irrelevant matters into account".

15. It is claimed that  the  finding  made  by  the  judge  "is  erroneous,
    exaggerated, and uncalled for".   It  shows  that  the  judge  did  not
    "understand the marriage process and failed to review the papers before
    him adequately".  The relevant registrar did not do all aspects of  the
    proxy marriage, he only conducted his part of it which is  to  register
    the marriage on 20 September 2018 and confirm he did so  in  a  letter.
    The judge failed to adequately determine the matter  before  him.   The
    judge did not have regard to the evidence.

The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

16. There was a bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  contains  a
    witness statement from the Appellant and  one  from  the  Sponsor.   In
    addition there is a document (AB/14) which is a certificate from  Lagos
    state government purporting to certify that the Appellant  was  married
    to the EEA national and that the marriage was  performed  according  to
    native law and custom.  There are two  dates  on  the  bottom  of  this
    document, one 15 September 2018 (which is the date of the marriage) and
    the second 20 September  2018  (which  is  the  date  of  issue).   The
    document is  stamped  and  signed  by  the  registrar,  Billy  Sherifat
    Abosede.

17. There is a document (AB/15) dated 20 September 2018.  This document  is
    similarly signed by the court registrar, Billy Sherifat Abosede.  It is
    from Mushin Local Government and it purports to be  confirmation  of  a
    traditional marriage under the  native  law  and  customs  between  the
    Appellant and the EEA Sponsor.  The document states as follows

         "We hereby confirm that, above captioned persons married under  the
         native law and customs on the 15th day of September,  2018  at  83,
         Oriokuta, Ikorodu, Lagos state of Nigeria.

         The groom's uncle Mr [AO] moved an oral motion in the court on 20th
         day of September 2018 to this effect suitably  supported  by  seven
         paragraphs affidavit and completed  form  MCM.1  submitted  to  the
         court by himself.

         The traditional marriage conformed with the native law and  customs
         of the land ...".

18. There is a form MCM.1 (registration of native law and customs  marriage
    (AB/16).  This document is dated 20 September 2018.  It  is  signed  by
    the uncle and  stamped  and  signed  by  Billy  Sherifat  Abosede,  the
    registrar.




19. There is a document (AB/18) dated 20 September 2018  and  entitled  "in
    the Magistrate Court of Lagos state of Nigeria Holden at Ogba".  It  is
    a  sworn  affidavit  from  the  Appellant's  uncle,  comprising   seven
    paragraphs.  There is a sworn affidavit in similar terms from  PGI  the
    uncle of the EEA  Sponsor.   There  is  a  document  (AB/23)  which  is
    described as  a  decree  absolute  supporting  that  the  Appellant  is
    divorced.


20. There is a document (AB/24) from Mushin Local Government dated  3  July
    2019 (after the date of the decision).  It is  an  affidavit  from  the
    court  registrar  Billy  Sherifat  Abosede  and  it  attests  that  the
    registration of  the  marriage  was  properly  done  "pursuant  to  the
    relevant laws stated above and duly signed by the  authorised  official
    of this honourable court".   There is  a  document  of  the  same  date
    (AB/25) from Mushin Local Government signed  again  by  Billy  Sherifat
    Abosede the  court  registrar  which  attests  to  the  marriage  being
    conducted under the native law and  custom  of  Lagos  state,  Nigeria.
    These documents (AB/24 and AB/25) are a response to  a  letter  to  the
    registrar from Chris Alexander Solicitors (AB/26) dated  28  June  2019
    asking for confirmation that the marriage certificate  was  issued  and
    valid and that the marriage was duly and fully registered  as  required
    by the relevant customary law of Mushin Local Government of Lagos state
    and that this was duly attested by the relevant authorised offices  and
    that either party to the marriage and/or their family member.


The hearing before the UT

21. The Appellant did not attend the hearing before me. The  solicitors  on
    record were contacted by the clerk. They said that they had written  to
    the Tribunal to ask to come off the record one week before the hearing.
    There was no record of this before me. In any event,  I  was  satisfied
    that Appellant had been sent a notice of hearing. It had been  sent  to
    his solicitors before they came off the record and to his home address.
     The Apppellant chose not to attend the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. He has not responded to directions issued by the UT. Applying
    Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the  2008
    Rules), I concluded that it was fair  and  just  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the Appellant's absence.

22. Mr Kotas, representing the Secretary of State, submitted that there was
    no error of law.  There was a Rule 24 response from  the  Secretary  of
    State of 13 May 2020.  The thrust of it is that  the  judge  was  faced
    with a paper hearing and the evidence before her.  The judge  concluded
    that given the same person who signed the register formally  registered
    the marriage  at  state  level  and  replied  to  the  replies  to  the
    representative's letter (AB/24/25 and 26) undermines the process.   The
    judge was not given any expert evidence that this is permissible  under
    Nigerian law.  The burden of proof is on the Appellant.

23. Mr Kotas submitted the burden of proof rests on the Appellant  and  the
    Appellant did not produce evidence to engage with the issues raised  in
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter or indeed  to  address  or  explain  the
    requirements of the Nigerian law.

Awuku and Secretary of State [2017] EWCA Civ 178

24. In Awuku the Court of Appeal considered proxy marriages in the  context
    of the EEA Regulations and confirmed the formal validity of a  marriage
    is governed  by   lex  loci  celebrationis;  namely;  that  a  marriage
    celebrated in the mode or according to the rites or ceremonies required
    by the law of the country where the marriage takes place is, as far  as
    formal requisites go, valid. In general the law of a  country  where  a
    marriage is solemnised must alone decide all questions relating to  the
    validity of the ceremony by which the marriage is alleged to have  been
    constituted.




25. To summarise, if  the  Appellant's  proxy  marriage  is  recognised  in
    Nigeria, the marriage is valid under the law of England and Wales  and,
    as a consequence, the relevant requirements of the EEA Regulations  are
    met.

Findings and reasons

26. The judge correctly identified the burden of proof at paragraph 3.   He
    properly stated that it  was  for  the  Appellant  to  prove  that  any
    document upon which he sought to rely is reliable and  he  acknowledged
    that he must consider the evidence in the round.

27. The issue before the judge was whether the marriage had been  conducted
    in accordance with Nigerian law.  To suggest that  the  judge  did  not
    understand this does not reflect a proper reading of the  decision  and
    ignores what is clearly stated by the judge. The decision  discloses  a
    clear understanding that Awuku applied.

28. It is for the Appellant to establish that  the  marriage  was  properly
    registered in accordance with Nigerian civil law.   I  have  considered
    the grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal and it is fair  to
    say  that  there  was  no  coherent  legal  argument  setting  out  the
    requirements under Nigerian Law and how the Appellant met them.   There
    was no proper analysis of Nigerian law. Similarly, there was no  expert
    evidence relied on by the Appellant. Bare assertions were made  in  the
    grounds and Nigerian caselaw cited without proper or clear  explanation
    or analysis.  The grounds of appeal were of little, if any,  assistance
    to the judge concerning the legal requirements  of  a  marriage  to  be
    valid under Nigerian law.

29. The grounds before me are an attempt to re-argue  the  case.  They  are
    overly argumentative. The judge was not under any obligation to  accept
    the  documents  at  face  value  as  reliable,  despite  the  misplaced
    indignation expressed in the grounds  and  written  submissions.    The
    judge was entitled to conclude that  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    Appellant was not sufficient to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof.   A
    proper reading of her decision indicates that she did not find that the
    documentary evidence was reliable or sufficient to discharge the burden
    of proof. She found that the Appellant had not engaged with the  issues
    in the decision letter.   The judge relied on a  point  raised  by  the
    SSHD about the documents having been signed by the same person. It  was
    a point on which the judge was entitled to rely. The Appellant did  not
    at any time seek to address this.  Further documents were obtained from
    Nigeria, signed by the same person.

30. The is no error of law properly identified in the grounds. The decision
    of the judge to dismiss the appeal is maintained.

31. In any event, if I were to  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence that was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge,  I would conclude that the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof to establish that the marriage was lawful
    under Nigerian law.  While the decision of the SSHD does not  make  for
    easy reading, issues were raised which the Appellant failed to address.
    Furthermore the burden is on the Appellant to establish that  he  meets
    the requirements of Nigerian law. He has failed to do so.

32. The judge did not make a finding in respect of the  durability  of  the
    relationship, a matter which is raised in the grounds of appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  However this is not an issue  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal before me.  In any event,  the  evidence  before  the
    judge was in my view skeletal.  There are witness statements  from  the
    Appellant and his partner which comprise two  pages  and  there  are  a
    number of photographs showing a couple together. The  evidence  is  not
    sufficient to discharge the burden of proof.   It  does  not  establish
    that there is a durable  relationship.  The  Appellant  chose  for  the
    matter to be determined on the papers before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judge did not have the benefit of hearing oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant or his partner.

33. There is no error of law in respect  of  the  judge's  decision  as  it
    concerns the appeal under Regulation 7 of the  2006  Regulations.   The
    decision to dismiss the appeal is maintained.  I  further  dismiss  the
    appeal under Regulation 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 27 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
