
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02596/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th June 2019                    |On 23rd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                Anoop Kairon
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Khan of Counsel, instructed by Sahota & Sahota
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Watson promulgated on 6 September  2018,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  application
    for an EEA Residence Card as the dependent  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national dated 7 March 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of India, born  on  10  January  1987,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom on 13 September 2011 as the  dependent
    of his wife, who was in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student, with leave to remain as such until 2015.   The  Appellant  and
    his wife had a son 4 April 2013 in the United Kingdom.   In  2016,  the
    Appellant's father (the "EEA Sponsor"), a German national, moved to the
    United Kingdom, started work and lived together with the Appellant, his
    wife and child.

 3. The Respondent refused the  application  the  basis  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant resided with the EEA  Sponsor,  noted  that
    the  documents  provided  were  nearly  2  years  old  and  there   was
    insufficient evidence of financial  support  to  meet  the  Appellant's
    essential needs; such that it was not accepted that the  Appellant  was
    dependent on his EEA sponsor.

 4. Judge Watson dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  6
    September 2018 on the basis that the Appellant had not  shown  that  he
    was the dependent family member of the EEA Sponsor.  The legal position
    was set out by the First-tier Tribunal in paragraphs  4  to  7  of  the
    decision, within which it is recognised that the  sole  issue  in  this
    appeal was dependency.  In relation to that, the following was said:

         "5.  The appellant has to establish dependency upon his sponsor  as
         at the date of the hearing.   This  must  be  a  genuine  financial
         dependency and not a contrived one for the  purposes  of  obtaining
         immigration status.  The appellant must show  that  he  needed  and
         received material support from the EEA national in  order  to  meet
         his basic needs.

         6.   The appellant had to show that he receives  financial  support
         from his father, that the support is material and that the  support
         is for the basic  necessities  of  life.   It  is  not  necessarily
         relevant that there are alternative sources  of  support  available
         either in the country of origin or in  the  UK,  but  such  may  be
         relevant to the findings of fact  on  the  genuine  nature  of  the
         claimed dependency."

 5. The First-tier Tribunal summarised the documentary  and  oral  evidence
    before it in paragraphs 14  to  35  of  the  decision,  which  included
    commentary on the consistency of the evidence, whether it  supported  a
    finding of dependency or not and as to the credibility of the Appellant
    and the Sponsor.  The findings of fact then followed  in  paragraph  36
    and onwards, with the main findings and reasons as follows:

         "36. I find that the appellant has not  shown  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that he was dependent upon the sponsor for the  daily
         necessities of life whilst in India or in the UK.  There  has  been
         little evidence of  money  sent  out  prior  to  the  date  of  the
         application, and the amounts  sent  have  been  irregular  and  not
         sufficient to be the sole means of support as claimed.  The sponsor
         has given oral evidence inconsistent with the information  provided
         in the form by the appellant  himself  and  inconsistent  with  the
         documents provided.  The sponsor states that he has  visited  India
         in 2016, yet the financial information  provided  by  the  employer
         does not reflect a two-month period of absence and the money  going
         into the account remains the same.  The  appellant  was  previously
         supporting himself and his family from wages and confirmed that  he
         was making savings up to when his visa was curtailed.  It  is  only
         after this point that the sponsor arrives  in  the  UK  and  takes,
         according to him, a  job  paying  considerably  less  than  he  was
         earning in Germany.  I find that the claimed  support  is  entirely
         contrived to found a basis of stay  in  the  UK.   I  find  on  the
         balance of  probabilities  that  the  appellant  is  able  and  has
         supported  himself  throughout  recent  years.   I  find  that  the
         evidence given by the sponsor and appellant was so inconsistent  as
         to the sponsor's working arrangements that I cannot find a  balance
         of probabilities that the sponsor is earning the money claimed.   I
         further find that the documented transfer of payments made in  2018
         was contrived to support the  appellants  application  and  is  not
         evidence  of  genuine  dependency  but  was  provided  to  gain  an
         immigration advantage.  This application has  nothing  to  do  with
         enabling the freedom of movement and  labour  of  an  EEA  citizen,
         namely Mr M Kairon who moved to the UK after his son and his family
         to join them when they were already in the UK overstaying a visa.

         37.  I find that the family lived together at ... But that this  is
         not due to the appellants  dependency  needs.   This  is  a  family
         arrangement and no doubt is of benefit to all of  them.   There  is
         however no dependency apart from a contrived  one  for  immigration
         reasons."

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on the following grounds.  First, that the First-
    tier Tribunal applied the wrong test for  dependency.   Secondly,  that
    there was improper consideration of  the  evidence  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Thirdly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained
    factual mistakes and inconsistent findings.  Fourthly, that the  First-
    tier Tribunal included in its reasons, matters which were  not  put  to
    the  Appellant  and/or  the  Sponsor  which  was  procedurally  unfair.
    Finally, there were  problems  with  interpretation  of  the  Sponsor's
    evidence which were raised at the time with  First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    not properly taken into account when adverse credibility findings  were
    made against the Sponsor.

 7. On behalf of the Appellant, Counsel relied on the  written  grounds  of
    appeal, amplifying them in oral submissions and focusing on the correct
    legal test for dependency.

 8. On behalf of the  Appellant,  it  was  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in  the  test  applied  for  dependency  for  the
    purposes of obtaining an EEA Residence  Card.   First,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered only financial dependency and failed in  accordance
    with Jia v Migrationsverket C-1/05 [2007] QB 545 and Reyes  (EEA  Regs:
    dependency) [2013] UKUT 00314 (IAC)  to  make  a  holistic  assessment,
    including financial, physical and social matters to establish a genuine
    relationship of dependency.

 9. Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal erred in  considering  whether  there
    was dependency in the past, including when the Appellant was  in  India
    and when the EEA Sponsor was in Germany, whereas the test  is  only  on
    present dependency.

10. Thirdly, the First-tier Tribunal required the Appellant to show that he
    both needed and received material support  from  the  EEA  Sponsor  and
    considered that alternative sources  of  support  may  be  relevant  to
    findings as to whether  there  was  a  genuine  dependency  not.   This
    applies a  two-pronged  approach,  contrary  to  the  case  law,  which
    requires a single question of whether the Appellant is  in  receipt  of
    financial support to meet his essential needs.  It is not necessary  in
    that assessment to determine why a person needs financial  support,  or
    whether there are alternative means of support and it is not  necessary
    for a person to be solely financially dependent on an EEA national.

11. It was accepted that the First-tier Tribunal's requirement in paragraph
    6 of the decision that support must be material, was not a misdirection
    in law, simply reflecting that support must be more than de minimis.

12. Overall, it was submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the  approach
    of the First-tier Tribunal to the issue of dependency deprived him of a
    fair and balanced assessment of the evidence.  This included a  failure
    to approach the matter holistically and also a  failure  to  take  into
    account the evidence that  the  EEA  Sponsor  paid  for  accommodation,
    utilities and food for the whole family,  in  addition  to  giving  the
    Appellant direct financial support, primarily in the form of cash.

13. As to  claimed  factual  errors  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it was submitted that there was simply  a  miscalculation  in
    paragraph 18 of the decision as the Sponsor was paid on a four  weekly,
    not monthly basis, such that his total earnings did reflect his claimed
    income.  In paragraph 13 of the decision, the  Sponsor  was  not  asked
    about whether he was given holiday pay whilst  in  India  in  2016,  to
    account for continuing payments during this  period.   In  relation  to
    inconsistency, the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the  family
    all live together, with the EEA Sponsor  providing  the  accommodation,
    itself shows a situation of dependency meeting essential needs  of  the
    Appellant.

14. Finally, Counsel for the Appellant maintained the ground of appeal that
    there  were  interpretation  difficulties  during  the  EEA   Sponsor's
    evidence which were not properly taken into account by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal when making adverse credibility findings but accepted that  no
    statement had been made by the Counsel appearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal as this was thought to be unnecessary.  Instead, paragraph  21
    of the written grounds of appeal was relied upon, which claimed that it
    became clear during the Sponsor's evidence that what  the  Sponsor  was
    saying was not being correctly translated from Punjabi into English and
    that concerns were immediately raised with the judge.  It is said  that
    essential parts  of  this  EEA  Sponsor's  evidence  was  either  being
    completely left out or misinterpreted it is  that  some  attempts  were
    made to rectify position but it was all unsatisfactory and  submissions
    had to be made asking for  allowance  to  be  made  for  the  fact  the
    evidence had been interpreted poorly.

15. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tufan relied upon the Court of Appeal's
    decision in Lim v Entry Clearance Officer, Manila [2015] EWCA Civ  1383
    as to the correct test for dependency,  set  out  in  paragraph  32  as
    follows:

         "In my judgement, the critical question is whether the claimant  is
         in fact in a position to support himself  or  not,  and  Reyes  now
         makes that clear beyond doubt, in my view.  That is a simple matter
         of fact.  If he can support himself, there is no  dependency,  even
         if he is given financial material support by the EU citizen.  Those
         additional resources are not necessary to enable him  to  meet  his
         basic needs.  If, on the other hand, he cannot support himself from
         his own resources, the court will not ask why  that  is  the  case,
         save perhaps where there is an abuse of rights.  The fact  that  he
         chooses not to get a job and become self-supporting is  irrelevant.
         ..."

16. In the present appeal, it was submitted that financial support had been
    given to the Appellant, but it was not  necessary  to  meet  his  basic
    needs and therefore the appeal  was  bound  to  fail.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal made clear findings that the  Appellant  is  able  to  support
    himself as he has  done  in  previous  years  and  adverse  credibility
    findings were made throughout the decision.  For example, there  was  a
    discrepancy in the evidence as to the  Sponsor's  work  in  the  United
    Kingdom (paragraph 15); that the total wages paid  did  not  equate  to
    claimed monthly earnings (paragraph 18); that there was no  explanation
    for a sudden decrease in  rent  paid  (paragraph  19);  that  the  bank
    statements showed normal usage  of  the  account  while  the  Appellant
    claimed to be in India (paragraph 21); that the Appellant had  declared
    himself eligible to vote in the United Kingdom (paragraph 22); the lack
    of evidence of any long-standing financial dependency  (paragraph  25);
    and that the Appellant had outstanding debts with  the  NHS  (paragraph
    27).

17. However, applying the test in Lim, Mr Tufan accepted that if there  was
    evidence of  financial  dependency,  it  would  be  accepted  that  the
    Appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016,  such  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside and the decision could be  remade  on  the
    papers.  On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted that  the  appeal
    may need to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as further  evidence
    may be necessary to determine the appeal if the decision is set aside.

Findings and reasons

18. I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially  erred  in  law  in  its
    approach to the question of dependency for the purposes of Regulation 7
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  both  in
    the self-direction given as to the legal position in paragraphs 5 and 6
    of the decision, and apparent throughout the decision in terms  of  the
    findings made in relation to the sole issue  of  dependency.   This  is
    particularly so where there has been no allegation  by  the  Respondent
    that there has been an abuse of rights, nor any lack of genuineness  of
    dependency which could be relevant to the issue to be determined.

19. The approach of the First-tier Tribunal to include in its determination
    of the primary issue reference  to  past  support  and  dependency,  to
    exclude wider considerations of the nature of the relationship  between
    the Appellant and the EEA Sponsor  and  to  require  the  Appellant  to
    identify a need for financial support which could not otherwise be  met
    (as it found it had been in the past through employment  and  savings),
    in particular by reference  to  previous  self-support  in  the  United
    Kingdom were all errors of law which are material to the outcome of the
    appeal.  The correct legal test is summarised succinctly  in  paragraph
    32 of Lim, and in detail in Reyes, as set out above, and  it  is  clear
    that that was not the approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal in  the
    present appeal.  For these reasons, it is necessary to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and for the appeal to be determined
    afresh in accordance with the correct test.

20. As to the grounds of appeal in  relation  to  claimed  factual  errors,
    these points add little of substance to the primary ground of appeal as
    to the approach in law to the  sole  issue  in  this  appeal,  that  of
    dependency.  The claimed factual errors only go to  the  assessment  of
    credibility of the EEA Sponsor  in  the  present  case,  which  is  not
    ultimately material to the outcome of the appeal if the  correct  legal
    test is applied, particularly given  the  acceptance  recorded  at  the
    outset of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the EEA  Sponsor
    is a qualified person under Regulation 6 of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016.   The  same  response  is   equally
    applicable to the grounds of appeal in relation to procedural  fairness
    and reliance upon matters not put to the witnesses.

21. As to the grounds of appeal in relation  to  inconsistent  findings  of
    fact, primarily the finding in relation to the family living  together,
    that is effectively part  and  parcel  of  the  error  of  law  already
    identified as to the correct approach to the issue of dependency and is
    a factual finding which should have been  taken  into  account  if  the
    correct legal test had been applied.

22. In relation to the final ground of appeal about interpretation, I  find
    no error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    paragraph 3 of the decision under appeal, it is recorded  that  at  one
    point  in  hearing  the  representative  raised  an  issue   with   the
    interpretation.   The  answer  was  repeated  and  the   representative
    confirmed at the end of the hearing that she had  no  other  issues  to
    raise  with  regard  to  interpretation.   The  record  of  proceedings
    available on the file is consistent  with  what  is  contained  in  the
    decision, confirming that it was only one point of concern in  relation
    to interpretation.

23. The matters raised in the written grounds of appeal are not  consistent
    with the record of proceedings decision, nor  are  they  supported,  as
    would be expected and required in support of such an allegation,  by  a
    written witness statement by Counsel appearing for the Appellant before
    the First-tier Tribunal, see in particular BW  (witness  statements  by
    advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568 (IAC)  and  Ortega  (remittal;
    bias; parental relationship) [2018[ UKUT 298.

24. In these circumstances, the written grounds of appeal are not made  out
    and the sole instance  of  concern  over  interpretation  was  resolved
    during the course of the oral hearing.  There is therefore no error  of
    law in the adverse  credibility  findings  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis of oral evidence  of  the  EEA  Sponsor  when  no
    further instances of problems with interpretation  which  are  said  to
    have  unfairly  contributed  to  the  findings   have   been   properly
    identified.  In any event, the outcome of the appeal does not  turn  on
    this point.

25. As above, it is necessary to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because it involved the making of a material error of  law  in
    the assessment of dependency.  Although it was suggested by Counsel for
    the Appellant that further evidence  may  be  required  to  remake  the
    decision, there was no specific submission about what further  evidence
    or findings of fact  would  be  required  to  remake  the  decision  in
    accordance with the correct legal test.

26. Contained in the bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  were  detailed
    written statements from the Appellant, his wife and the EEA Sponsor and
    there is a record of proceedings of  the  oral  evidence  of  both  the
    Appellant and the EEA Sponsor; together with  an  extensive  bundle  of
    documents containing a tenancy agreement, utility and other bills, bank
    statements, payslips and letters  in  relation  to  the  EEA  Sponsor's
    employment and various other correspondence addressed to the  Appellant
    his wife and the EEA Sponsor.  The evidence is set out in  some  detail
    in paragraphs 14 to 34 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    there is no further evidence required to remake the decision on appeal,
    either documentary or witness evidence.  I therefore go  on  to  remake
    the decision under appeal as follows.

27. As above, the sole issue in this appeal is  whether  the  Appellant  is
    dependent on his EEA Sponsor, which is a factual question, as  set  out
    in Lim.  The question is whether the Appellant is in fact in a position
    to support himself and on the facts of this case I find that he is not.
     There is no suggestion by the Respondent or in the evidence before the
    Tribunal that the Appellant, or his wife, has any current (or  in  fact
    has recently had) source of income available to support themselves  for
    their essential daily needs.  Although it is not necessary to  consider
    the reason for this or whether they could  support  themselves,  it  is
    clear from the facts of the case that they are unable to do so  because
    they have no permission to work in the  United  Kingdom  following  the
    curtailment of leave to remain in 2015.

28. The Appellant, his wife and  son  are  living  together  with  the  EEA
    Sponsor in the United Kingdom and the documentary evidence  shows  that
    it is the EEA Sponsor who is primarily financially responsible for  the
    accommodation and daily living expenses.  The EEA Sponsor pays rent for
    the property on a monthly basis and it is irrelevant for  the  purposes
    of this appeal that the rent payments have  reduced  from  the  initial
    tenancy agreement.  The EEA Sponsor is  also  responsible  for  utility
    bills at the accommodation.  There are bills in  the  Appellant's  name
    for virgin media and sky, although it is  the  EEA  Sponsor's  evidence
    that he provides the money for these  bills  to  be  paid  out  of  the
    Appellant's account.  In any event, the Appellant does not need  to  be
    solely financially dependent  on  the  EEA  Sponsor  and  even  if  the
    Appellant was paying for some of the bills at the property, that  would
    not detract from or alter a finding of financial support being given by
    the EEA Sponsor for the Appellant's essential needs.

29. In addition, the EEA Sponsor's bank statements also show  payments  for
    other basic necessities of life, including food, sundry items, clothing
    and items for a young child.  The bank statements also  show  transfers
    of money to the Appellant from the EEA Sponsor and a history previously
    of transfers of money to the Appellant's wife from the EEA Sponsor.

30. The written evidence from the Appellant, his wife and the  EEA  Sponsor
    detail  a  close  relationship  between  all  of  the  family  members,
    including the young child, the nature of which has not been directly or
    substantively challenged by the Respondent.

31. In all of the circumstances, considering the evidence as a whole I find
    that the Appellant has established, on the  balance  of  probabilities,
    that he is the  dependent  family  member  of  the  EEA  Sponsor.   The
    Appellant is presently unable to support himself and is in  receipt  of
    financial support, both directly and indirectly through  the  provision
    of accommodation, food, clothing and so on, for his  and  his  family's
    basic needs.  The Respondent has not submitted that there is any  abuse
    of rights in this case and it is accepted that the  EEA  Sponsor  is  a
    qualified person who is  genuinely  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It is not  therefore  relevant  to  question  why  the
    Appellant cannot support himself from his own  resources,  nor  was  it
    necessary to consider  whether  the  Appellant  has  consistently  been
    dependent on the EEA Sponsor in the past or not.  For these  reasons  I
    allow the Appellant's  appeal  as  he  satisfies  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 and therefore the requirements for an  EEA  Residence  Card  as  a
    dependent family member.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  it  as
follows.

The appeal  is  allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.

 Signed  [pic]         Date         15th July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

