


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/02723/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 10th January 2019                |         On 1st February 2019         |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|  |         ARBER ISLAMAJ                                      |            |
|  |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                                  |            |
|  |                                                            |Appellant   |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|  |         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT     |            |
|  |                                                            |Respondent  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, of Counsel, instructed by Oaks
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Albania born on 6  April  1989,  has  been
    granted permission to appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Dean who, in a determination promulgated on 4  July  2018
    following a hearing on 6 June 2018, dismissed his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 20 March 2018 to refuse to issue  him  with  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right of residence as the  spouse
    of Ms Patricia Mercaldo (hereafter the "sponsor"),  born  on  30  April
    1983. The sponsor is said to  be  an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom. She was born in Brazil and is a  national
    of Brazil and Italy.

 2. The appellant and the sponsor were married on  15  December  2017.  The
    respondent  interviewed  them  separately  on  27  November  2017.  The
    interviewer made a summary of the interviews which described  what  the
    interviewer considered  were  inconsistencies  and  other  difficulties
    arising from their  answers  at  their  interviews.  In  addition,  the
    sponsor's phone was examined, with her permission. The  summary  states
    that there was a text message concerning the conversion of E  5,000  to
    pounds sterling. There  were  other  text  messages  referring  to  the
    appellant getting his 'papers'. The  interviewer  also  stated  in  the
    summary: "It is felt that [the  sponsor]  is  fully  committed  to  the
    relationship...".

 3. The decision letter states that the respondent had concluded  that  the
    marriage was a marriage of convenience.

 4. The judge found that the marriage was a marriage of convenience.

 5. Permission was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page  who
    said that "an arguably dismissive approach may have been taken  to  the
    appellant's evidence"  and  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  merit  full
    consideration.

 6. At the commencement of the  hearing,  I  asked  Mr  Jaisri  to  explain
    precisely what errors of law were alleged in the  grounds,  which  were
    set out in 2 � pages (hereafter the  "grounds").  Mr  Jaisri  requested
    some time to prepare a document and I therefore agreed to put this case
    back to enable him to produce  a  document  setting  out  clearly  what
    errors of law were alleged in the grounds. Mr Jaisri produced a  4-page
    document entitled: "Clarification of grounds" (hereafter the "COG").  I
    then heard submissions from him and Mr Avery.

 7. I shall refer to the paragraph-numbering in  the  judge's  decision  in
    square brackets and the paragraph-numbering in the COG and the  grounds
    as "paras".

The judge's decision

 8. The judge heard evidence from the  appellant,  the  sponsor,  Mr  Latif
    Marku and Mr Safet Zyberaj. She reminded  herself  of  the  burden  and
    standard of proof and  relevant  case-law,  including  Papajorgji  (EEA
    spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012]  UKUT  38  (IAC),  Rosa
    [2016] EWCA Civ 14, Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54, R (Molina)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWHC 1730 and also  Miah  (interviewer's  comments:  disclosure:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC) ([4], [6] and [10])  of  the  judge's
    decision).

 9. The judge then considered the evidence before her.  She  found  that  a
    marriage had taken place between the appellant and the sponsor  ([11]);
    that the fact that the appellant  was  recorded  in  his  interview  as
    having given his wife's date of birth as "3/4/1983" when it was in fact
    30 April 1983 was not a material discrepancy because  a  mistake  could
    have been  made  by  the  interviewer  writing  "3/4/1983"  instead  of
    "30/4/1983" ([12]); and that the couple had given  consistent  evidence
    as to where and when they first met (Gypsy Moth pub in Greenwich on  23
    November 2016) ([13]).

10. The remainder of the judge's very detailed reasoning, set out at  [14]-
    [38], concerned matters such as the fact that, when first asked at  his
    interview who he was with when he first met the sponsor, the  appellant
    failed to mention his brothers  ([14]);  that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor had given inconsistent evidence at their interviews as  to  the
    date, time and whether they had lunch or dinner together when they  met
    each other the second time ([16]); that the appellant had said that  he
    had made a mistake at his interview when he said  that  his  wife  went
    from part-time work to full-time work in July 2017 when it  was  August
    2017 ([19]); that the appellant had given inconsistent evidence at  his
    marriage interview and at the hearing as to why he  was  in  the  Gypsy
    Moth pub when he first met the sponsor ([21]); that the  appellant  and
    the sponsor had given inconsistent evidence as to who pays the rent and
    the amount of the rent ([28]);  that  the  appellant's  claim  that  he
    contributes to the rent was not supported by any  documentary  evidence
    ([28]); and that the explanations given by the appellant and  Mr  Marku
    about the text messages concerning the conversion of E5,000  to  pounds
    sterling were inconsistent [29]-[33]).

11. The judge said that she placed little weight on the  Tenancy  Agreement
    which the appellant had submitted to establish cohabitation because the
    document purported to be a 6-month tenancy agreement but the dates  for
    the duration of the lease covered a 12-month period ([24]). At [25] and
    [26], she said that she gave little weight to the two bills from  South
    East Water (respondent's bundle, F3 and F4) which show the  appellant's
    name and that of the sponsor because  the  bill  at  F3  was  dated  24
    January 2017 which was 3 days before the  appellant  said  he  and  the
    sponsor moved in to the address and the bill at F4 purported to cover a
    period which began 3 days before the appellant claimed to have taken up
    residence at the address. She therefore found ([27]) that the two South
    East Water bills, when taken in the round, did not demonstrate that the
    appellant had lived at the address with the sponsor during 2017.

12. The judge said ([34])  she  had  also  considered  evidence  after  the
    marriage in December 2017 because such evidence was capable of  casting
    light on their intention at the time of marriage.  She  said  that  she
    placed little weight on the letters of support, witness statements  and
    oral evidence of the supporting witnesses because, when  taken  in  the
    round, such evidence "amounted to nothing more than claims to know  the
    parties and, in some cases, a vague claim  of  socialising  with  them"
    ([35]). At [36], the judge noted that  there  was  almost  no  evidence
    before her to demonstrate to the required standard that  the  appellant
    and the sponsor had continued to live at the same address  since  their
    marriage in December 2017. At [36], the judge also considered the album
    of photographs which showed the appellant's wedding. However, she  said
    that "none of the photographs had a date,  in  particular  those  of  a
    social nature and therefore I  find  that  these  do  not  advance  the
    appellant's case".

13. The judge then set out her conclusions at [37]-[38].

            "37. Looking at the evidence in the round I  find  the  lack  of
             post-marriage evidence, together with my finding in  paragraph
             33 concerning the E5,000, calls into question the intention of
             the parties when entering into that  marriage.  The  Appellant
             acknowledges  that  he  entered  this  country  illegally  and
             remained here  unlawfully.  In  her  evidence  his  wife  also
             acknowledged that the Appellant was in this country unlawfully
             and referred to hoping that he would  be  able  to  travel  to
             Italy and Brazil  with  her.  Thus,  I  find  the  Appellant's
             immigration status was, and remains, a matter  of  concern  to
             them.  I   further   find   that   the   inconsistencies   and
             discrepancies in the Appellant's evidence,  together  with  my
             findings in paragraphs 14-33 above, lead me to the  conclusion
             that the predominant purpose of entering  into  this  marriage
             was for the Appellant to obtain a right of residence  in  this
             country.

            38.  Looking at the totality of the evidence before me,  I  find
             that the Appellant has not discharged  the  evidential  burden
             placed upon him and I therefore further find that it  is  more
             probable than not that this is a marriage of convenience which
             was entered into with the predominant purpose being to gain an
             immigration  advantage,  namely  the  Appellant's   right   of
             residence."

The grounds, the COG and oral submissions

14. Para 4 of the COG (para 1 of the grounds) contends that, given that the
    text messages were not produced to the judge,  there  was  no  evidence
    before her as to the alleged 'proximity' of  the  text  concerning  the
    conversion of E5,000 and the  text  messages  about  his  "papers"  and
    therefore there was no evidence to suggest  there  was  a  causal  link
    between the money and his papers.

15. Para 5 of the COG (para 1 of the grounds the grounds) contends that the
    judge failed to consider the  sponsor's  explanation  at  her  marriage
    interview for the presence of the texts referring  to  the  appellant's
    'papers' to the effect  that  her  insecurity  and  worries  about  his
    fidelity had given rise to angry responses by her to him by texts.  The
    sponsor had explained that she sometimes felt jealous  of  other  women
    and when she did she would sometimes say in anger  that  the  appellant
    had married her for his 'papers'.

16. At the hearing, Mr Jaisri re-formulated the submission at para 5 of the
    COG. He submitted that this ground is that the  judge  failed  to  take
    into account the sponsor's evidence as to  the  reasons  for  the  text
    messages referring to the appellant's 'papers'. He submitted  that,  if
    the sponsor was being paid E5,000, she would not have cared  about  his
    infidelity.

17. Para 6 of the COG contends that the judge unlawfully placed  weight  at
    [29] on the fact that the sponsor had not  explained  at  her  marriage
    interview what the money referred to in the text was  for  because  the
    sponsor had not been asked this question.

18. Para 7 of the COG (para 1 of  the  grounds)  contends  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the evidence in the interviewer's summary  that  "It
    was felt that [the sponsor] [was] fully committed to  the  relationship
    .....[the sponsor] was quite emotional and had  genuine  tears  in  her
    eyes".

19. I asked Mr Jaisri to explain why the interviewer's view was relevant to
    the judge's assessment of credibility, given that she (the  judge)  had
    the benefit of seeing and hearing the appellant and  the  sponsor  give
    oral  evidence.  Mr  Jaisri  submitted  that   it   was   because   the
    interviewer's view was  germane  to  the  respondent's  decision-making
    process and should therefore have been  considered  by  the  judge.  He
    submitted that this is to be distinguished  from  an  expert's  opinion
    about the credibility of an appellant's evidence.

20. Para 8 of the COG (para 2 of the grounds) contends  that,  in  reaching
    her adverse credibility assessment, the  judge  placed  undue  reliance
    upon minor issues, i.e. the appellant's evidence as to when the sponsor
    went full time.

21. Paras 9 and 10 of the COG (para 10 of the  grounds)  contend  that  the
    judge erroneously placed little weight on the Tenancy Agreement because
    the document stated that the tenancy was a 6-month tenancy whereas  the
    dates given on the document covered a 12-month period. This is  because
    she looked at  the  tenancy  agreement  in  isolation.  She  failed  to
    consider the tenancy deposit certificate (page F2 of  the  respondent's
    bundle) which supported the existence of the tenancy.

22. Para 11 of the COG (para 2 of the  grounds)  contends  that  the  judge
    erred in her rejection (at [25]) of the Water Bill at page  F3  of  the
    respondent's bundle. She failed to consider the  interviewer's  summary
    suggesting  that  the  sponsor  was  committed  to  the   relationship.
    Furthermore, this issue had not been put to the appellant or  his  wife
    during the hearing. In this regard, reliance is placed  upon  AM  (fair
    hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 656 (IAC).

23. At the hearing, Mr Jaisri submitted that the "unlawful" charge  by  the
    water company for three days did not  undermine  the  veracity  of  the
    water bills. It was not unknown for people to be billed  for  incorrect
    periods. Furthermore, he submitted that the judge  had  overlooked  the
    water bill at page F4 of the respondent's bundle. If the bill  at  page
    F3 of the respondent's bundle was not a genuine bill, he questioned why
    another bill would be sent to the appellant and the sponsor,

24. Para 12 of the COG (para 3 of the grounds) contends  that  the  judge's
    finding at [14] was irrational. There was no reason for  the  appellant
    to lie about his brothers  or  his  job  or  the  fact  that  he  owned
    vehicles.  Para  3  of  the  grounds  states  that  the  appellant  had
    initially denied being with his brothers in the pub because  they  were
    here illegally but their presence came to light later in the course  of
    the interview. There was no reason for the appellant to lie about this.
    Para 3 of the grounds contends that the same applies to the appellant's
    job and the fact that he owned vehicles.

25. Para 13 of the COG (para 4 of the grounds) contends that the judge  did
    not consider the evidence in a manner  that  was  consistent  with  the
    approach in Papajorgi, in that, she had  unlawfully  ignored  the  many
    consistencies in the evidence, including the fact  that  the  appellant
    and  the  sponsor  had  given  consistent  answers  at  their  marriage
    interviews about their movements on the Friday  before  their  marriage
    interviews and the names of the sponsor's teddy bears.

26. Para 14 of the COG (para 5 of the  grounds)  contends  that  the  judge
    failed to properly and lawfully  consider  the  appellant's  photograph
    album which  contained  the  following  photographs:  (i)  the  wedding
    photographs which showed that many guests attended  the  wedding;  (ii)
    photographs showing that the sponsor's best friend,  her  daughter  and
    her mother attended the wedding and  visited  them;  (iii)  photographs
    showing that the sponsor's mother visited the appellant and the sponsor
    in March 2018 and that the sponsor's sister visited them from Brazil in
    April 2017.

27. Mr Jaisri submitted that, if the judge had  been  concerned  about  the
    fact that the photographs did not have a date,  the  dates  could  have
    been attributed to the photographs by witness evidence.  There  was  no
    issue between the parties that the marriage took place on  15  December
    2017. There were other photographs at around the time  of  the  wedding
    which showed that individuals had attended the wedding from  Italy  and
    that the sponsor's mother and  sister  had  travelled  from  Brazil  to
    attend the wedding. There was an email at page 33  of  the  appellant's
    bundle which confirmed the visit of the sponsor's friend from Italy. Mr
    Jaisri submitted that this evidence was relevant to the perceptions  of
    others towards the marriage. The judge's dismissal of these photographs
    on the basis that they did not have a date was not in  conformity  with
    the approach that the judge should have adopted, i.e. to  consider  the
    evidence as a whole.

28. Para 15 of the COG (para 6 of the  grounds)  contends  that  the  judge
    irrationally suggested at  [37]  that  the  couple's  concern  for  the
    immigration status of the appellant was only so that he could travel to
    Italy and Brazil. She failed to appreciate it was for  the  purpose  of
    him seeing her family in Italy and Brazil.

29. Para 16 of the COG contends that, in the light of the other submissions
    in the COG, the judge had unlawfully failed  to  place  the  burden  of
    proof on the respondent and had incorrectly stated, at [38],  that  the
    appellant has not discharged the burden, contrary to Sadovska.

30. Mr Avery submitted that the  grounds  and  the  COG  amounted  to  mere
    disagreements  with   the   judge's   reasoning   and   findings.   The
    interviewer's  view  that  the  sponsor  was  fully  committed  to  the
    relationship was not a relevant consideration, given that the appellant
    and the sponsor gave oral evidence  before  the  judge  and  had  their
    evidence tested under cross-examination. In any event,  the  judge  was
    aware of the interviewer's summary because she referred to  it.  It  is
    plain that the judge considered the photographs and concluded that they
    did not advance the appellant's case. He submitted that  the  appellant
    was clearly a man who was prepared to lie. He had accepted that what he
    had said at his interview about his employment and his brothers was not
    true. He had  also  denied  having  a  car  at  his  interview  but  it
    transpired that he had a van. All of  this  called  into  question  his
    overall credibility. He submitted that there was no error of law in the
    judge's decision which was a good decision.

31. Mr Jaisri did not wish to respond.

32. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

33. In relation to para 7 of the COG, Mr Jaisri submitted  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to take into account the interviewer's view  that  the
    sponsor was fully committed to the relationship. I do not  accept  that
    this was relevant to the judge's assessment. Mr Jaisri  submitted  that
    the interviewer's assessment was relevant because it was germane to the
    respondent's  decision-making  process.  Although  I  accept  that  the
    interviewer's assessment was relevant  to  the  respondent's  decision-
    making process, the fact is that the judge had the advantage of  seeing
    and hearing the appellant and the sponsor give oral evidence and having
    their  evidence  tested  under  cross-examination.  The   interviewer's
    opinion that the sponsor was fully committed the relationship  was  not
    therefore relevant. It was no different from an expert's view about the
    credibility of asylum seeker (as opposed to whether his or her  account
    is consistent with the background). I therefore do not accept that  the
    judge erred in law by failing to take into the interviewer's view  that
    the sponsor was full committed to the relationship.

34. Turning to the judge's assessment of the text messages, it is necessary
    to quote [29]-[33] of the judge's decision which read:

            "29. During  the  marriage  interview,  [the  sponsor's]  mobile
            telephone was, with her consent, examined. Amongst  "a  number"
            of text  messages  referring  to  the  Appellant  "getting  his
            papers" was one  about  the  conversion  of  E5,000  to  pounds
            Sterling (marriage interview, record  summary,  page  2).  [The
            sponsor] was asked if she was being paid to marry the Appellant
            and stated she was not (marriage interview,  page  7).  I  note
            that she did not comment on what the money referred to  in  the
            text was for (marriage interview, page 7).

            30.  In the Notice of Appeal (paragraph 8) the Appellant  states
            "I was merely querying the exchange rate with her as  a  friend
            of mine wanted to send some money to his  family  in  Albania."
            However, the interviewing  officer  records  that  the  message
            concerned the conversion of Euros to pounds which I  find  goes
            against credibility of the Appellant's  subsequent  claim  that
            his friend wanted to  send  money  to  his  family  in  Albania
            (marriage interview, page 7). Furthermore, in oral evidence the
            Appellant's wife stated that the money was  in  relation  to  a
            family matter involving the Appellant's father. Looking at this
            evidence I find  it  is  contradictory  and  goes  against  the
            credibility of the Appellant's account of the facts.

            31.  In his Witness Statement (Appellant's bundle,  page  7)  Mr
            Latif Marku, a French national of Albanian origin, states  that
            he lent  the  Appellant's  father  E5,000  and  that  when  the
            Appellant wanted to  repay  Mr  Marku  he  was  unsure  of  the
            exchange rate "hence his text message to his wife Patricia". Mr
            Marku claims he was present when the Appellant sent the text to
            his wife.  However,  I  find  this  is  inconsistent  with  the
            Appellant's version of the facts  set  out  in  the  Notice  of
            Appeal, namely that a  friend  wanted  to  send  money  to  his
            family, rather than, as Mr Marku claims, the money was to repay
            a debt arising out of a loan he made to the Appellant's father.
            I find that this is a material inconsistency  which  undermines
            the credibility of the Appellant's claim that the money was not
            intended for [the sponsor].

            32.  In oral evidence Mr Marku was asked why the  Appellant  had
            asked his wife for the exchange rate rather than looking it  up
            on the internet or going to a high street bank. He stated  that
            there is a difference in the exchange rate and it was  to  give
            him an idea. However,  I  give  this  explanation  very  little
            weight because it does not explain why [the sponsor] was  in  a
            better position to provide an exchange rate than a high  street
            bank or an exchange rate website. Furthermore, I find it is not
            a credible explanation because if the Appellant was to repay Mr
            Marku he would  have  been  paying  him  in  pounds  and  would
            therefore have asked for the exchange rate from pounds to Euros
            rather than from Euros to pounds. Additionally I find that,  Mr
            Marku's evidence does not provide a credible explanation of why
            the Appellant would ask his wife for an  exchange  rate  rather
            than  check  on  the  internet  or  at  a  high  street   bank,
            particularly  when  there  was  a  considerable  sum  of  money
            involved. Thus, when taken in the round, I find that Mr Marku's
            evidence was neither consistent nor credible.

            33.  Accordingly, looking at all of the evidence concerning  the
            text and the conversion of E5,000 to pounds, I find it contains
            inconsistencies   and   discrepancies   which   undermine   the
            credibility of the Appellant's account of the facts.  The  text
            had been sent before the Appellant's marriage to [the  sponsor]
            and, when taken in the round, I find it more  likely  than  not
            that money was to pass to [the sponsor] because  the  Appellant
            has failed to provide evidence which is consistent and credible
            with the regard to the content of the text and the  purpose  of
            the money transaction."

            (my emphasis)

35. As can be seen, there is nothing in the judge's reasoning at  [29]-[33]
    which shows that she erroneously considered  that  the  respondent  had
    produced  evidence  establishing  a  link  between  the  text   message
    concerning the conversion of E5,000 and the  text  messages  about  the
    appellant's 'papers', nor  is  there  anything  which  shows  that  she
    considered that the text message concerning the  conversion  of  E5,000
    and the text messages about the  appellant's  'papers'  occurred  close
    together in  time  as  opposed  to  the  text  message  concerning  the
    conversion of E5,000 having been sent before the marriage. It  has  not
    been suggested on the appellant's behalf that the judge  misapprehended
    the evidence when  she  said  that  the  text  message  concerning  the
    conversion of E5,000 was sent before the marriage.

36. Paras [29]-[33] of the judge's decision show that she did not  consider
    that the appellant had  given  a  credible  explanation  for  the  text
    message about the conversion of E5,000, nor did his witness  Mr  Marku.
    She then made her finding on the issue of whether the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience on the basis of her assessment of the whole  of
    the evidence, including, but not limited to, the evidence of  the  text
    messages.

37. I accept that the judge  did  not  mention,  in  terms,  the  sponsor's
    explanation for the reasons for the  test  messages  referring  to  the
    appellant's status, i.e. that her insecurity  about  his  fidelity  had
    given rise to angry responses by her to him  by  text  messages  saying
    that he had married her for his 'papers'. However, the mere  fact  that
    this was not  mentioned  in  terms  does  not  mean  that  it  was  not
    considered. Judges are not obliged to refer specifically to every piece
    of the evidence. The fact is that she was plainly aware  of,  and  took
    into account, the  appellant's  and  the  sponsor's  answers  at  their
    interviews. There is therefore no reason to think that she did not take
    the totality of the evidence they gave at their  respective  interviews
    into account when assessing the evidence in the case.

38. There is no substance in the contention that  it  was  unfair  for  the
    judge to take into account the fact that the sponsor did not explain at
    her marriage interview what the E5,000 was for on the  basis  that  she
    had not been asked this question at her interview. At  page  7  of  her
    marriage interview, the sponsor was asked: "Is [the  appellant]  paying
    you?". She answered "no". On any legitimate view, the  existence  of  a
    text message concerning the conversion of E5,000 was a matter that  was
    "crying out" for an explanation. This was a perfect opportunity for her
    to explain what the E5,000 was for, on any legitimate view. She did not
    need to be specifically asked what the money was  for.  The  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to note that the sponsor had not commented  on  what
    the money was for at her interview.

39. There is therefore no substance in paras 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the COG.

40. It also appears to be suggested (see paras 22 and 27 above) that  there
    had been unfairness, in that, the following had not  been  put  to  the
    appellant and the sponsor at the hearing: (i) the fact that  the  water
    bill at page F3 charged the appellant and  the  sponsor  for  a  period
    commencing 3 days prior to the date that the appellant claimed to  have
    taken up residence  at  the  property;  and  (ii)  the  fact  that  the
    photographs had not been dated.

41. However, the fact is that the  judge  was  entitled  to  consider  such
    evidence as was before her. I do not accept that the  fact  that  these
    points were not put to appellant led to unfairness. He was  represented
    at the hearing by Counsel (not Mr Jaisri). It should have been  obvious
    that the water bill at F3 was dated 3 days before  the  date  when  the
    appellant claimed to have taken up residence at the property. Likewise,
    it should have been obvious that photographs that  are  not  dated  are
    less helpful than photographs that are dated.  The  appellant,  through
    his representative, could have dealt with these maters in  evidence  at
    the hearing before the judge.

42. The judge specifically referred to the album of photographs.  She  also
    had before her an email dated 28 May  2018  timed  at  10:42  from  the
    sponsor to someone named Kevin Murphy which described the  photographs.
    There is simply no reason to think that she did not take this  evidence
    into account when assessing the case as a whole.

43. There is therefore no substance in para 14 of the COG.

44. I reject Mr Jaisri's submission (see para 23 above) that the judge  had
    failed to  take  into  account  the  water  bill  at  page  F4  of  the
    respondent's bundle. Mr Jaisri questioned why  another  bill  would  be
    sent to the appellant and the sponsor if the bill at  page  F3  of  the
    respondent's bundle was not genuine bill. However,  the  fact  is  that
    judge specifically referred to  the  water  bill  at  page  F4  of  the
    respondent's bundle. It simply cannot be said that she  overlooked  it.
    In  reality,  Mr  Jaisri  is  seeking  to   re-argue   this   evidence.
    Accordingly, there is no substance in para 11 of the COG.

45. As I have said already, the mere fact that the judge did not mention  a
    specific piece of evidence does not mean that she did not take it  into
    account. This applies as much to the sponsor's evidence concerning  the
    reason for the text messages referring to the appellant's  'papers'  as
    it does to the fact that  she  did  not  mention  the  tenancy  deposit
    certificate at page F2 of the respondent's bundle (paras 9  and  10  of
    the  COG)  and  the  consistencies  between  the  appellant's  and  the
    sponsor's  answers  at  their  marriage  interviews  concerning   their
    movements on the Friday before the marriage interviews and the names of
    the sponsor's teddy bears (para 13 of the COG).

46. Arguments concerning the weight to be given to various aspects  of  the
    evidence will rarely demonstrate an error of  law.  The  threshold  for
    irrationality is far from being reached in this case. It  was  for  the
    judge to decide what weight was to be given to the appellant's evidence
    as to when the sponsor went full-time para 8 of the COG) and  the  fact
    that the Tenancy Agreement stated that the tenancy was for 6 months but
    the dates given on the document covered a 12-month period (paras 9  and
    10 of the COG).

47. Paras 12 and 15 of the COG amount to no more than a  disagreement  with
    the judge's reasoning and an attempt to re-argue the case.

48. I drew Mr Jaisri's attention to the fact that the submission in para 16
    of the COG, that the judge had unlawfully failed to place the burden of
    proof on the respondent and had incorrectly stated  at  [38]  that  the
    appellant had not discharged the  burden  of  proof,  was  not  in  the
    original grounds and therefore he did not have permission to argue this
    ground. In any event, the judge directed  herself  at  para  4  in  the
    following terms:


        "Burden and Standard of Proof
        4. This is a case where the Respondent alleges  the  Appellant  has
             entered into  a  marriage  of  convenience.  I  have  therefore
             considered the cases of Papajorgji (EEA spouse  -  marriage  of
             convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 and Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14.
             These make clear that the legal  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
             Respondent to prove that  an  otherwise  valid  marriage  is  a
             marriage of convenience so as  to  justify  the  refusal  of  a
             residence card under  the  EEA  Regulations.  However,  if  the
             Respondent  adduces  evidence  capable  of  pointing   to   the
             conclusion  that  the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience,  the
             evidential burden shifts to  the  Appellant.  Sadovska  v  SSHD
             [2017] UKSC 54 confirms that the legal burden of  proof  is  on
             the Respondent. The standard  of  proof  remains  that  of  the
             balance of probabilities."

            (my emphasis)

49. It is clear that the judge was aware that the  legal  burden  of  proof
    rested on the respondent and that, if the respondent  adduced  evidence
    capable of pointing to the conclusion that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience, the evidential burden would shift  to  the  appellant.  At
    [38] of her decision (quoted at para 13 above) the judge said in  terms
    that the appellant had not discharged the evidential burden  upon  him.
    In view of [4] and [38], it is simply misconceived to suggest that  the
    judge applied the burden of proof incorrectly.

50. Even if I am wrong to say (para 33 above) that the  interviewer's  view
    that the sponsor was  fully  committed  to  the  relationship  was  not
    relevant to the judge's assessment of credibility, this is not material
    to the outcome, given the very detailed reasons given by the judge  for
    her adverse credibility assessment and the  fact  that  the  judge  was
    plainly aware of the interviewer's summary and therefore must have been
    aware of his opinion.

51. When one steps back from the detail, it is clear that the  grounds  and
    the COG advance arguments dressed up as errors  of  law  which  are  in
    reality no more that a disagreement with the judge's decision.  I  have
    no difficulty in saying that, in my  judgment,  permission  should  not
    have been granted.

      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dean did  not  involve
    the making of any error of law. Accordingly, her  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal against the respondent decision stands.





[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 25 January 2019
