
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02759/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd March 2018                           |On 26th April 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                               MR ISSIFU SEIDU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by BWF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is recorded  as
    4th August 1985.  He made application for a residence card pursuant  to
    the EEA Regulations 2006 on the  basis  of  being  an  extended  family
    member.  On 23rd February 2016 the Respondent refused  the  application
    and the Appellant appealed.  On 31st January 2017 Designated  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy sitting at  Birmingham  dismissed  the
    appeal on the basis of the guidance in the case  of  Sala  [2016]  UKUT
    00411 in which the Upper Tribunal had held that there was no basis upon
    which an application of this sort could succeed  before  the  Tribunal.
    Subsequently, the Court of Appeal in the case of Khan  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 gave judgment to the
    effect that the reasoning in the case of Sala  was  wrong.   Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on that basis by Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft on 24th January 2018.

 2. Ms Ahmad for the Secretary of State accepts that she cannot resist this
    appeal.  She is right to take that position.  Accordingly I  find  that
    there was a material error of law.  I have to decide whether to  remake
    or remit the decision.  As there has been nothing material done by  the
    Tribunal other than to have regard to the guidance in the case of  Sala
    it is entirely appropriate for the matter to be remitted to resolve  on
    the merits with findings of fact needing to be made with respect to the
    nature of the relationship contended for.  In those  circumstances  the
    matter will be remitted to Birmingham First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
    de novo.

Notice of Decision

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 23 April 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
