
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/02002/2015
     EA/02000/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at First-tier Tribunal              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 January 2017                        |On 7 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Raja Farhan Aurangzeb
                             Mrs Shahzadi Romana
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State from the decision
of First-tier Judge Gribble which was promulgated on 15 June 2016.  The
appeal concerned the refusal by the Secretary of State to issue residence
cards to the appellants on the basis that they were extended family
members.  That appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the
Secretary of State duly appealed, raising a number of matters which were
said to constitute material errors of law.

2.   That was overtaken because by the grant of permission to appeal on 7
October 2016, by which time a decision of the Upper Tribunal, Vice
President Ockelton and Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb, was in the public
domain, namely Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411.  For present
purposes, I need only set out the first two paragraphs:

"1.  This appeal raises the issue of whether a person who is refused a
residence card as an 'extended family member' under the Immigration (EEA)
Regulations 2006 has a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal under
Regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations 2006.

2.   For the reasons we give below, we have reached the conclusion that no
right of appeal exists."

3.   Those acting for the respondents in this matter wrote to the Upper
Tribunal on 25 January of this year, indicating that in the light of the
decision in Sala, they wished to withdraw their appeal. However, it was not
their appeal to withdraw but one brought by the Secretary of State, so a
Judge of the Upper Tribunal directed that their attendance be excused today
and indicated that the matter would be dealt with in their absence.

4.   In the circumstances because as a matter of law no appeal existed from
the Secretary of State's discretion to the First-tier Tribunal it follows
that I must allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal and
set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as it had no jurisdiction
to hear the appeal and it erred in law in doing so. In remaking the
decision, I substitute a declaration that there was no valid appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  set
aside, and substituted with a declaration that is no valid appeal  from  the
Secretary of State's exercise discretion to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

