
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02533/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8th October 2018                |On 14th March 2019                 |
|And 4th March 2019                 |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between
                                Amtul Hafeez
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance at either hearing.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 5th September 1933  and
    was granted permission to  appeal  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge H Graves, promulgated on 24th May 2018, which  dismissed
    an appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  7th
    March 2018.  The appellant claimed to have entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 1st September 2017 and sought a residence card on 9th December 2017.
     The EEA sponsor was said to be her son of German nationality, Mr Ahmed
    Tahir, born on 18th November 1962. It was asserted that  she  had  been
    living in Pakistan and had become widowed subsequently relying  on  her
    grandson in Pakistan.  She travelled to the USA to live with her  other
    son, but he became no longer able to provide proper care for her  owing
    to domestic issues.  The letter from Mr Ahmed  Tahir  stated  that  'it
    became necessary to bring our mother to the United Kingdom'.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the application  for  a  residence  card
    under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016, because  the  appellant  had  not  provided  adequate
    evidence to prove that she was the direct family member of  an  EEA  or
    Swiss national and that she  was  related  as  claimed.  She  had  only
    provided a photocopy of her birth certificate which was not acceptable.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal judge recorded that

    (i)    the appellant  had  provided,  by  post,  the  original  of  the
    documents requested by the respondent,  in  relation  to  the  familial
    relationship.

    The judge found

         'it may be that the respondent wishes to undertake her  own  checks
         of these documents.  As the originals were  sent  directly  to  the
         Tribunal, and this is a paper case, they will not have been seen by
         the respondent'. [8]

         'There  is  no  documentation  or  information  to  enable  a  full
         assessment of the appellant's right to residence, such as  evidence
         of exercise  of  Treaty  rights  by  the  sponsor  or  evidence  of
         dependency under Regulation 7(1)(c).  The familial relationship  of
         mother and son is not sufficient  to  establish  family  membership
         between adults, unless evidence of  dependency  is  also  provided.
         This is not before me.  The Tribunal has  also  not  been  provided
         with  evidence  of  the  sponsor's   nationality   or   any   other
         information. [9]

         For the appeal to be allowed, the appellant needs to establish that
         she is the family member of an EEA national, that she is  dependent
         and in the ascending line,  and  that  the  sponsor  is  exercising
         Treaty rights in the United Kingdom. Since the  grounds  of  appeal
         only address the family relationship  and  not  dependency  or  the
         exercise of Treaty rights by the sponsor, it  is  not  possible  to
         allow the appeal on the basis that the residence card should now be
         issued, as the burden of proof in relation to all legal and factual
         matters has not been discharged by the appellant.  The  information
         in the application does not provide a clear  picture  and  suggests
         past dependency on at least two other  family  members.  Since  the
         appeal is against the refusal  of  a  residence  card,  it  is  not
         possible to allow the appeal  outright,  to  the  extent  that  the
         appeal is  entitled  to  such  a  residence  card,  without  having
         information  and  evidence  to  address  the   remainder   of   the
         requirements under the Regulations.  However, there is  nothing  to
         prevent the appellant  from  making  a  fresh  application  to  the
         respondent addressing all that is required under the  Regulations'.
         [10]

Application for Permission to Appeal


 4. The application for permission to appeal stated that the  determination
    contained material errors of law, specifically that the appeal was made
    only  on  the  point  of  not  having  sufficient  proof  of   maternal
    relationship.  The grounds noted that the  sponsor,  Tahir  Ahmed,  had
    provided his German passport with his residence card to prove  that  he
    was exercising his right to live in the UK as an  EU  citizen  and  had
    done so since 2004.  The appeal was made on this  discrete  ground  and
    the grounds for appeal, drafted by the sponsor, made reference to

         '... correspondence made by the  HM  Courts  &  Tribunal  Services,
         dated 11.04.2018, where it  clearly  states  that  respondent  must
         provide  'any  statement  of  evidence,  application  form,  record
         interview, or any other unpublished documents'.   These  statements
         caused us to be  under  the  impression  that  the  respondent  had
         already sent you copies of all documents we sent together with  the
         application form.

         Further the grounds for appeal have been addressed by  us  when  we
         provided original documents that  clearly  showed  and  proved  the
         existence of a maternal relationship between I  and  Amtul  Hafeez.
         To conclude all original  documents  necessary  were  provided  and
         under EEA regulations, all criteria have been met'.

    The grounds  thus  complained  that  the  appellant  had  answered  the
    specific point raised in the Secretary of State's refusal  letter,  but
    the judge had unlawfully extended consideration beyond the remit of the
    appeal and erred in refusing the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Alis on 31st July 2018 on the
    following basis.

         'There is always a danger when dealing with an appeal on the papers
         that the Judge enters into  areas  for  which  no  issue  had  been
         raised.  The decision letter dated March 7,  2018  only  challenged
         the relationship between the appellant and sponsor. The  respondent
         did not challenge the appellant to demonstrate she was dependent on
         the sponsor.

         In refusing the appeal the Judge arguably erred by firstly  stating
         the sponsor had not demonstrated he was  exercising  treaty  rights
         (according to the decision he had acquired permanent  residence  on
         December 1, 2010  and  would  therefore  not  have  to  demonstrate
         ongoing exercise of treaty rights) and secondly, by  requiring  the
         appellant to demonstrate dependency when  the  same  had  not  been
         raised in the decision letter. The second issue raised in issue  of
         procedural unfairness'.

The Hearing


 6. At the first hearing the appellant failed  to  attend  although  I  was
    satisfied that she was notified of the  date  time  and  venue  of  the
    hearing. In the interests of justice, I proceeded with the appeal.

 7. Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant had not attended and further the
    appellant could not succeed under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016.  She had not shown the  requisite  elements  of
    dependency.

 8. Following finding an error of law as set out below I issued  directions
    inviting the parties to have the matters decided on the papers.  In the
    event neither the appellant nor the Secretary of State responded to  my
    direction and the matter was set down for  a  hearing,  of  which  both
    parties were notified.  The  appellant  failed  to  attend  the  second
    hearing and failed to  submit  any  further  evidence  in  relation  to
    dependency or otherwise. I proceeded to determine the matter.

Conclusions

 9. Albeit the notice from the Tribunal, dated 11th April 2018, advised the
    respondent to file any documents upon which reliance was placed,  there
    was a similar direction to the appellant.  This stated

         'The Tribunal may determine the appeal on the basis of  the  appeal
         documents together with any further written evidence or  submission
         you may wish to make.  You  must  send  any  written  evidence  and
         submission to the Tribunal and the Respondent by 9th May 2018'.

10. It is trite law that it is for the appellant to prove her case  and  it
    is  misconceived  to  place  faith  in  the   respondent   to   provide
    documentation on which an appellant hopes to rely.  It is a matter  for
    the appellant to  provide  documentation  to  support  her  appeal  and
    whether or not the respondent provides the relevant documentation.

11. To allow an appeal in relation to the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 the judge must be satisfied  that  the  relevant
    requirements have been met.  Although the  following  judgment  was  in
    relation to the Immigration Rules the same principle applies. RM  (Kwok
    On Tong:   HC395  para  320)  India  [2006]  UKAIT  00039  observed  at
    paragraph 11

         'In Kwok On Tong (and also in R v IAT ex parte Hubbard  [1985]  Imm
         AR 110) the Court had to  consider  what  the  position  was  if  a
         refusal of entry clearance was based on one element of  the  Rules,
         but by the time of the hearing it became apparent  that  there  was
         some other requirement of the Rules which the appellant  could  not
         meet.  Both those cases decide that the notice of  refusal  is  not
         equivalent to a pleading; if new elements of the Immigration  Rules
         come into play, they are to be dealt with on the  appeal,  and  the
         parties must be allowed any appropriate  adjournment  in  order  to
         avoid the injustice of being taken by surprise.  The reason is  the
         wording of s19.   Even  if  the  appellant  shows  that  he  met  a
         particular requirement of the Immigration Rules that  had  been  in
         issue at the appeal, the decision to refuse him is not  a  decision
         that was "not in accordance with the law including  any  applicable
         Immigration Rules" unless, at the time of the decision, he met  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules applicable to his  case.   To
         put it another way, an appellant can lose his appeal by failing  to
         meet just one requirement of the Rules (whether specified or not in
         the notice of refusal), but he can win  only  by  meeting  all  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules (whether specified or not  in
         the notice of refusal)'.

12. As set out in ZB & HB (Validity and recognition of  marriage)  Pakistan
    [2009] UKAIT 00040

         So far as concerns the first,  it  is  not  right  to  say,  as  Mr
         Mohammed does in his letter, that the decision of Glidewell J in  R
         v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Kwok on Tong [1981]  Imm  AR
         214 has been superseded.  On the contrary, it is clearly good  law,
         and has recently been re-emphasised by the Tribunal  in  RM  [2006]
         UKAIT  00039.   Those  are  not  the  only  authorities   for   the
         proposition that the respondent's  notice  of  decision  is  not  a
         pleading: provided that the appellant is given a proper opportunity
         to deal with any new points, it is open to the respondent  to  open
         new points, and the Tribunal is obliged to deal with them,  because
         it cannot allow an  appeal  against  a  non-discretionary  decision
         unless satisfied that the decision was 'not in accordance with  the
         law (including Immigration  Rules)':  those  are  the  words  of  s
         86(3)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002'

13. Clearly the context of the decision taken by the Secretary of State was
    that of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  and
    not the Immigration Rules but the  principle  remains  the  same.   The
    appellant must fulfil all relevant requirements under  the  regulations
    to succeed in the appeal.

14. Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations sets out the relevant requirements.
     The appellant needed, inter alia, to show dependency as follows:

          "Family member"

         7. -     (1)  In  these  Regulations,  "family  member"  means,  in
                  relation to a person ("A")-

                  (a)  A's spouse or civil partner;

                  (b)  A's direct descendants, or the direct descendants  of
                  A's spouse or civil partner who are either-

                      (i)   aged under 21; or

                      (ii)  dependants of A, or  of  A's  spouse  or  civil
                      partner;

                  (c)  dependent direct relatives in A's ascending line,  or
                  in that of A's spouse or civil partner.

15. The issue of dependency was raised by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    question and definition of dependency was  addressed  in  Lim  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer, Manila [2015] EWCA Civ 1383 and

         'the critical question is whether the claimant  is  in  fact  in  a
         position to support himself or not'.

16. In my error of law decision I set aside the First-tier Tribunal judge's
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE  2007)  owing  to  the  procedural  error  of
    failing to adjourn proceedings to raise the issue of dependency and the
    matter was adjourned with directions for the parties to produce further
    evidence and specifically for the  appellant  to  produce  evidence  on
    dependency.  The matter was resumed before me to remake the decision.

17. On appeal, and as I have explained above, it is still for the appellant
    to make good her fulfilment of the regulations and  without  which  she
    will not be construed as a 'family member' for the purposes of the  EEA
    Regulations. As the FFT judge pointed out the matter of dependency  was
    part of the criteria to which the appellant had not complied.

18. In this instance, however, I also noted in my  error  of  law  decision
    that the birth registration certificate did not accord  with  the  name
    given in the application form. The application and  grounds  of  appeal
    refer to 'Tahir Ahmed' whilst the birth certificate  refers  to  'Tahir
    Ahmad'.  This was not a point taken by the  judge  and  I  specifically
    raised the matter for the appellant to address.  No  representation  on
    this was received.

19. In order to remake the decision both parties were  directed  to  submit
    any  further  pleadings  or  evidence  in  relation  to  the  point  on
    dependency by 25th October 2018 following which the matter  was  to  be
    determined. I directed that the  matter  would  be  determined  on  the
    papers unless there was any objection with reasons in writing given.

20. No evidence was received but nonetheless the matter was set down for an
    oral hearing on 6th March 2019 and both parties advised  of  the  same.
    In the event there was no attendance by the appellant, no  evidence  in
    relation to the point on dependency and no evidence in relation to  the
    discrepancy between the application form and the birth  certificate.  I
    discerned no unfairness in proceeding with the appeal.   The  appellant
    failed to satisfy  me,  despite  the  lengthy  opportunity  to  produce
    further evidence despite the explanation in my previous  error  of  law
    decision on the requirements for the  appellant  to  produce  evidence,
    that she could satisfy the requirements in Regulation 7 (1) (c)  namely
    that she was a dependent direct relative in the  Appellant's  ascending
    line.  As such her appeal is therefore dismissed.



Order

21. Mrs Hafeez's  appeal  is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.



Signed      Helen Rimington  Date: 6th March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





To the Respondent:  FEE AWARD

Since the appeal was dismissed there can be no fee award.



Signed      Helen Rimington  Date: 6th March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


