
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/02187/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 September 2018                   |On 17 October 2018                |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                juliet Ekoma
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Mazeli instructed by Bridges Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She appealed  to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 13
    January 2017 refusing her application for a residence card as a  family
    member of an EEA national. The judge dismissed her appeal.   The  judge
    appears at one point  to  have  been  under  the  impression  that  the
    appellant's application was on the basis of seeking to show a  retained
    right of residence following the breakdown of her marriage.   In  fact,
    it seems clear from the respondent's decision  and  from  the  evidence
    that the appellant was not divorced from her EEA national  husband  and
    as a consequence the matter fell for consideration under Regulation  15
    rather than Regulation  10  of  the  Immigration  (EEA  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

2.   The essential challenge to the  judge's  decision,  as  refined  in  Ms
    Victor-Mazeli's submissions, is that the judge of her own motion should
    have adjourned the hearing on the basis of  incompetence  displayed  on
    the part of the appellant's previous representative.  She  also  argued
    that the judge had erred in dealing  with  the  matter  in  respect  of
    Regulation 10 of the EEA Regulations, which is  concerned  with  family
    members who have retained the right of residence, but it  is  clear  on
    the judge's findings, for example at paragraph 32, that  the  appellant
    had not divorced her partner and the judge then  went  on  to  consider
    permanent residence under Regulation 15  and  came  to  conclusions  on
    that.

3.   In essence Ms Victor-Mazeli's argument was as set out  in  the  grounds
    and developed by her and  also  was  referred  to  in  the  appellant's
    witness statement attached to the grounds, that as a consequence of the
    appellant's then representative being ill-equipped and unfamiliar  with
    her case and the law, the judge should have adjourned the hearing.

4.   It is clear from paragraph 11 of the judge's decision  that  there  was
    an  application  for   an   adjournment   made   by   the   appellant's
    representative.  This was made on the basis that she had not been  able
    to locate her EEA spouse, that she needed to show she was married to an
    EEA national for the purposes of the appeal.  The judge noted that  the
    representative was remarkably unfamiliar with the requirements that had
    to be met in order for the appellant to be entitled to a retained right
    of residence (perhaps hardly surprisingly since that was not her claim)
    but noted that the representative had arrived late and because  of  his
    apparent lack of understanding of the issues the  judge  rose  on  more
    than one occasion to give him the opportunity to consider the  relevant
    law and clarify the issues that he submitted were live in  the  appeal.
    He was not able to present any arguments however, did not highlight the
    purposes that would be served by the grant of an  adjournment  and  the
    judge therefore refused the application.

5.   It is clear that the judge  had  concerns  about  the  quality  of  the
    representation because she set out subsequently at paragraphs 14 to  16
    a precis of three authorities in which the Administrative Court and the
    Upper Tribunal expressed concerns about cases where there were examples
    of unprofessional behaviour on the part of representatives.

6.   Ms  Victor-Mazeli  referred  to  the  overriding  objective  which  was
    required to be born in mind by First-tier Judges and to the decision of
    the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  which  sets  out
    the  various  circumstances  in  which  a  refusal  to  accede  to   an
    adjournment request may in principle be erroneous in law.  The test  is
    one of fairness.

7.   As Ms Victor-Mazeli very fairly  accepted,  there  was  no  adjournment
    request  made  on  the  basis  of  inadequacy  on  the  part   of   the
    representative which is perhaps hardly surprising.  Her  argument  was,
    as noted above, essentially that the judge should have her  own  motion
    adjourned the hearing.

8.   That has to be seen however in light of the circumstances as  a  whole.
    In particular of relevance in my view is the fact that,  as  the  judge
    noted at paragraph 34 of her decision, the appellant had  not  produced
    any evidence to show that her EEA spouse was  a  worker  at  any  stage
    during the currency of her residence card.  She had  not  stated  where
    her EEA spouse worked during the time they were living together and the
    only information included in her application form was the name  of  her
    EEA spouse.  It is right of course to point out, as the  judge  did  at
    paragraph 38 of her decision, that it is for an applicant to  prove  to
    their case.

9.   It is also relevant to note that  the  appellant,  now  represented  by
    different representatives, has not shown in what respect evidence might
    have been provided to demonstrate  the  inadequacies  of  the  previous
    representatives in terms of the provision of evidence to make  out  the
    claim that was being made.  Though that evidence would  not  have  been
    admissible to show an error of law by the judge,  it  would  have  been
    admissible to show the difference it might have  made  had  there  been
    competent representation before the judge.

10.  As a consequence, I do not consider than any  error  of  law  has  been
    made out.  One can only have  sympathy  for  the  appellant  given  the
    inadequacies of representation that are alleged and as described by the
    judge in her decision.  I do not however think she can be left  with  a
    sense of grievance as to the Tribunal process  in  circumstances  where
    she provided no evidence to make out the essence of her claim.  However
    inadequate her representative may have been, it does  not  appear  that
    the evidence existed that could have gone any way  towards  making  out
    the claim by bearing in mind the minimal amount of evidence provided as
    noted by the judge at paragraph 34 of her decision.  As a  consequence,
    though as I say there must be sympathy for  the  appellant,  I  do  not
    consider that the judge erred as a matter of law  in  not  deciding  to
    adjourn the hearing of her own motion in order to enable the  appellant
    to obtain alternative representation.  As a consequence,  her  decision
    dismissing the appeal is maintained.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              25 September 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              25 September 2018

