
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02418/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                 SERGE MINOU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Khalid, of counsel, instructed by Chancery CS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Cameroon born on 18  October  1979.  He
      appeals the decision of the Secretary of  State  on  9  February  2016
      refusing to issue him with a permanent residence card  as  the  former
      spouse of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty  Rights  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

   2. The appellant had applied for a residence card as a spouse of  an  EEA
      national and this was issued on 11 February 2010 and was  valid  until
      11 February 2015.

   3. On 7 September 2015 the  appellant's  representatives  applied  for  a
      permanent residence card as a confirmation  of  a  retained  right  to
      reside in the United Kingdom.

   4. It is common ground that the appellant's marriage ended in divorce  on
      2 November 2015. The appellant had  got  married  to  his  wife  on  2
      February 2009.

   5. The respondent refused the application because she was not of the view
      that evidence had been provided that his wife  was  exercising  treaty
      rights from November 2011 to December 2012, from May 2014 to  February
      2015, and also from October 2015 up until the point of the divorce.

   6. The respondent was also of the view that the appellant had  failed  to
      provide evidence of his self-employment since the divorce and  refused
      the application on that basis also. The appellant's appeal came before
      a First-tier Judge on 12 May 2016 to be determined as  a  paper  case,
      neither  party  requesting  an  oral  hearing.  The   judge   exercise
      discretion to determine the appeal on the papers. In  paragraph  5  of
      the decision the judge stated that the burden lay on the appellant  to
      prove on the balance of probabilities that he met  the  terms  of  the
      Immigration EEA Regulations with reference to Regulation  15  (1)  (f)
      "so as to show residence here in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous
      period of five years."

   7. Having considered pages in the appellant's bundle the judge found that
      he could not  see  evidence  that  the  appellant's  spouse  had  been
      exercising treaty rights from  November  2011  to  December  2012.  In
      paragraph 15 he commented "in any event it seemed to me that the  real
      issue in this appeal turned on Regulation 10 (6) even if I am wrong on
      the exercise of Treaty Rights  by  the  EEA  national."  Having  found
      nothing in the papers submitted to address this point the judge  found
      that the appellant had failed to  address  the  issue  raised  by  the
      respondent. He added:

           "Even if he had produced evidence in relation to missing gaps on
           the spouse's Treaty Rights (which was not wholly clear to me) in
           any event the appeal must fail for the foregoing reasons."

   8. Accordingly the judge dismissed the appeal. The appellant applied  for
      permission to appeal. A First-tier  Judge  granted  permission  on  28
      September 2016. The judge noted that  the  marriage  had  run  from  2
      February 2009 until 2 November  2015  when  the  decree  absolute  was
      signed:

           "Retained residence would not,  therefore,  have  arisen  as  an
           issue had the 5 years'  continuous  residence  been  established
           prior to the date of divorce. It is,  therefore,  arguable  that
           the judge fell into  error  in  failing  to  consider  the  P60s
           relating to the exercise of Treaty Rights during the  course  of
           the marriage."

   9. The respondent filed a response on 18 October 2016. In paragraph 3  of
      the response it was stated:

           "The appellant  was  required  to  show  that  his  ex-wife  was
           exercising treaty rights in accordance with the EEA  Regulations
           for the period February 2009 to February 2014. The  judge  noted
           at paragraph 14 that there were gaps in the evidence during  the
           course of the marriage. Even if one were to count back from  the
           date of the termination of the marriage which  was  in  November
           2015 to 2010 there was insufficient evidence available  to  show
           that the  EEA  national  was  exercising  Treaty  Rights  for  a
           continuous period of 5 years."

  10. A difficulty arose at the hearing before me in  that  the  appellant's
      evidence bundle before the First-tier Judge had  become  detached  and
      was no longer in the court bundle. Mr Singh had not got a copy.

  11. Mr Khalid helpfully provided the relevant  parts  of  the  bundle.  He
      submitted that while the judge had been unable to locate the  evidence
      it was in the bundle as the appellant had stated.

  12. Mr Singh was given the opportunity to  consider  the  bundle  and  the
      original documents. He accepted what  was  said  in  the  respondent's
      response on the question of the 5 year period of residence that I have
      set out above. The respondent appeared not to have demurred from  what
      had been said when permission to appeal had been granted. He commented
      that it was unclear that the judge had referred to the correct  bundle
      as the pages that Mr Khalid had submitted filled in the gaps.

  13. Having carefully gone through all the material Mr Singh accepted  that
      the evidence showed that the appellant's spouse  had  been  exercising
      Treaty Rights during the marriage in accordance with regulation 15 (1)
      (b). He was content that the appeal be allowed. I did not  trouble  Mr
      Khalid in the circumstances.

  14. I am grateful to Mr Singh for his assistance.  It is possible that the
      First-tier Judge, who  of  course  did  not  have  the  assistance  of
      representatives from either side, directed his attention to the  wrong
      bundle.  In any event is now agreed and  accepted  that  the  material
      before the judge ought to have led him to  allow  the  appeal  on  the
      evidence before him.

  15. Appeal allowed under the EEA regulations. The appellant is entitled to
      a permanent residence card  having  established  5  years'  continuous
      residence under Regulation 15 (1) (f).




      Anonymity Direction

      The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

      Fee Award

      Any fee paid by the appellant should be returned to him.




      Signed
                               G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               3 November 2016
