
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02400/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 October 2016                            |On 09 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             NATASHA ANN CHRISTY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davey) allowing an appeal by  the  applicant
    against the respondent's decision made on 29 October 2015 refusing  her
    a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the  UK.   The
    appeal was allowed, to the extent that the decision was returned to the
    Secretary of State to consider the exercise  of  discretion.   In  this
    decision, I will refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the applicant as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of the United  States  born  on  13  January
    1988.  In September 2011 she left the USA and travelled to Slovakia via
    Prague in the Czech Republic.  In October 2011 she began working for  a
    Canadian language school in Slovakia  and  duly  received  a  one  year
    Slovak visa valid until 24 October 2011.  She first  met  her  partner,
    Scott Alan Jones, a citizen of the UK born on 2 March 1978, on  a  trip
    she made to London from Slovakia.  There was a further  visit  in  June
    2011 and on 2 July 2011 her partner went to meet her in  Slovakia.   On
    16 September 2011 they moved together to Opole in Poland.  Her  partner
    started working for Bizneslingua of Opole and shortly afterwards at the
    British School of Opole.  They both continued to work in  Poland  until
    September 2014 when they drove through a number of  European  countries
    as part of a commemoration project, finally arriving in the UK.  On  25
    February  2015  they  travelled  back  to  France   to   complete   the
    commemoration project, returning to the UK via Calais.

3.   On 29 April 2015 the appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  as  a
    family member but her application was refused on 29 October 2015.   The
    respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of reg. 9 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations") as she was unable to show that she
    and her partner had been married in an EEA country before returning  to
    the UK.  In a supplementary decision  letter  dated  1  December  2015,
    following  further  representations  from  the  appellant  drawing  the
    respondent's attention to a decision of the Upper Tribunal in Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v Cain  (IA/40868/2013)  holding  that
    reg. 9 was inconsistent with the principle  of  Surinder  Singh  [1992]
    EUECC-370/90  as it did not extend to durable partners, the  respondent
    decided to maintain her previous refusal,  taking  the  view  that  the
    decision in Cain was limited to the facts of that particular  case  and
    that any conclusions were not binding on the respondent with respect to
    her wider policy.

4.   The appeal against the decision the appeal was listed on  12  May  2016
    for an  oral  hearing  but  was  adjourned  pending  a  review  by  the
    respondent.  This led to the issue of a decision letter  dated  9  June
    2016 in which  the  respondent  again  maintained  her  decision.   She
    accepted that the appellant and her  partner  were  in  a  genuine  and
    durable relationship and that the  appellant's  relationship  with  her
    partner was that of an extended family member. However, she  could  not
    meet the requirements of reg. 8(5) as her partner did not  fall  within
    the meaning of an EEA national as  set  out  in  reg.  2.   The  letter
    referred to  the  judgment  in  Surinder  Singh,  indicating  that  the
    respondent interpreted it as referring to "family members"  as  defined
    in Article 2(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC.  The decision also  refers  to
    regs. 17(4) and (5) but it  was  the  respondent's  view  that  as  the
    sponsor  was  not  considered  an  EEA  national  under  reg   2,   the
    requirements of  reg.  17  could  not  be  met.   The  respondent  also
    maintained that the decision in Cain was limited to the facts  of  that
    particular case and that  any  conclusions  were  not  binding  on  the
    respondent.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing of the appeal on 22 July 2016, the judge found that  the
    appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  reg.  8(5)  of  the
    Regulations as an extended family member because her partner was  a  UK
    national the requirements of reg. 9(b) as that was limited to those who
    were married or in a civil  partnership.   The  judge  found  that  the
    difference between EEA nationals and UK nationals under reg. 8 in terms
    of its consequences was discriminatory and arguably prevented the  free
    movement of a UK national to go and work in other EU countries  because
    of the uncertainty as to whether he or she could  bring  their  partner
    back to the UK.  This  would  confound  the  objective  of  freedom  of
    movement of  people  enabling  an  EEA  national  to  travel  and  work
    accompanied by family and  other  dependants.  He  found  that  it  was
    significant that nationals of Member States should not be deterred from
    leaving to work elsewhere in the EEA because of  uncertainty  of  being
    able to return to their Member State of origin.

6.   The judge referred to examples in EU case law demonstrating, albeit  by
    reference to different relationships, the importance of enabling family
    members to accompany a worker to another EEA country.  He  noted  there
    were frequent references to  non-discrimination  and  the  movement  of
    workers in Directive 2004/38/EC and under Article 2 of the  Convention.
    He considered them in their own right, unaffected by  the  judgment  in
    Surinder Singh, which related to a married couple returning to the  UK.
    He considered the Tribunal decisions in Cain and Osoro (Surinder Singh)
    [2015] UKUT 593.

7.   The judge noted that the expression "durable partner" was to  be  found
    in Article 3 of the Directive under the heading "Beneficiaries",  where
    the Directive sought to identify those intended to benefit from and, in
    effect, not impede free movement and residence. The judge found that on
    the facts of the present case the provisions of reg. 9  and  reg.  8(5)
    prevented free movement and reg. 8(5) was  discriminatory  between  EEA
    nationals and UK nationals and therefore  contrary  to  law.  In  these
    circumstances, he allowed the appeal to the extent that the matter  was
    returned to the respondent to consider the exercise of discretion.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds of appeal the respondent argues that it was not open  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  to  declare  the  Regulations  discretionary.
    Secondly, having considered that the appellant could  not  fall  within
    the requirements of the Regulations, there was no basis for  the  judge
    to find that the respondent  was  bound  nonetheless  to  exercise  her
    discretion under reg. 17(4). It was not  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge, so it is argued, to dispense with the requirements of  secondary
    legislation whatever he  considered  were  the  purposes  or  otherwise
    behind such legislation.

9.   Thirdly, it is argued that in the case of durable  relationships  there
    can be no expectation under EEA law of  receiving  specific  rights  in
    other Member States as the rights for those durable  relationships  are
    not harmonised.  Article 3.2 of the Citizens Directive is clear that it
    is national legislation that determines the position of extended family
    members not Union law, provided national legislation facilitates  their
    entry and residence.  The Directive, it is submitted, correctly assumes
    that Union law does not need to preserve the free movement of nationals
    in their own Member State.

10.  Mr Walker adopted the grounds arguing  that  the  appellant  could  not
    bring  herself  within  the  Regulations.   He   confirmed   that   the
    consequence of his submission was that to  option  leave  to  enter  or
    remain the appellant would need to comply with the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules as EEA law could  not  help  her  in  her  particular
    situation.  He submitted that the appellant  could  not  bring  herself
    within the Surinder Singh principle and that, although  she  was  in  a
    durable relationship, this brought with it no expectation of  receiving
    particular rights in a any Member State.

11.  The appellant, assisted in her submissions by  her  partner,  submitted
    firstly that the respondent's application for permission to appeal  had
    been made out of time. So far  as  the  substance  of  the  appeal  was
    concerned, she submitted that the judge had been right to find that the
    Regulations were  discriminatory  as  they  prevented  free  moment  of
    British citizens and allowed different freedoms for EEA nationals.  She
    submitted that her situation was similar to that considered in the Cain
    and she should be treated in a similar  way.    She  argued  that  reg.
    17(4) related precisely to her situation as equivalent to  an  extended
    family member. So far as the respondent's comment that there  could  be
    no expectation under Union law of  receiving  specific  rights  as  the
    rights for those in durable  relationships  were  not  harmonised,  she
    submitted that this was in effect saying that she would have no  rights
    in the UK unless she married.

12.  She made the point that she wanted to enter into that  relationship  of
    her own volition and at a time of her choosing and, referred  to  Judge
    Davey's comments at [17], that there may be a  number  of  reasons  why
    only a durable relationship is  possible,  e.g.  an  existing  previous
    marriage, no wish to be married or religious  reasons.   She  submitted
    that the judge's approach properly  acknowledged  that  in  the  modern
    world, people in committed long term relationships did not  always  get
    married right away.  She also made the point that  when  preparing  and
    submitting her application under the EEA Regulations, she had  followed
    the advice received from various  officials  at  the  Home  Office  and
    expressed her upset and concern at the effect of the  decision  on  her
    and her partner in creating a situation where she was  unable  to  work
    which had now been going on for at least a year and a half.


Assessment of the Issues

13.  The issue I must assess is whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law in finding that the provisions of reg 9 and reg 8(3) prevented free
    movement and that reg. 8(5) was discriminatory  between  EEA  nationals
    and UK nationals and therefore contrary to  law.  The  essence  of  the
    respondent's submission is that the  Regulations  are  clear  that  the
    appellant cannot bring herself within the  provisions  of  either  reg.
    8(5) or reg, 9, that the Regulations are consistent with  the  Citizens
    Directive and that the Regulations are not discriminatory  and  do  not
    inhibit free movement of EU citizens.  The appellant's case is that  it
    has been accepted that she  is  in  a  durable  relationship  in  that,
    although not married to her partner, they have been living together and
    the relationship is akin to marriage.  The fact that she is not allowed
    to enter the UK  within  the  EEA  Regulations  is  discriminatory  and
    prevents the free movement of her partner, a UK  national,  to  go  and
    work in other EEA countries because of the uncertainty as to whether he
    could bring a partner back with him to the UK.

14.  In Surinder Singh, the question referred by the UK High  Court  to  the
    European Court for a preliminary ruling was:

         "Where a married woman who is a national  of  a  Member  State  has
         exercised treaty rights in another Member State  by  working  there
         and enters and remains in the  Member  State  of  which  she  is  a
         national for the purposes of running a business with  her  husband,
         do Article 52 of the Treaty of Rome and Council Directive 73/148 of
         21 May 1973 entitle her spouse (who is not a Community national) to
         enter and remain in that Community state with his wife?"

15.  The answer given by the Court of Justice was as follows:

         "The answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling  must
         therefore be that Article 52 of the Treaty  and  Directive  73/148,
         properly construed, require a Member State to grant leave to  enter
         and reside in its territory to the spouse, of whatever nationality,
         of a national of that state who has  gone,  with  that  spouse,  to
         another Member State in order to work there as an  employed  person
         as envisaged by Article 48 of the treaty and returns  to  establish
         himself or herself as envisaged by Article 52 of the treaty in  the
         territory of the state of which he  or  she  is  a  national.   The
         spouse must enjoy at least the same rights as would be  granted  to
         him or here under Community law if his or her  spouse  entered  and
         resided in the territory of another Member State."

16.  In Osoro (Surinder Singh) [2015] UKUT 593 the Tribunal warned that  the
    linguistic formulation "the principle in Surinder Singh":

         "...required particular care and circumspection on the part of both
         practitioners and judges as it was a fact sensitive case decided by
         the European Court by resort of free movement provisions of primary
         Community law.  The case was decided and accordingly its  rationale
         has  the  two-fold  doctrinal  components  of  the   principle   of
         efficacious enjoyment of Community law rights and the principle  of
         non-discrimination  and  it  is  these  principles   which   demand
         attention in any given context rather than treating Surinder  Singh
         as authority for some principle of wider application".

17.  As the Tribunal pointed out, the importance of  the  case  of  Surinder
    Singh lay in its reasoning that the rights conferred by Articles 48 and
    52 of the Treaty cannot be fully effective if  an  EU  citizen  may  be
    deterred from exercising them by obstacles raised in his or her country
    of origin to the entry and residence of his or her spouse. Accordingly,
    when a Community national who has availed himself or herself  of  those
    rights returns to his or her country of origin, his or her spouse  must
    enjoy at least the same rights of  entry  and  residence  as  would  be
    granted to him or her under Community law if his or her spouse chose to
    enter and reside in another Member State.

18.  The Tribunal then commented that within this passage one could  readily
    identify the familiar principle of efficacious enjoyment  of  Community
    Law rights and  the  related  concept  of  dissuasion,  or  deterrence,
    coupled with the principle of non-discrimination.

19.  The appellant seeks to rely on the unreported  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Cain. The facts in that case were that  the  appellant  and
    her partner were in a durable relationship and had been living together
    since June 2008.  They had three children. The appellant's partner  had
    been exercising treaty rights in Spain and Portugal from  January  2010
    until January 2012 where they had lived together. In January 2012  they
    returned to the UK.   The applicant's partner made an application for a
    residence card as the family member of an EEA  national  but  this  was
    refused.  The Tribunal identified as the heart of the appeal whether an
    unmarried partner was entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the  decision  in
    Surinder Singh which concerned British citizens  returning  to  the  UK
    after having exercised treaty rights  in  another  EEA  state  and  the
    extent to which a third  country  national  family  member  of  such  a
    British citizen was entitled to reside in the UK under EU law.

20.  The Tribunal noted that Surinder Singh answered the question  submitted
    by holding that where a spouse of whatever nationality of a citizen  of
    an EU state had gone with that spouse to another Member State  to  work
    there, and then returned, the spouse  must  enjoy  at  least  the  same
    rights that would be granted under Community law if  they  entered  and
    resided in the territory of another Member State.

21.  The Tribunal then considered a subsequent decision of the ECJ  in  Eind
    [2007] EUECJC-291/05 concerning a national of the Netherlands  who  had
    come to the UK, become employed and was later joined by his daughter, a
    national of Suriname.  On return to  the  Netherlands  the  authorities
    refused to grant a residence permit to his  daughter.  The  Court  said
    that the national of a Member State could be deterred from leaving that
    member state to pursue gainful employment in the territory  of  another
    member state if he did not have the certainty of being able  to  return
    to his Member State of origin irrespective of whether he was  going  to
    engage in economic activity there.  The deterrent effect  would  derive
    simply from the prospect on  that  national   of  not  being  able,  on
    returning to his Member State of origin, to continue living with  close
    relatives a way of life which may have come  into  being  in  the  host
    Member State as a result of marriage or family reunification.

22.  The Tribunal said:

         "37.     Barriers to family reunification are therefore  liable  to
             undermine the right to free movement which  the  nationals  of
             Member States have under Community law,  as  the  right  of  a
             Community worker to return to the member state of which he  is
             a national cannot  be  considered  to  be  a  purely  internal
             matter."

     The Tribunal noted that this and subsequent cases,  S  and  G  case  C-
    457/12 and O and B case  C-456/12  concerned  family  members  and  not
    unmarried partners.

23   The Tribunal considered the distinction in Articles  2  and  3  of  the
    Citizens Directive 2004/38/EC between a family  member  as  defined  in
    Article 2(2) and beneficiaries as defined in  Article  3,  including  a
    partner with whom the Union citizen has  a  durable  relationship  duly
    attested. The Tribunal said that it could not see that  there  was  any
    distinction in principle between the cases it had been referred to  and
    the case of the applellant before it.  The exercise  of  the  right  of
    free movement by an EEA national was as likely to be adversely affected
    by the inability of a durable partner to reside with the  EEA  national
    in the host state, as it would be if  his  or  her  spouse  was  denied
    residence status.

24.  The Tribunal set out its conclusions at [54] as follows:

         "Drawing all these threads together we are  satisfied  that  First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  Powell  was  correct  to  conclude  that  the
         Surinder Singh principle applies to this appellant, albeit  it  not
         for precisely the reasons that he gave.   The  principle  does  not
         derive from the Directive which has no  equivalent  provision,  but
         from Community law.  We are nevertheless satisfied that  Regulation
         9 is inconsistent with the  principle  in  Surinder  Singh  in  its
         application to this  appellant  as  a  durable  partner,  being  an
         extended family member."

25.  The Tribunal did, however, find  that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
    purport to allow the appeal outright and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the  exercise  of
    discretion under reg. 17(4) in that the  appellant  was  not  a  family
    member as defined in Article 2 but another beneficiary  within  Article
    3.2.

26.  Turning now, in the light of these  authorities,  to  the  respondent's
    grounds in the present appeal, it is argued firstly  that  it  was  not
    open  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   to   declare   the   Regulations
    discriminatory.  I am not satisfied that there is any substance in this
    ground if it is being argued that the Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to
    make such a declaration.  European law is directly  applicable  and  it
    was open to the judge to make  such  a  finding  if  justified  in  the
    circumstances of the appeal.

27.  In any event, I do not treat  the  grounds  as  limited  to  issues  of
    jurisdiction  but  as  challenging  the  substance  of   the   decision
    particularly in the light of paragraph 10 of the grounds, where  it  is
    argued that in the case of those in durable relationships, there can be
    no expectation under Union law of receiving specific rights in  another
    Member State as those rights are not harmonised and Article 3.2 of  the
    Citizens Directive makes it clear that it is national legislation  that
    determines the position of extended family members, not Union  law.  It
    is further argued that the Directive correctly assumes that  Union  law
    does not need to preserve the free movement of nationals in  their  own
    Member State.

28.  However, so far as the substance  of  the  appeal  is  concerned,  this
    ground overlooks  the  core  European  principles  of  the  efficacious
    enjoyment  of  Community  law  rights  and  the   principle   of   non-
    discrimination.  The grounds have little if anything to  say  on  these
    aspects which were  at  the  heart  of  the  judge's  decision.   I  am
    satisfied on the evidence and submissions before him, it  was  open  to
    the judge to find that in the circumstances of the  appellant  and  her
    partner the application of reg. 9 and reg. 8(5) inhibited her partner's
    free movement and the impact of the Regulations was discriminatory.

29.  As Judge Davey pointed out at [15] of his decision, the  respondent  in
    arguing the case before him  did  not  seek  to  argue  there  was  any
    justification for the exclusion of partners from reg.  9  and  in  this
    context it is worth noting the fact that reg. 9 is limited  to  spouses
    and civil partners in contrast with the provisions in  the  Immigration
    Rules which defines partners as including a spouse, a civil partner,  a
    fianc�, a proposed civil partner and a person in a relationship akin to
    marriage or civil partnership for at least two years prior to the  date
    of application.

30.   There  are  two  further  points  I  should  cover  for  the  sake  of
    completeness. Firstly, I do not accept that the respondent's notice  of
    appeal was filed out of time.  In any event, the delay would have  been
    minimal and the issues  are  such  that  an  extension  of  time  would
    inevitably have been granted. Secondly, at the  hearing  before  me  no
    reference was made to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala (EFMs:
    right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 issued on 19  August  2016  where  the
    Tribunal held that there was no statutory right  of  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent not to grant a residence card  to  a  person
    claiming to be an extended family member. However, in the present  case
    the application was in substance based on general principles of EU  law
    rather than a specific application under the Regulations as an extended
    family member.  Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the  appeal  falls
    within the scope of the  decision  in  Sala  and  there  was  therefore
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

31.  In summary, the grounds and submissions do  not  satisfy  me  that  the
    judge erred in law by finding that the combined effect of  reg.  9  and
    reg. 8(5) prevented freedom of movement and was discriminatory  between
    EEA nationals and in consequence the proper course was for the judge to
    refer the application back to the respondent.


Decision

32.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in  law.   It  follows  that  the
    decision  stands.  No  anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 4 December 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
