
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02820/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 April 2021 via Skype           |On 11 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           Miss Giftling Agyemang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Ferguson Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Miss S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against a decision made by the respondent on 31 May
2019 to refuse to issue her with a document confirming her right of
permanent residence as the family member of an EEA national exercising
treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  Her appeal against that decision was
dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge K R Moore, for the reasons set out
in a decision promulgated on 31 October 2019.  For the reasons set out in
my decision of 10 December 2020, a copy of which is annexed, that decision
was set aside and a direction made for the matter to be reheard.

 1. The appellant's case is that she is lawfully married to Adjetey  Samuel
    Sowah and has been since 1 December 2010. That marriage was  conducted,
    by proxy, in Ghana and according to customary law.

 2. The respondent does not, however, accept that this marriage was  lawful
    as evidence obtained during a visit to the appellant's home address  on
    20 June 2017 indicated that she had been married to Michael Adu  on  29
    August 2010, and had not been divorced prior  to  her  marriage  to  Mr
    Sowah on 1 December 2010; and, as a result, the marriage was not  valid
    and so she was not the family member of Mr Sowah.

 3. Following the visit in 2017, the respondent had refused the appellant's
    then pending application for a permanent residence cared. That resulted
    in an appeal (EA/06426/2017) which was then dismissed for  the  reasons
    set out in a decision promulgated on 29 June 2018.  In that appeal  the
    appellant said that the marriage to Mr Adu was not a legal marriage  as
    the pastor who had performed it, said he had not had the  authority  to
    conduct it. Neither Mr Adu nor Mr Sowah attended the hearing.

 4. In her decision, the judge found that the appellant's evidence that the
    marriage to Michael Adu was not valid not to be credible,  noting  [64]
    that she had not checked any registers of marriage or with  the  church
    where it was conducted; or whether the church where  it  was  conducted
    was registered to perform marriages.  Taking the evidence as  a  whole,
    the judge was not satisfied that the marriage to Mr Sowah was valid  as
    he found the appellant was not free to marry at that point.

 5. At the appeal before FtTJ Moore, the appellant  said  that  the  church
    service was simply a blessing, and that in any event, she had found out
    two weeks later that Mr Adu had a wife, Lydia, in the  Netherlands  and
    so had not in any event been free to marry. She also sought  to  adduce
    the certificate of marriage between Mr Adu and his  wife,  Lydia,  from
    2003 as well as  the  divorce  certificate  from  2015  by  which  that
    marriage was dissolved. The judge refused to admit the late evidence of
    Mr Adu's divorce [5] and [6] evidence of Mr Adu's marriage in 2003.

 6. The judge considered [24] that the issue was whether the appellant was,
    as at 1 December 2010, free to marry, noting  [25]  that  although  the
    respondent had initially accepted the marriage to Mr  Sowah  as  valid,
    she now claims that the appellant was already married to  Mr  Adu,  and
    was thus not free to marry Mr Sowah.  He found [28] that the  appellant
    had not given credible evidence, nor was he satisfied that she had been
    free to marry Mr Sowah and " had failed to  provide  reliable  evidence
    that the marriage between Michael Adu and another woman came to an  end
    before 28 August 2010 when she married him".

As a preliminary matter Miss Cunha submitted that it would be possible for
the Upper Tribunal to go behind the earlier decision of Judge Connor,
promulgated on 29 June 2018, who found that contrary to the evidence
submitted in the form of a report from the Immigration Officer who attended
in 2017, Samuel Sowah and Michael Adu are one and the same person.
Although noting that he had not heard evidence from either Mr Sowah or Mr
Adu, he noted that he had seen a copy of indefinite leave to remain given
to Mr Adu and accepted the appellant's submission that if that was so he
would not need to be working in the name of Samuel Sowah and found that
they were not the same person [61].  He notes also, "the Immigration
Officer's statement sets out that the Immigration Officer noted the picture
on the wedding DVD was not the same as the picture of Samuel Sowah.  I am
therefore unclear how it was concluded that they were the same person."

That is a finding of fact reached by a judge.  I am not satisfied that
there is any reason to go behind that finding there being no new evidence
in support of the Secretary of State's case that Michael Adu and Mr Sowah
are one and the same person.  The submission that because the judge had not
set out what weight to attach to the report of the officers is a reason to
go behind it is insufficient.  That would not have been a sustainable
ground of appeal given that it is evident that the judge had taken the
report into account and for good reasons had not accepted the evidence on
that point.  Further, Mr Sowah gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
Judge Moore and before me.  In conclusion there is insufficient material
before me to suggest that the test in Ladd v Marshall could be met.  There
is no new evidence and thus there is nothing that could not have been
before the First-tier Tribunal; second, there is nothing that it could be
said would be probative.

After some discussion I heard evidence from both Miss Agyemang and Mr
Sowah, both of whom gave evidence through an interpreter.  I then heard
submissions from both representatives.

In addition, I had before me the following documents:-

      1) Appellant's bundle.

      2) Respondent's bundle.

      3) Appellant's supplementary bundle.

      4) Skeleton argument from Miss Ferguson.

         The Law

So far as they are relevant the EEA Regulations provide:


         '7.- "Family member"

         (1)  In these Regulations, "family member" means, in relation to a
         person ("A")-

            (a)   A's spouse or civil partner;

            (b)   A's direct descendants, or the direct descendants of A's
            spouse or civil partner who are

         ...

         15.- Right of permanent residence

         (1)  The following persons acquire the right to reside in the
         United Kingdom permanently-

            (a)   an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
            accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of
            five years;

            (b)   a family member of an EEA national who is not an EEA
            national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA
            national in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
            period of five years;

         ...'

Although the EEA Regulations have been revoked with effect from 31st
December 2020, they are preserved for the purposes of this appeal.

As both parties accept, the sole issue in this case is whether the
appellant was validly married to Mr Adu.   If she were not, then she was
free to marry Mr Sowah, and, as his family member who has resided in the
United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period
of five years, has acquired the right of permanent residence and is
therefore entitled to document confirming that.

It is not in dispute that Mr Sowah is an EEA national, or that he has been
residing in the United Kingdom for the required period, nor is it said he
has not been exercising Treaty Rights. Further, it is not argued that the
marriage, if valid, is one of convenience.

It is for the appellant to show that her marriage is valid.  The basis of
the Secretary of State's case is that it is not solely because she was not
free to marry due to a prior marriage to Mr Adu.  If of course Mr Adu and
Mr Sowah are one and the same person, even going by different names, albeit
that the marriage might have been irregular, it is difficult to see how it
would be invalid.  To that extent the argument does not assist the
Secretary of State.  It is not disputed that the appellant underwent some
sort of ceremony of marriage to Michael Adu.  It is not in dispute either
that a DVD of that was produced or that the cover of the DVD had
photographs of those who had attended the wedding.  In the circumstances
the Secretary of State was entitled, prima facie, to conclude that the
marriage might be invalid.

But there is no documentary evidence as to who performed the ceremony,
where it was performed, whether the person who conducted or the premises
where it was conducted,  was licensed; any marriage certificate or any
other indicators that the marriage was valid according to the law of
England and Wales.  While I note Miss Cunha's submission that the marriage
could have taken place elsewhere, I consider that to be speculative, and it
was not an issue canvassed during cross-examination.  The reality is that
the unchallenged evidence extracted from the Register of Marriages and
divorces with the assistance of Miss Ferguson, who provided screenshots, is
that there is no record of Michael Adu taking part in a marriage indeed in
the United Kingdom or, for that matter, a record of the appellant partaking
in a marriage in the United Kingdom.

The Secretary of State submits that that is not a sufficient basis on which
I could conclude that there was no valid marriage to Michael Adu.  Whilst
at first glance that to me would be a surprising submission, I have found
that the evidence of neither the appellant nor her husband was credible or
compelling.  On the contrary, it was evasive, discursive and on numerous
occasions they simply failed to answer direct questions put to them by Miss
Cunha and by me seeking clarification.

Whilst I accept, as Miss Ferguson submitted, there may be some difficulty
regarding the technicalities of whether a marriage was valid or not and
that is not a concept easy to translate let alone to be answered by
somebody who is not a lawyer.  But that does not explain the appellant's
inability to explain whether it was days or months after the "marriage" to
Michael Adu that the DVD was produced nor is it at all clear why Michael
Adu would have married the appellant despite being, on her account, already
married to a wife then present in the Netherlands or why she would have
kept a DVD of such an event nor is it clear when she realised that the
marriage was not valid as she must have done if she agreed to marry Mr
Sowah.

Mr Sowah was not a satisfactory witness.  He was evasive.  For example,
when asked where he was when the marriage took place he mentioned meeting
his wife in Ghana, then that he later came to the United Kingdom, he had
found out what happened to Mr Adu and only after continual questioning and
irrelevant answers did he say that he had returned to Ghana for the
marriage to take place by proxy with his wife, who has remained in the
United Kingdom.  Again, it was only after prolonged questioning that he
explained that he had gone to Ghana because he wanted the marriage to be
properly registered so that she would have the protection of being validly
married in Ghana when he was asked why they had got not married in the
United Kingdom.  He was equivocal when asked whether he knew whether the
marriage to Michael Adu was valid or not.

I bear in mind that there may be many reasons why witnesses do not tell the
truth but in this case no real explanation has been given for the appellant
undergoing an "marriage" to Michael Adu which broke down in a matter of
weeks when it turned out he was married to a woman resident in the
Netherlands, nor why he would have done so in a ceremony which was not
valid in the United Kingdom.

I need, however, only decide whether that "marriage" was valid.  Even
accounting for the fact that I find that the appellants have not told me
the truth, the reality is that the official Register of Marriages shows no
marriage conducted in the United Kingdom between Michael Adu and anyone
else or, for that matter, between the appellant and anybody else.  Given
also the lack of evidence as to when and where the marriage took place, it
being unlikely given the legislation in place at the time that a marriage
valid according to the law in England and Wales could have taken place
without notice to the Home Office, I conclude that the appellant was not
married to Michael Adu.

 I consider that significant weight can and should be attached to the
absence of any trace of a marriage in official records. I find it wholly
unlikely that there could, in the circumstances, have been a valid marriage
between Mr Adu and the appellant, absent any indication that marriage took
place outside the United Kingdom.

In the circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to consider whether or not
Michael Adu was married at the time of the purported marriage but no
submissions have been made to me regarding the documents which had been
produced showing that he was married previously and that he was
subsequently divorced.

It has not been suggested to me that the proxy marriage between the
appellant and Mr Sowah is invalid for any other reason and accordingly, I
am satisfied that they are lawfully married according to the law of England
and Wales.

There being no submission that this is a marriage of convenience or that Mr
Sowah is not an EEA national exercising treaty rights, I conclude that,
given the duration of the marriage which took place in 2010 and the length
of time that the appellant has lived in the United Kingdom with Mr Sowah,
that she meets the requirements of the EEA Regulations and I therefore
allow the appeal on that basis.

Notice of Decision

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.
      2. I remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
         Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 29 April 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02820/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 10 December 2020                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              GIFTLING AGYEMANG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge K  R Moore, promulgated on 31 October 2019,
    dismissing her appeal under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2016 against a decision of the respondent to refuse to
    issue her with a card confirming her permanent right of residence.

 7. The appellant's case is that she is lawfully married to Adjetey  Samuel
    Sowah and has been since 1 December 2010. That marriage was  conducted,
    by proxy, in Ghana and according to customary law.

 8. The respondent does not, however, accept that this marriage was  lawful
    as evidence obtained during a visit to the appellant's home address  on
    20 June 2017 indicated that she had been married to Michael Adu on   29
    August 2010, and had not been divorced prior  to  her  marriage  to  Mr
    Sowah on 1 December 2010; and, as a result, the marriage was not  valid
    and so she was not the family member of Mr Sowah.

 9. Following the visit in 2017, the respondent had refused the appellant's
    then pending application for a permanent residence cared. That resulted
    in an appeal (EA/06426/2017) which was then dismissed for  the  reasons
    set out in a decision promulgated on 29 June 2018.  In that appeal  the
    appellant said that the marriage to Mr Adu was not a legal marriage  as
    the pastor who had performed it, said he had not had the  authority  to
    conduct it. Neither Mr Adu nor Mr Sowah attended the hearing.

10. In her decision, the judge found that the appellant's evidence that the
    marriage to Michael Adu was not valid not to be credible,  noting  [64]
    that she had not checked any registers of marriage or with  the  church
    where it was conducted; or whether the church where  it  was  conducted
    was registered to perform marriages.  Taking the evidence as  a  whole,
    the judge was not satisfied that the marriage to Mr Sowah was valid  as
    he found the appellant was not free to marry at that point.

11. At the appeal before  FtTJ Moore, the appellant said  that  the  church
    service was simply a blessing, and that in any event, she had found out
    two weeks later that Mr Adu had a wife, Lydia, in the  Netherlands  and
    so had not in any event been free to marry. She also sought  to  adduce
    the certificate of marriage between Mr Adu and his  wife,  Lydia,  from
    2003 as well as  the  divorce  certificate  from  2015  by  which  that
    marriage was dissolved. The judge refused to admit the late evidence of
    Mr Adu's divorce [5] and [6] evidence of Mr Adu's marriage in 2003.

12. The judge considered [24] that the issue was whether the appellant was,
    as at 1 December 2010, free to marry, noting  [25]  that  although  the
    respondent had initially accepted the marriage to Mr  Sowah  as  valid,
    she now claims that the appellant was already married to  Mr  Adu,  and
    was thus not free to marry Mr Sowah.  He found [28] that the  appellant
    had not given credible evidence, nor was he satisfied that she had been
    free to marry Mr Sowah and " had failed to  provide  reliable  evidence
    that the marriage between Michael Adu and another woman came to an  end
    before 28 August 2010 when she married him".

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds the judge  had
    erred in not permitting her to adduce evidence showing that  Mr Adu was
    in fact married at the time of the church blessing on 29  August  2010,
    and thus, she had been free to marry Mr Sowah.

14. On 1 April 2020, FtTJ Osborne granted permission to appeal.

15. On 13 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt gave directions which   that
    she had reached the provisional view,  that it would in  this  case  be
    appropriate  to  determine  whether  the  making  of   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error of law, and, if  so
    whether that decision should be  set  aside  the  questions  without  a
    hearing. She also set out a timetable within which any  submissions  or
    objections were to be served

16. The appellant made further submissions on 22 July 2020. The  respondent
    replied on 4 August 2020.

17. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  In deciding to make a decision without
    a hearing, I have borne in mind Rule 34 and the judgment of  Fordham  J
    in JCWI v President of the Upper Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 as  well  as
    the order made in that case. Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard  to
    the views of the parties.  Given that no objection to  this  course  of
    action has been raised, and bearing in mind the overriding objective in
    Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,  I
    am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of this case where no
    objection to a decision being made in the absence of a hearing that  it
    would be right to do so.

18. Contrary to what is averred by the respondent in her Rule  24  Response
    of 4 August 2020, the grounds are not simply a  disagreement,  nor  are
    the findings at paragraph 27 of the decision sustainable.

19. As Ms Ferguson submitted, the judge misunderstood  the  nature  of  the
    documents the appellant sought to adduce. They were evidence  not  that
    she had divorced Mr Adu before the marriage to Mr Sowah but that Mr Adu
    had been married at the time of the purported marriage to  her  and  he
    had not been divorced until 2015. That evidence goes  to  the  core  of
    whether the appellant was free to marry Mr Sowah as it  indicates  that
    any marriage of the appellant to Mr Adu was void and she was  therefore
    free to marry Mr Sowah.

20. The confusion as to the nature of the evidence appears both at [4]  and
    [5] and played a significant part in the judge's  analysis  of  why  he
    excluded it.  I consider that, accordingly, his decision on that  point
    is flawed and involved the making of an error of law.

21. The judge also made no express  finding  about  Mr  Adu's  marriage  to
    Lydia, save that at [27] he says that

         "While I would not necessarily dispute this claim [that Michael Adu
         and Lydia were married in 2005],  more  pertinently,  there  is  no
         reliable evidence before me demonstrating that  this  marriage  had
         been dissolved, or that Michael Adu was divorced from Lydia, before
         28th August  2010  when  the  appellant  entered  into  a  marriage
         ceremony with Michael Adu"

22. With respect to the judge, that rather misses the point. Because, if Mr
    Adu had not been free to marry, then his marriage to the appellant  was
    invalid in any event which would mean that the appellant  was  free  to
    marry Mr Sowah. In which case, the appeal ought to have been allowed.

23. For these reasons, the decision involved the making of an error of  law
    as claimed and I set it aside. I consider that in all the circumstances
    of this case, the appropriate course of action is for the  decision  to
    be remade in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  parties  are  to  prepare
    accordingly.

24. I observe that in this case, it is the respondent who is claiming  that
    the marriage is not valid, and does so on the basis that the  appellant
    was, as the time of the marriage, not free so  to  do.  Yet,  beyond  a
    video of the ceremony, the existence of which is not in dispute,  there
    is no certificate of marriage or any other evidence to show  that  what
    took place was a valid marriage. No details  are  given  of  where  the
    marriage was said to have been  performed,  or  by  whom,  or  who  the
    witnesses were.   Still less is there evidence  of  who  conducted  the
    ceremony, whether he was licensed to do so or whether the  building  in
    which it took place was licensed. That said, it appears  unlikely  that
    the appellant would have forgotten where the ceremony took place.

Notice of Decision & Directions

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. The appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal on  a  date  to  be
         fixed

DIRECTIONS

      1. Having regard  to  the  Pilot  Practice  Direction  and  the  UTIAC
         Guidance Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally  of
         the view that the forthcoming hearing in this appeal can and should
         be held remotely, by Skype for Business  on  a  date  to  be  fixed
         within the period 31 January 2021 to 15 March 2021

      2. No later than 7 days after these directions are sent by  the  Upper
         Tribunal:

         (a)  the parties shall file and serve by email any objection to the
         hearing being a remote hearing at all/by  the  proposed  means;  in
         either case giving reasons; and

         (b)  without prejudice to the Tribunal's consideration of any  such
         objections, the parties shall also file and serve:

             (i)  contact/join-in details, were  the  hearing  is  to  take
             place remotely by the means currently proposed; and

             (ii) in that event, dates to avoid in the period specified.

      3. The Tribunal will then give further directions, which  will  either
         be:

         (i) to list the date and time of the remote hearing, confirming the
         join-in details etc and directing the electronic filing and service
         of documents in connection with the hearing; or

         (ii) to give directions with respect to a face-to-face hearing.

         (iii) give a timetable within which skeleton arguments  are  to  be
         raised.

      4. Any additional material must be served on  the  Upper  Tribunal  at
         least 10 working days before the hearing.




    Signed   Date 10 December 2020


    Jeremy K H Rintoul
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


