
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02616/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 October 2018                           |On 6 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 Meggan [O]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Acharya of Archaryas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the  appeal  of  Meggan  Naddine  O'Brien  against  a  decision
    refusing her application for  a  derivative  right  to  reside  as  the
    primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national  under  Regulation  15A  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations of 2006.  The  refusal
    date is 1 December 2015.  Little needs to be said  about  the  decision
    apart from one or two matters in light of the very helpful  submissions
    I received today from Mr Acharya on behalf of Ms O'Brien and  Mr  Mills
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.

2.   The judge accepted that Ms O'Brien is her daughter B's  primary  carer,
    so that disposed of one of the relevant  criteria  in  Regulation  15A.
    The remaining issue was the matter of whether she would  be  forced  to
    leave the United Kingdom  as  there  was  no  alternative  care  option
    available to her, and this essentially  revolved  around  the  evidence
    concerning her father.  The evidence was that he had not  been  on  the
    scene for some time.  The judge did not take into  account  documentary
    evidence from B herself or  from  her  friends  also  about  this,  but
    essentially based his conclusion refusing the appeal on the  fact  that
    there was a suggestion that the father would have to have been involved
    in her life when B's British passport was obtained in 2014 (I think  it
    is right that it was 2014 and not 2015 as the judge said).

3.   That, Mr Mills accepts on behalf of the  respondent  today,  is  wrong.
    Once she had attained the age of 10 as a British citizen she  would  be
    able to get a passport without any involvement of her  father  and  the
    key reason therefore in the judge's refusal falls away in light of  the
    supporting evidence which has been referred to and looked at about  the
    absence of the father from B's life.  It seems clear to me and I  think
    it is common ground that the  requirements  of  Regulation  15A(4)  are
    indeed met as  a  consequence  and  in  substitution  for  the  judge's
    decision dismissing the appeal is substituted a decision  allowing  the
    appeal under Regulation 15A.

4.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date     06/11/2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
