
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02860/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st December 2018                |On 11th January 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                BENEDICTA [D]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akohene, instructed by BWF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Ms [D] made an  application  for  a  permanent  residence  card  in
         accordance  with   the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2016 on 11 December 2017. Her application  was  refused
         for reasons set out in a decision dated 21st  March  2018  and  her
         appeal dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  Bannerman  in  a
         decision promulgated on 27th June 2018.

      2. Ms [D] sought permission to appeal, and was granted permission,  on
         the following grounds:

               i) The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in  failing  to
                  have adequate regard to the circumstances of the breakdown
                  of the marriage in considering the lack of  documentation;
                  failing to have regard to the respondent's policy in terms
                  of documentation and failing to give adequate reasons.

              ii) Erred in law in appearing to suggest that the marriage was
                  a marriage of convenience;

             iii) Erred in law in raising the former husband's  exercise  of
                  Treaty Rights and in any event erred  in  law  in  finding
                  that the husband was not exercising Treaty Rights for  the
                  requisite period.

      3. The grant of permission states that the sole reason for the refusal
         was the failure to  provide  relevant  documentation  but  did  not
         restrict the grant of permission.

      4. The relevant parts of the respondent's decision are as follows:

             "...

             You can submit another application if you can provide evidence
             that you are the former family  member  of  an  EEA  or  swiss
             national exercising Treaty Rights in the UK ...

             Reasons why your application has been refused

             Your application has been considered  under  regulation  21(5)
             ...

             ...

             As you have failed to provide a  valid  original  passport  or
             national identity card you [sic] application has been refused.

             This department has determined that you do not have a retained
             right of residence in the UK following divorce from  your  EEA
             or Swiss national sponsor.

             ..."

      5. It was accepted by the parties that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         should consider whether,  if  the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to
         permanent residence,  she  is  entitled  to  a  retained  right  of
         residence. It was not argued that the sole ground  of  refusal  was
         the lack of documentation; the challenge was to the decision  as  a
         whole and the findings made on each discrete issue.  There  was  no
         challenge to the credibility findings made by the judge:

                . Her claim to  have  suffered  domestic  violence  was  not
                  credible

                . Her claim to have had no direct contact with  her  husband
                  since 2013 was not credible

                . It was not true that  she  had  been  unable  to  put  her
                  husband's name on the middle child's birth certificate

      6. The judge found that the appellant was married to and then divorced
         from her husband (paragraph 88), that  she  had  previously  had  a
         residence card which had expired on 12th  January  2017  (paragraph
         90), that most of what she said was untruthful (paragraph 85), that
         the eldest child can stay with his father in  the  UK  even  if  he
         stays part of the time with the appellant although he was 'far from
         satisfied' that he does live with her, that he struggled to  accept
         that she ever did anything other than marry and  then  divorce  her
         husband (para 95), that she has lived in the UK at the  address  as
         shown on the bank documentation (para 97), that she was  untruthful
         throughout her evidence (para 97).

         Ground 1

      7. The respondent is enjoined in policy documents to take a  pragmatic
         approach  to  cases  where  there  has  been  a  breakdown   in   a
         relationship and gives the example where a relationship  has  ended
         acrimoniously and where  every  effort  has  been  made  to  obtain
         documents.  It is not apparent from the evidence before the  First-
         tier Tribunal what efforts were made by  the  appellant  to  obtain
         documents of identity of her former husband. If she  is  in  direct
         contact with him there was no explanation why he had not been asked
         for documents; if she was not in contact with him but  had  contact
         through a mutual friend, there was no evidence from the  friend  or
         the appellant what efforts she had  made  through  that  friend  to
         obtain documents. Her evidence was that there were still  documents
         relating to him coming to her home and that had been the case since
         they separated in 2014.

      8. The judge made  findings  on  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
         appellant  had,  overall,  not   given   credible   evidence.   The
         respondent's policy requires a pragmatic approach in  circumstances
         that make it difficult for an appellant to obtain  documents.  This
         appellant has been found by  the  judge  not  to  be  a  victim  of
         domestic violence, to be untruthful about contact with her  husband
         and to have produced very  little  evidence  of  attempts  made  to
         obtain documents. Although the judge makes no direct  reference  to
         the respondent's  policy,  there  is  nothing  significant  in  the
         evidence that could have led to a different finding to that made by
         the judge that there was any reason "beyond her control"  that  she
         could not produce original  documentation.  There  is  no  material
         error of law by the First-tier Tribunal in  finding  that  she  had
         failed to provide the required documentation.

         Ground 2

      9. The judge nevertheless went on to make findings on the  appellant's
         overall claim.

     10. Although the judge casts some  doubt  on  the  genuineness  of  the
         appellant's marriage, he does not make a finding that the  marriage
         was a marriage of convenience. As  correctly  pointed  out  in  the
         grounds and by Mr Akohene, there  had  been  no  assertion  by  the
         respondent that the marriage was one of convenience thus  resulting
         in a 'shift in the burden of proof". The judge has not found  there
         to be a marriage of convenience, there is no  identified  error  of
         law.

         Ground 3

     11. The judge found it improbable that the appellant's  former  husband
         could have  been  continuously  in  work  when  travelling  between
         Manchester to London to work or Manchester to Crewe (paragraph 96).
         The evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  his  employment
         consisted of 5 P60s covering 5 continuous  years.  The  appellant's
         evidence was that her husband had been working  for  a  company  in
         London, whilst living in Manchester and working sometimes in  Crewe
         and sometimes in London where the company's headquarters were.  She
         said he sometimes left for a week or two  at  a  time  to  work  in
         London. She said that his income  was  sufficient  to  meet  family
         expenses and rent. It was submitted to the First-tier Tribunal, and
         in the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  that  part  time
         working counts as employment for the purpose of  exercising  Treaty
         Rights provided the work is genuine and provides an effective means
         for a person to earn a living even if it needs to  be  supplemented
         from public  funds  -  Levin  (1982)  EUECJ  R-53/8.  There  is  no
         suggestion here that public funds were claimed (although Ms [D] has
         been receiving public funds since their separation). The  appellant
         did not produce any payslips of her husband indicating the hours he
         worked. Nor was there evidence of what rent he paid, if  any,  when
         he was working away from home, or what the rent on the family  home
         was. Mr Akohene said that the husband could have  worked  somewhere
         in the region of 15-20 hours per week and  earned  that  amount  of
         money, given the low pay rate. But there was no  evidence  to  that
         effect - it is pure speculation  on  the  part  of  Mr  Akohene  to
         suggest this.

     12. The appellant's evidence overall was not credible. According to the
         First-tier Tribunal  her  evidence  was  "vague",  she  "could  not
         provide direct answers to many of  the  questions  asked"  and  her
         witness statement "reads confusedly". It was open to the  judge  to
         consider that lack of  credibility  when  considering  whether  the
         appellant's  husband  had  been  exercising  Treaty  Rights  for  a
         continuous period. Whilst the judge accepts that  many  people  can
         survive on a low wage, it was open to him to find,  when  the  only
         evidence before him as to earnings was the P60s and the appellant's
         inconsistent and incredible evidence,  that  the  husband  was  not
         residing in the UK for  the  five  year  period  exercising  Treaty
         rights. The existence of the P60s is insufficient  when  considered
         in the context of a person travelling to work and working in  three
         different areas of the UK and paying rent  for  a  family  home  in
         Manchester with  no  additional  income  shown,  to  be  considered
         effective. Although one explanation may be 20 hours a week  at  low
         pay, an equally acceptable explanation is bursts of employment  for
         long hours and not in the country for other periods  of  time.  The
         judge was entitled to consider the evidence in the round and  reach
         the findings he did that the husband was not continuously  in  work
         and was not exercising Treaty Rights.

     13. There is no material error of law identified in ground 3.

         Conclusion

     14. There is no identifiable material error of law in the  decision  by
         the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's appeal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal stands.


     Date 28th December 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
