

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/02632/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                  | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 13 November 2018                    | On: 27 November 2018             |
|                                        |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            Wuga NORNUBARI birabe
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Omorere of Bestway Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willock-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 31  March  1987.  He  appeals,
with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
his appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue him  with  a
residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2016 as the family member (father) of an EEA national.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hamilton dismissed his appeal.

The background to this appeal, as far  as  I  can  gather  form  the  papers
before me, is as follows. The appellant married a Polish national in  Poland
on 9 April 2011 and together they had a son, D, born  on  22  June  2011  in
Poland. They moved as a family to the  UK  and  on  21  September  2015  the
appellant was issued with an EEA residence card. The appellant and his  wife
subsequently separated. An interim Child Arrangements Order was made in  the
Family Court on 7 October 2015 in which it was  agreed  that  D  would  live
with his mother and would have  regular  contact  with  the  appellant.  The
appellant and his wife were divorced on 13  April  2016  and  the  appellant
informed the Home Office on 20 October 2016 that his marriage had ended.  On
the basis that the appellant had failed to show  that  he  qualified  for  a
retained right of residence on divorce under regulation  10(5)  of  the  EEA
Regulations 2016, the respondent revoked the appellant's residence  card  on
1 February 2017. On 24 March 2017 the respondent made a decision  to  remove
the appellant. The appellant appealed against that decision and  the  appeal
was listed for hearing under the appeal reference EA/03637/2017.

In the meantime, on 18 December 2017, the appellant's solicitors applied  on
behalf of D for a registration certificate as confirmation  of  a  right  to
reside in the UK as an EEA national exercising treaty rights as  a  student.
They also applied on behalf of the appellant for a residence card under  the
EEA Regulations 2016 as a non-EEA family  member.  Those  applications  were
refused by the respondent on 12 March 2018.

In refusing the applications, the respondent was not satisfied  that  D  was
exercising treaty rights in  the  UK  as  a  student  for  the  purposes  of
regulation 6 and 4 of the  EEA  Regulations  2016,  since  (a)  he  had  not
provided a declaration confirming that he had sufficient resources  for  him
and his family members living in the UK not to become a burden on  the  UK's
social assistance system; and (b) he had not provided evidence that he  held
comprehensive sickness insurance in the UK, as  the  document  provided  was
for the appellant and not the sponsor D.   The  appellant  appealed  against
the decision refusing his  application.  There  was  no  appeal  by  D.  The
appellant's appeal  was  listed  for  hearing  under  the  appeal  reference
EA/02632/2018.

The appellant's combined  appeals  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Hamilton on 30 April 2018. The first appeal,  EA/03637/2017,  was  withdrawn
at the hearing on the basis that  it  had  been  superseded  by  the  second
appeal.

Judge Hamilton was satisfied, from the  interim  Child  Arrangements  Order,
that the appellant was seeing D.  The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
appellant  was  entitled  to  a  derived  right  of  residence   under   the
Regulations as there was no evidence that D would be forced to leave the  EU
if he had to leave. The  judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  D  met  the
definition of  a  "student"  under  the  Regulations.  He  accepted,  having
received the terms and conditions  of  the  comprehensive  health  insurance
policy submitted after  the  hearing,  that  the  policy  covered  both  the
appellant and D and that  the  terms  of  regulation  4(d)(ii)  of  the  EEA
Regulations were therefore met. He then turned to regulation 4(d)(iii)  and,
whilst accepting that D could not make a declaration  himself  as  a  minor,
considered whether  this  requirement  had  been  satisfied  by  alternative
means. The judge considered that the requirement might be met if  there  was
clear evidence from both of D's parents showing  that  their  earnings  were
sufficient to make it unlikely that they would need to  claim  benefits.  He
noted the appellant's oral evidence that D's mother was working and that  he
was  also  supporting  D  financially  using  tips  received  from  football
coaching. However the judge noted that no evidence had  been  provided  from
D's mother and that there was no independent evidence to show that  she  was
not working  or  claiming  benefits.  The  judge  noted  the  claim  in  the
appellant's handwritten letter to be on  good  terms  with  D's  mother  and
therefore considered it reasonable to  expect  him  to  have  been  able  to
produce such evidence.  The  judge  considered  that  there  was  inadequate
evidence to show that the appellant or D's mother were  able  to  support  D
without recourse to public funds and that  the  requirements  of  regulation
4(d)(iii) were therefore not met. He dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had erred by  failing  to  take  into
account the proper guidance under  regulation  6  in  regard  to  exercising
treaty rights as a student. It was asserted in the grounds that all  parties
had agreed at the hearing that the appeal rested  on  whether  there  was  a
comprehensive insurance policy covering D and that the  judge  had  directed
that the appellant's solicitors submit the complete terms of  the  insurance
policy within 7 days which would then resolve the appeal.  It  was  asserted
that the policy had been sent to the Tribunal within 7  days  and  that  the
judge had dismissed the appeal contrary  to  the  indication  given  at  the
hearing. It was also asserted in the grounds that the  judge  had  erred  by
assuming without any evidence that D's mother was in receipt of benefits  on
his behalf.

Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 12  September  2018  on
the following basis:
"The grounds assert that the Judge may have indicated that the appeal  would
be allowed upon production of a document then refused the appeal.

In order to resolve the matter, permission to appeal is granted. There  will
need to be a witness statement from the representative  in  the  appeal  and
the Judge should also be asked to provide his comments, as should  the  Home
Office."

At the hearing before me,  there  was  no  statement  from  the  appellant's
representative and no comments  from  the  judge  or  the  Home  Office.  Ms
Willock-Briscoe advised me that there had been  no  representative  for  the
Home Office at the hearing. I noted that Judge Hamilton had not  been  asked
for his comments, but I have the record of  proceedings  before  me  in  any
event. The appellant himself provided a  statement  in  which  he  confirmed
that he had provided the comprehensive insurance  policy  as  requested  and
was surprised when the appeal was dismissed  as  the  judge  had  given  the
impression  that  the  appeal  would  be  allowed  once  the  document   was
submitted.

Mr Omorere submitted that the appellant met the requirements  in  regulation
16 on the basis of derivative rights and that the appeal  should  have  been
allowed  once  the  complete  comprehensive  insurance   policy   had   been
submitted. The judge had had sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  D  was  a
student. The  appellant's  handwritten  letter  sufficed  in  terms  of  the
declaration to be made for the purposes of regulation 4(d)(iii).  The  judge
was wrong to consider that D's mother was claiming state  benefits.  No  one
was in receipt of public funds.

Ms Willock-Briscoe submitted that the appellant's grounds  did  not  reflect
what the judge had said in granting  permission.  There  was  no  indication
that the judge would allow the appeal on  the  basis  of  the  comprehensive
sickness insurance  policy  being  produced  and  there  must  have  been  a
misunderstanding by the appellant. The judge gave  proper  reasons  why  the
evidence did not show sufficient resources  so  that  A  did  not  become  a
burden on the  state.  The  appellant  was  therefore  unable  to  meet  the
requirements in regulation 4(d)(iii) and therefore did not  get  as  far  as
regulation 16.

In response Mr Omorere submitted that it was not a matter of what the  judge
believed to be the case, but what the law actually  was  and  the  appellant
had met the requirements of regulation 4(d)(iii) and regulation 16(3).

The EEA Regulations 2016

In so far as they are relevant the 2016 Regulations are as follows:

      Regulation 4

      "4.-(1) In these Regulations-

      (d) "student" means a person who-

              i) is enrolled, for  the  principal  purpose  of  following  a
                 course of  study  (including  vocational  training),  at  a
                 public or private establishment ...

             ii) has comprehensive sickness insurance cover  in  the  United
                 Kingdom; and

            iii)  has  assured  the  Secretary  of  State,  by  means  of  a
                 declaration, or by such equivalent means as the person  may
                 choose, that the person has  sufficient  resources  not  to
                 become a burden on the  social  assistance  system  of  the
                 United Kingdom  during  the  person's  intended  period  of
                 residence."


Discussion

Permission was granted in the appellant's case on the basis that  there  was
a concern that the judge  may  have  indicated  that  the  appeal  would  be
allowed on the production of a document which  was  then  produced  but  the
appeal dismissed. However there is nothing in  the  evidence  before  me  to
indicate that there was any such concession by the judge and it seems to  me
that the appellant has simply  misunderstood  the  judge's  indication.  The
only evidence  to  support  such  a  suggestion  is  a  statement  from  the
appellant himself. Mr Omorere, who was the representative  at  the  hearing,
did  not  produce  a  statement  despite  the  direction  in  the  grant  of
permission. The respondent was not represented at the hearing and  therefore
could not have produced any comments. Judge Hamilton has not been  asked  to
comment, but his contemporaneous notes, which are  far  more  relevant,  are
available and do not indicate any such concession. It is  correct  that  the
judge provided the appellant with an opportunity to produce  the  terms  and
conditions  of  the  comprehensive  insurance  policy,  but  there  was   no
indication that the production of that document would resolve the appeal  in
his favour.

It is clear, in any event, that the judge could not have allowed the  appeal
on that basis alone, given the observations and findings he made at [43]  to
[47] with reference to regulation 4(d)(iii). It is  not  the  case,  as  the
appellant asserts, that the judge based his findings  on  D's  mother  being
dependent upon public benefits. At [46] the  judge  commented  that  it  was
likely that she was in receipt of child benefit but then went on  to  accept
that that may not qualify as being a  burden  on  the  state  and  that  the
question was whether there was  evidence  to  show  that  she  was  able  to
support D without reliance on state benefits, which he found there was  not.
The judge noted the appellant's oral evidence at [44] in regard to  his  own
income and that of D's mother and had before him payslips for the  appellant
showing sporadic payments but nothing for D's mother. The judge  noted  that
the appellant had specifically stated in his letter at page 83 that  he  was
on very good terms with D's mother and he was therefore  perfectly  entitled
to find it reasonable to expect him to obtain evidence of her income and  to
draw the conclusions  that  he  did  from  the  absence  of  such  evidence.
Contrary to Mr Omerere's submission, the appellant's handwritten  letter  at
page 83, his statement  at  page  1  and  his  oral  evidence  were  not  in
themselves such as to require  the  judge  to  find  that  the  criteria  in
regulation 4(d)(iii) had been met. The judge was entitled to  conclude  that
that was not sufficient for the purposes  of  regulation  4(d)(iii)  and  to
conclude that D did not meet  the  definition  of  "student"  in  regulation
4(d)(iii) and was not a qualified person for the purposes of  regulation  6.


As Ms Willock-Briscoe submitted,  the  appellant  did  not  get  as  far  as
regulation 16 if  he  could  not  succeed  in  satisfying  the  criteria  in
regulation 4(d)(iii). It also seems to me that Mr Omerere misunderstood  the
regulations in so far as he  relied  upon  regulation  16,  and  it  is  not
entirely clear to me which part of regulation 16 he was  relying  upon.  The
appellant plainly could not succeed under regulation 16(2)  as  he  was  not
the primary carer of D and there was no evidence that D would  have  had  to
leave the EU if he left, as the judge properly found at  [36].  Likewise  he
could not rely on regulation 16(3) as that was relevant  to  the  derivative
rights for a child and would not be relevant to the appellant.

Accordingly, for all  these  reasons,  the  judge  was  fully  and  properly
entitled to conclude that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
the EEA Regulations 2016 and was entitled  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  the
basis that he did.  He  did  not  make  any  concessions  to  the  appellant
requiring the appeal to be allowed. There were  no  errors  of  law  in  his
decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity. I see no reason to
    continue the order in its  current  form  but  I  limit  the  order  in
    relation to the identification of the  appellant's  child  pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed: [pic]                           Dated:           14 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
