
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02138/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th October 2016                 |On 20th October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                         Mrs Regina Omenebelle Ofeke
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Khalid, Counsel, instructed by Chancery CS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria. Her date of birth is  given  as
    13th May 1945.  She lawfully entered the UK with entry  clearance.   On
    13th May 2015  she  applied  for  a  residence  card  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    Regulations) as confirmation of her right to reside in the  UK  as  the
    extended family member of Mr George Ubumeh Ofeke, a  person  who  holds
    German nationality.

2.   I pause at this early stage to  make  the  following  observation.  The
    appellant is the mother  of  George  Ofeke.  This  is  clear  from  the
    documentation that was  provided  with  the  application  for  the  EEA
    residence card. This documentation includes a  birth  certificate,  the
    authenticity  of  which  has  not  been  challenged,   confirming   the
    relationship. This relationship was also referred to  in  the  covering
    letter from Chancery CS Solicitors dated 13th May 2015 accompanying the
    application. Given this familial relationship it  is  unclear  why  the
    appellant's solicitors advanced the application on the basis  that  the
    appellant is Mr Ofeke's extended family member.

3.   Under Regulation 7(1)(c)  of  the  2006  Regulations  a  family  member
    includes a dependent direct relative in his ascending line. It has  not
    been disputed that the appellant is the ascending direct relative of Mr
    Ofeke. The issue for determination is whether she is dependent  on  him
    as a family member, not as an extended  family  member  as  defined  in
    Article 8 of the 2006 Regulations. This vital  distinction  appears  to
    have been lost on the Appellant's solicitors and the Home  Office  and,
    with respect, the judge who considered the appeal on the papers.

4.   Both parties and the First-tier Tribunal proceeded on  the  basis  that
    the appellant was an extended family member when it is quite clear that
    she is in fact, the direct family member of  an  EEA  national  in  the
    ascending line. The  failure  to  appreciate  this  distinction  in  my
    judgment  constitutes  a  material  error  of  law  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, who  dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  papers  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 7th April 2016. The judge gave no consideration  to  the
    actual relationship between the appellant and  her  son  and  therefore
    misdirected himself as to the relevant law.

5.   The judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that there was no  evidence
    to show that the appellant was dependent on her son either  in  Nigeria
    or in the UK. No  evidence  appeared  to  have  been  provided  to  the
    Tribunal pursuant to directions issued  on  2nd  March  2016.   In  the
    absence of any further evidence the judge concluded that there  was  no
    adequate basis  to  support  the  Appellant's  claimed  dependency  and
    dismissed the appeal.

6.   The judge was not however unaware that further evidence in  support  of
    the claimed dependency had in fact been sent to the  Tribunal.  On  2nd
    March 2016 the Tribunal issued directions to  the  appellant  requiring
    any further written submissions or evidence to be sent  by  30th  March
    2016. At the error of law hearing the appellant produced a transmission
    verification report dated "1.4.2022".  I am prepared to find  that  the
    2022 is a clerical error. I am also prepared to find that the reference
    to "1.4." relates to '1st April' 2016. This indicates that, at 18.25 on
    01 April 2016, a 38 page fax was sent to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    First-tier Tribunal does not have any record of receipt of  this  faxed
    transmission. It is also apparent that the fax transmission was, in any
    event, sent after the deadline of 30th March 2016.

7.   I have additionally seen a recorded delivery slip indicating  that  the
    appellant's bundle was also sent to the Tribunal  on  2nd  April  2016.
    Indeed I have before me the actual bundle, including the delivery slip,
    which was received by Hatton Cross on 5th April 2016. The documents  in
    the Tribunal file indicate that, on that day (i.e. 05 April  2016)  the
    file was sent to the First-tier Judge to consider  the  appeal  on  the
    papers.  The judge, however, did not make his decision until 7th  April
    2016 and it was not promulgated until 13th April 2016.

8.   I am satisfied, having regard to this  evidence,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did receive the 38  page  bundle  of  evidence  prior  to  the
    consideration by the judge of the appeal and the  promulgation  of  his
    decision. E & R v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]
    EWCA Civ 49 is authority for the proposition that a Tribunal is  seized
    of an appeal up until the date its decision is promulgated. Moreover, a
    successful appeal is not dependent on the demonstration of some failing
    on the part of the Tribunal and an error of law may be  found  to  have
    occurred in circumstances where  some  material  evidence,  through  no
    fault of the Tribunal, was not considered,  with  resulting  unfairness
    (MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC). I  fully  accept
    that the appellant did not comply with the directions but the judge did
    not dismiss the  appeal  because  of  a  failure  to  comply  with  the
    directions.  The  judge  was  entirely  unaware  of  the  existence  of
    materially relevant documents that were within the  possession  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

10.  In my judgment the administrative  staff  at  Hatton  Cross  failed  to
    attach the bundle of documents to the file in an expedient manner  and,
    as a result, the judge did  not  have  relevant  evidence  before  him.
    Although the judge is blameless for his failure  to  consider  evidence
    that was not before him I am  satisfied,  given  the  history  of  this
    matter, that there has been  a  procedural  impropriety  sufficient  to
    render the decision unsafe as relevant  evidence  was  not  taken  into
    account by the judge even though it was in the Tribunal's possession. I
    am satisfied that this constitutes a material error of law.

11.  I have therefore found that there are two material errors of  law,  the
    first being the judge's misdirection as  to  the  applicable  law,  the
    second relating to procedural unfairness. In these circumstances  there
    has been no proper consideration of the application by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and it is appropriate to remit the matter back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be considered afresh before a judge other  than  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Hembrough.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that it is remitted for a  fresh
hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a  judge  other  than
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hembrough.

As  the  appellant  initially  requested  a  paper  hearing  the  First-tier
Tribunal will consider the appeal on the papers unless the  appellant  makes
any application, and pays the requisite fee, to have her  appeal  considered
at an oral hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  19 October 2016

