
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ea/02097/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 1 October 2018                             |On 5 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                SHAHZAIB SYED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M. Sowerby, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


 1. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  against  a
    decision to refuse a residence card as confirmation of a retained right
    of residence. The FtT dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Permission  to
    appeal against the FtT's decision was granted to the appellant and thus
    the appeal came before me.

 2. At the hearing before me it was agreed between the parties that the FtT
    did materially err in law as contended in  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
    relation to the decision  of  the  FtT  and  that  in  consequence  its
    decision should be set aside with the appeal being remitted to the  FtT
    for a hearing de novo.

 3. In the circumstances, and considering the  decision  of  the  FtT,  the
    grounds of appeal in relation to its decision, the grant of  permission
    to appeal, and all other  relevant  documentation,   I  set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT and remit the appeal to the FtT for  a  hearing  de
    novo  before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

 4. It was agreed between the parties that the following findings  of  fact
    (as quoted) made by the FtT are to be preserved, with paragraph numbers
    of the FtT's decision in brackets:

    (i)  "On the evidence it  appears  that  Mrs  Nyiri  was  a  'qualified
        person' at the date of the termination of the marriage." [9]; and

    (ii) "The various documents demonstrate that  the  appellant  has  been
        living in accordance with these Regs, from 2015  through  to  2018."
        [13].

 5. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required, the  decision
    being made with the consent of the parties.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            1/10/18


