
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02084/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 August 2018 and 20 November 2018  |On 7 December 2018               |
|                                        |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                         OLUWAKEMI PEDETIN OKETUNDE
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Aborisade (for O A Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola and Ms Everett (Specialist Appeals
Unit)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal  of  Oluwakemi  Pedetin  Oketunde,  a  citizen  of
       Nigeria born 26 August 1983, against the decision of  the  First-tier
       tribunal of 18 May 2018 dismissing her appeal, itself brought against
       the decision of the Respondent of 20  February  2018  to  refuse  her
       application for recognition of her right to  permanent  residence  on
       the basis of a retained right of residence.


    2. The basis of her application of 20 November 2017  was  that  she  had
       married an EEA national on 15 March 2011 from  whom  she  had  become
       divorced on 23 December 2016. Accordingly at the date of divorce  she
       had resided in the UK for more than three years alongside a person to
       whom she had been married for more than a year, and  she  accordingly
       argued that she was owed the retained right of residence as  provided
       by The Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016.  As
       established by the relevant authorities, consistent  cohabitation  is
       not required so long as the marriage has not been dissolved.

    3. The application was refused because no valid national  identity  card
       or passport was provided in the name of the Appellant's EEA  national
       ex-husband. Furthermore, given she had been able to provide  evidence
       of his working history up to December 2016, it was not accepted  that
       she was unable to obtain confirmation of his nationality and identity
       as at the application date.

    4. The Appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision, and the
       matter was determined without  a  hearing.  The  First-tier  tribunal
       noted that a Portuguese Citizen Card had now  been  supplied  in  the
       name of  Nuno  Miguel  Abrantes  Rodirguers  Costa;  that  name  also
       appeared in the copy  of  the  Decree  Absolute.  However,  the  name
       attributed therein to the Appellant was  simply  "Oluwakemi  Pedetin"
       rather  than  her  full  name  in  which  she  brought  the   appeal;
       accordingly there was no cogent  evidence  connecting  her  with  the
       Decree Absolute. Furthermore, the Tribunal was unable  to  verify  Mr
       Costa's citizenship.

    5. Grounds of appeal of 25 May 2018 argued  that  the  validity  of  the
       Appellant's divorce had not been put in issue by the Respondent,  and
       that witness statement evidence from Mr Costa confirming the fact  of
       their marriage and divorce had been overlooked.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  tribunal  on  25
       June 2018 on the basis that the Judge may have erred  in  questioning
       the Decree Absolute when  the  Respondent  had  not  challenged  that
       document.

Error of law hearing

    7. Before me Mr  Kandola  accepted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       materially erred in law. The sole  issue  in  dispute  had  been  the
       adequacy of the  evidence  of  the  EEA  national's  nationality  and
       identity. He submitted that the appropriate disposal  of  the  appeal
       was for the Upper Tribunal to so rule, and consequently to retain the
       matter for a continuation hearing, albeit that it was  possible  that
       any such further hearing would be forestalled by the  recognition  in
       the meantime of the Appellant's residence  right  if  the  Portuguese
       identity document was confirmed as genuine. Mr Aborisade replied that
       any ruling by the  Upper  Tribunal  should  be  accompanied  by  firm
       directions to ensure that  the  application  was  reconsidered  in  a
       timely fashion.

Findings and reasons - Error of law hearing

    8. I accepted that there was indeed an error of law here.  The  fact  of
       the divorce had not been  disputed  by  the  Respondent.  Indeed,  as
       acknowledged by Mr Kandola, the Appellant had  been  married  in  the
       same name as that which appeared in the divorce certificate.


    9. The First-tier Tribunal should not have raised this point of its  own
       motion. That was unfair in the context of an appeal  that  was  being
       determined without a hearing: the  parties  to  such  an  appeal  are
       entitled to presume that the issues between them have been settled by
       the terms of the refusal letter.

   10. Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal was required  to  adjudicate  on
       the sole issue that divided the parties, ie  as  to  whether  or  not
       there was adequate evidence of identity and  nationality  before  it.
       There was witness statement evidence from the EEA national which  was
       relevant to  these  consideration  that  was  not  addressed  in  the
       Tribunal's material reasoning. That represented  a  failure  to  take
       account of relevant considerations.

   11. In any event the point raised by the First-tier Tribunal  is  without
       substance: the Appellant had in reality both married and divorced  in
       the same name.

   12. Accordingly the First-tier Tribunal decision was flawed by errors  of
       law. As they went to the central issues in  the  appeal,  the  errors
       were material ones. Accordingly the appeal fell to  be  re-heard.  As
       there were only limited matters remaining for  adjudication,  it  was
       appropriate to  retain  the  matter  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a
       continuation hearing.

   13. However, as sensibly pointed out by Mr Kandola, in the event that the
       Secretary of State was able  to  confirm  the  identity  of  the  EEA
       national, the only issue that remained live for decision, as no other
       aspect of the Appellant's case was doubted,  there would  potentially
       be no need for the appeal to proceed further. The  application  could
       be granted without further ado.

  Continuation hearing


   14. At the continuation hearing, Ms Everett appeared for the Secretary of
       State,  and  confirmed  that  there  was  now  no  objection  to  the
       application, and that in the circumstances, it  was  appropriate  for
       the appeal to be allowed. Mr Aborisade agreed.


   15. In the circumstances, there being no material issue that divides  the
       parties, it is indeed appropriate for the appeal to be allowed. It is
       now firmly established that the Appellant remains  the  spouse  of  a
       qualified person.


          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.
    The appeal is allowed.


Signed:                                            Date: 30 November 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


