
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02111/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 August 2021                     |On 27 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              MUHAMMAD SHABBIR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akhtar, solicitor, Law Gate solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals with permission against a decision by the First-tier
Tribunal promulgated on 20 April 2021.

On 27 July 2021, I issued directions in this case which stated:

    2.   The respondent has in its rule 24 response accepted that the FtTJ
         erred as averred by the appellant. On that basis alone, it is my
         preliminary view that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         involved the making of an error of law, and must be set aside. It
         is also my preliminary view that the decision must be set aside and
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for fresh findings of fact to
         be made.  I therefore propose making a decision to that effect
         without the need for a an oral hearing and without the need for the
         parties to attend on 2 August 2021.

    3.   Given that the appeal is listed for hearing on 2 August 2021, I
         direct that unless before 4.00pm on 30 July 2021 there is any
         written objection to this course of action, supported by cogent
         argument, the Upper Tribunal will proceed to determine the appeal
         without an oral hearing and will remit it to the First-tier
         Tribunal to be heard again by a judge other than Judge Dineen.

    4.   In the absence of a timely response by a party, it will be
         presumed that it has no objection to the course of action proposed.

 1.  There was no response to the directions  from  the  appellant  or  his
    solicitors.

 2. Although the appellant's solicitor attempted to join the  hearing,  and
    could be seen online, it proved impossible to communicate with him, and
    he made no attempt to contact the Tribunal by telephone or email.    In
    the circumstances, and in the  light  of  the  directions  made,  I  am
    satisfied that it was  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  proceed  to
    determine the appeal.

 3. In the light of the concession made by the respondent, which I consider
    was a proper concession, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did, for the reasons set out in the  grounds  of  appeal,
    involve the making of an error of law and must be set aside. Given that
    the judge failed to make findings on the central issue of dependency, I
    consider that the only proper course of action is to remit  the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo appeal. None of  the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 4. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
    on all issues; none of the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    preserved.


Signed                                  Date 23 August 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

