
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02162/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2018                           |On 27 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                           Mr ibrahima dahaba mane
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chukwudum
For the Respondent:    Mr Naith, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Senegal.  He was born on 8 March 1983.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 21 December 2015 to
    revoke the appellant's residence card.

 3. In a  decision  promulgated  on  17  February  2017,  Designated  Judge
    McCarthy (the judge) dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction.

 4. The judge recited the immigration history.  The appellant applied for a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national in  April  2012,  which
    application was refused.  There was no appeal  against  that  decision,
    however, the appellant applied again on the basis  that  he  was  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national.  It was on that  basis  that
    he was granted a residence card on 14 January 2014 but  the  respondent
    revoked that residence card on 8 February 2016 on the grounds that  the
    appellant was no longer in a durable relationship.  The  appellant  had
    no evidence to show that he was in such a relationship and admitted  to
    the judge that he did not live with his named partner and that they had
    relationship difficulties.

 5. The judge found that there was no evidence  on  those  facts  that  the
    appellant was at the date of the EEA decision or currently in a durable
    relationship such that he no longer benefited from Regulation  7(3)  of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations and as such, he did not have en entitlement to
    a residence card.  For the reasons given by the Upper Tribunal in  Sala
    [2016] UKUT 00411, the judge said the appellant did not have a right of
    appeal.

 6. The appellant made application for permission to appeal.   He  attached
    no grounds.  Designated Judge Woodcraft in a decision dated  23  August
    2017 refused permission to appeal.  He said at that time, Sala remained
    good law.  He found no arguable error of law.

 7. The grounds were renewed and on 18 December 2017, Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Macleman said that notwithstanding the absence of grounds  and  absence
    of an address for the appellant in light of Khan [2017] EWCA  Civ  1755
    he was minded to set aside the judge's decision and remit the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  UT Judge Macleman  directed  that  any  party
    opposed to such set aside and remittal was directed to inform the Upper
    Tribunal with reasons no later than seven days from 18  December  2017.
    There was no response to the direction.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Both sides agreed the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. The judge through no fault of his own, erred in law for the reasons set
    out  in  Khan.   Accordingly,  the  First-tier   Tribunal   does   have
    jurisdiction to determine the appeal and therefore the decision to  the
    contrary of the judge is set aside.

10. The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to allow  substantive
    consideration of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error of law.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remit the appeal for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 15 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


