
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02245/2020
                                                               EA/02246/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On the 7th June 2021                      |On the 22nd June 2021            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            KHALID IQBAL MEHMOOD
                                RIFFAT KHALID
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed instructed by Fawad Law Associates.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellants, both citizens of Pakistan, are  a  married  couple.
        The first appellant was born on 14 February  1951  and  the  second
        appellant on 15 April 1958. They  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
        their applications for leave to enter the United Kingdom as  family
        members of an EEA national,  their  daughter  sponsor  Maria  Usman
        Khan, who has also been granted Limited  Leave  to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom pursuant to Appendix EU of the Immigration Rules  on
        29 June 2020.
     2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside by consent by
        the Upper Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 22  April  2021  in
        which directions were given for the further hearing of this  appeal
        to enable the Upper Tribunal to substitute  a  decision  to  either
        allow or dismiss the appeal.
     3. A bundle was received at Field House on 25th May 2021 containing  a
        skeleton argument,  the  original  appeal  bundle,  and  additional
        documentary evidence, all of which has been taken into account  for
        the purposes of this decision.

Discussion

     4. The application was refused by an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  as
        it was not accepted on the basis of the evidence provided with  the
        application  that  the  appellants  had  established  the  required
        element of dependency upon the UK-based sponsor. The refusal, dated
        5 February 2020, refers to  the  lack  of  evidence  regarding  the
        appellant's own financial situation, such  as  bank  statements  or
        other documents indicating financial incomings and  outgoings,  the
        absence of which prevented the decision-maker being  satisfied  the
        appellants required the financial support from the EEA national  to
        meet their essential needs.
     5. Within the bundle  a  number  of  wage  slips  have  been  provided
        together  with  evidence  of  remittances  via  Money  Gram   money
        transfer, a letter from the first appellant's recent  employer,  an
        advocate in the High Court in  Pakistan,  confirming  his  previous
        employment as an office assistant from early 2012 to November  2018
        did not entitle him to any pension, evidence to show the portion of
        the property occupied by the appellants in Pakistan, together  with
        other letters in support. Also, in  the  bundle  are  a  number  of
        documents described as "income and expense statements" for  various
        months between January 2020 April  2021  recording  money  received
        from the UK-based sponsor (in Pakistani rupees)  and  the  expenses
        incurred and any balance remaining, which appears on the  following
        months statement as a balance carried forward.
     6. What has not  been  provided  within  the  bundle  is  any  further
        evidence  from  the  appellants  themselves.  Mr  Bates  asked  the
        sponsor, who provided both written and oral evidence, why there was
        no statement from her parents, to which she responded that they had
        not been asked to prepare one by the solicitors  and  that  it  had
        they been asked one would have been filed. Similarly, when Mr Bates
        asked why no evidence had been provided to confirm the identity  of
        the statement purporting to come  from  the  appellant's  landlady,
        such as a driving licence or passport, the  sponsor  confirmed  her
        national identity number had been provided, but that they  had  not
        been asked by their solicitor to provide any further material,  and
        that if they had been asked the same would have been provided.  The
        First-tier judge referred to concerns arising from the evidence  in
        that decision and the refusal clearly refers to a lack of  evidence
        establishing the required degree of dependency. It is not known why
        solicitors who no doubt have charged for their services  failed  to
        provide appropriate advice which,  in  certain  circumstances,  may
        have led to the appeal being refused.
     7. As a result of  the  evidential  omissions  the  relevant  evidence
        therefore came from the sponsor. Mr Bates in his submissions argued
        that all depended upon the credibility of the sponsor and  that  if
        her evidence was accepted and she was found to be credible  he  was
        unable to show anything that will prevent the appeal being allowed.
     8. I found the sponsor to  be  a  very  honest,  forthright,  credible
        witness. She gave her evidence in a clear and proper manner as  one
        would expect from an intelligent person who is a qualified  medical
        professional. There is no doubt about the ability of  her  and  her
        family unit to have provided appropriate financial support  in  the
        past to her parents or their  ability  to  care  for  them  in  the
        future.
     9. In relation to the key  issue,  that  of  dependency,  the  sponsor
        confirmed that she is from a poor family and  that  her  education,
        based upon academic ability,  was  supported  by  sponsorships  and
        grants from the government of Pakistan. These included her  medical
        studies, for which she received an  appropriate  scholarship.  When
        asked whether she received any support from  her  parents,  as  her
        father would have been working at  this  time,  she  confirmed  the
        higher proportion of the funds for  her  education  came  from  the
        government.
    10.  The  sponsor  stated  that  her   father   worked   in   low-level
        administrative assistant jobs from which he retired in  late  2018.
        Her father's employment was not with the  government  and  did  not
        entitle him to a pension. Her parents still live on one floor of  a
        house they share with  another  tenant,  where  she  herself  lived
        before her marriage.
    11. Mr Bates did raise  an  issue  concerning  the  evidence  from  the
        landlady  in  relation  to  how  responsibility  for   paying   the
        proportion of the bills relating to the appellant's occupation  was
        established, reading the landlady's statement as being that when  a
        bill arrives it is given to the appellants who then hand  the  Bill
        back to her as evidence that payment has been made, which was  said
        to be different from  the  sponsor's  evidence  that  when  a  bill
        arrives it is in the landlady's name and that her parents  and  the
        other tenant pay the landlady in cash, which is  used  to  pay  the
        bill. I have looked at  the  statement  of  the  landlady  and  the
        evidence as a whole and there is a scope for reading the landlady's
        evidence either way. I do not find this to be a determinative issue
        however, as the source of the income available to the appellants to
        meet the proportion of the costs for which they are responsible  is
        that provided by their daughter in the United  Kingdom.  The  issue
        raised concerning the statement is more relevant to  the  mechanics
        of the method by which payment is  made  rather  than  whether  the
        appellants are reliant upon the support provided to pay the bill.
    12. The sponsor's evidence is that her  parents  do  not  have  a  bank
        account and that remitted funds are withdrawn in cash.
    13. As noted above, I am satisfied that the  sponsor  gave  a  credible
        account upon which weight may be placed relating  to  the  historic
        family circumstances, her own educational journey and how the  same
        was funded, the economic level of her parents in Pakistan and  lack
        of pension income, the funds remitted by her over a period of  time
        to support her parents' essential needs, and the inability  of  her
        parents to meet those needs without the resources she provides.
    14. I am therefore satisfied that the appellants  have  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon them to the  required  standard  to  establish
        they are financially dependent upon the EEA national in  accordance
        with the requirements of Regulation 7.
    15. As there is no other reason in the refusal notice  as  to  why  the
        appellants could not satisfy the requirements of regulation  12  of
        the  2016  regulations  it   appears   appropriate   in   all   the
        circumstances for the EEA Family Permit  to  be  issued.  When  the
        appellants are able to travel to the  United  Kingdom  will  depend
        upon the Covid-19 rules and regulations. They should therefore  not
        make arrangements for travelling until they are certain  they  will
        be permitted to board an international  flight  and  to  enter  the
        United Kingdom. Pakistan is at the date of this decision on the  UK
        Governments 'Red list'.

Decision

    16. I allow the appeals.

   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 9 June 2021

