
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/02591/2015
                                                               EA/02596/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th April 2017                            |On 4th May 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr gurpreet singh kalsi
                         mrs Paramjeet Malkit Sembhi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, Counsel instructed by Magna Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimants in this case are husband  and  wife  and  nationals  from
    India (I shall continue to refer  to  them  as  the  appellants)  whose
    appeal was allowed on immigration grounds by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Lloyd in a decision promulgated on 10th August 2016.  The Secretary  of
    State sought permission to appeal the  judge's  decision  and  set  out
    grounds for doing so.  Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Scott-Baker who  pointed  out  that  in  addition  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction would need to be considered pursuant to Sala (EFMs:  Right
    of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal  found  there
    is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State not to grant a residence card to a person claiming  to  be  an
    extended family member - which is the position here.

 2. Before me Mr Bramble relied on his grounds and  said  that,  given  the
    Sala point, there had  been  no  valid  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. For the appellants, Mr Chohan relied on his Rule 24 Notice and  pointed
    out that the judge's findings predated the promulgation of the decision
    in the Sala case; as such the judge was not bound by Sala which in  any
    event was the subject of an appeal.

 4. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 5. I go straight to the Sala point in  that  it  raises  a  jurisdictional
    issue.  It is true, as Mr Chohan pointed out, that the decision in that
    case had not  been  promulgated  at  the  time  the  judge  issued  his
    decision.  Sala was promulgated on 19th August 2016,  nine  days  after
    the decision of Judge Lloyd was promulgated.  However, that is not  the
    point.  The question is what was the law at the material  time,  namely
    when Judge Lloyd made his decision.  As at the date  of  that  decision
    the principle set out in Sala applied.

 6. That principle  in  Sala  is  quite  clear  -  the  Vice-President  and
    Professor Grubb found that  there  is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a residence
    card to a person claiming to be an  extended  family  member.  That  is
    exactly the position here.  It follows that, according to the reasoning
    set out in Sala (whether it is being appealed or not),  the  appellants
    in this case do not have a statutory right of appeal.  It is  therefore
    necessary to set aside the decision of Judge Lloyd.

Notice of Decision

 7. The appellants have no right of appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal had no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  It erred in law in doing so.

 8. I set aside the decision to allow the appeal and substitute a  decision
    that there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 24th April 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
