
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02762/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House             |             Decision & Reasons           |
|On 9 March 2018                  |Promulgated                               |
|                                 |On 12 April 2018                          |
|                                     |                                     |


                                  Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                  Between



                                NASIRA NASIR

                                                       (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT
MADE)                        Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:                     Mr F Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:          Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
                           Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

1.    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and I do
    not consider that the Appellant should be accorded anonymity for these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.


Background

2.    The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Martins) dismissing her appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  issue  her  with  a
    permanent residence card, as confirmation of a retained right to reside
    in the United Kingdom (UK), as the former spouse of an EEA national.

3.    The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. She last entered the UK on  23
    January 2008 with entry clearance conferring  leave  to  enter  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national. The Appellant married an EEA national on  13
    July 2007. The marriage ended in divorce on 1 April 2015.

4.    On 11  May  2015  the  Appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of her right to reside in the  UK  on  a  permanent  basis
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

5.    On 6 November 2015 the  Respondent  issued  a  Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision refusing the application under Regulation 15 with reference to
    regulation 10(5) and 10(6). This was because there was  a  gap  in  the
    former spouse's employment records  between  2009  and  2014,  and  the
    Appellant had not been exercising  treaty  rights  since  the  date  of
    divorce.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


6.    The Appellant's appeal was allocated to Judge Martins  in  the  First-
      tier Tribunal on 10 January 2017. Both parties had submitted  evidence
      in support of the appeal and Judge Martins  heard  evidence  from  the
      Appellant. The Appellant claimed inter alia that since divorce she was
      working on a self-employed basis as a property consultant. It is  fair
      to say that  Judge  Martins  was  not  impressed  by  the  Appellant's
      evidence of her employment. Whilst she  acknowledged  that  there  was
      "some documentary evidence" of the  Appellant's  work,  Judge  Martins
      stated that there was "aspects of her evidence which detract from  her
      credibility" and that her evidence left  "a  very  confused  picture".
      Judge Martins was thus not satisfied that "the whole  truth  is  being
      told". Judge Martins further noted that in respect of the  Appellant's
      former EEA spouse, that there was "quite a significant period of time,
      for which there is no independent evidence." Judge  Martins  concluded
      that she could not be satisfied that the Appellant's former spouse had
      been exercising treaty rights for a continuous period  of  five  years
      or, that the Appellant had been employed since the date of divorce  as
      a property consultant. Judge Martins thus found that the Appellant had
      not established that she had retained a right of residence and nor was
      she entitled to  permanent  residence.  Accordingly,  the  appeal  was
      dismissed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

7.    The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that
      there was documentary evidence before Judge Martins which showed  that
      the Appellant's former spouse was exercising treaty rights at the time
      of divorce and, that the  Appellant  was  working  at  that  time  and
      thereafter, which demonstrated her entitlement to a retained right  of
      residence upon divorce.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal


8.    On 22 January 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted  permission  to
      appeal on the basis that it was arguable that Judge Martins failed  to
      consider the documentary evidence and failed to give adequate  reasons
      for concluding that it did not establish the Appellant's entitlement.



The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal


9.    At the hearing before me, Mr Khan conceded that the Appellant had  not
      established her entitlement to permanent residence as there was a  gap
      in the evidence of the former's spouse's  exercise  of  treaty  rights
      from 2009 to 2014. Nonetheless, he referred  to  documentary  evidence
      before Judge Martins that he submitted  was  sufficient  to  establish
      that the Appellant had retained a right of residence following divorce
      pursuant to regulation 10(5) that had not been  considered.  Mr  Duffy
      submitted that the grounds merely sought to disagree with the findings
      made.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

10.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred.

11.   While Judge Martins criticisms of the Appellant's oral  evidence  were
      open to her, that evidence and the issues to  be  addressed  ought  to
      have been examined within the context  of  the  documentary  evidence.
      Judge Martins consideration  of  that  evidence  went  as  far  as  to
      acknowledge  that  there  was  "some  documentary  evidence"  of   the
      Appellant's  work  but  that  consideration  in   my   judgement   was
      inadequate.  There  was  documentary  evidence  before  Judge  Martins
      supportive of the Appellant's claim that she had retained a  right  of
      residence  and  whilst  I  acknowledge   its   limitations,   adequate
      consideration was not given to that evidence and no reasons are  given
      are as to why it did not assist towards establishing  the  Appellant's
      entitlement. I cannot exclude the possibility that  the  evidence  may
      have led to a different conclusion had it been adequately  considered.
      In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that Judge Martins assessment
      of the Appellant's evidence can stand.

12.   I thus set aside the decision.

13.   The parties agreed that I could proceed to remake the Decision on  the
      evidence, a course which I indicated I would consider, but considering
      the concerns raised by the Appellant's evidence I have decided that it
      would not be appropriate to do so. The appeal in my view  requires  to
      be  reheard  and  a  decision  remade  considering  all  the  evidence
      including the oral evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  the  documentary
      evidence relied on, the originals  of  which  I  have  not  seen.  The
      appropriate forum in which to do so is the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law.
Accordingly, the decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal to be reheard afresh by a judge other than Judge  Martins.  No
findings are preserved.



Signed                                             Date 29 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



