
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02582/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2019                     |On 3 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                      Mohammad Mahmoud Yousef Alhanouti
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by Danielle Cohen
                    Immigration Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Jordan.  He appealed to a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  27
    February 2017 refusing his application for  permanent  residence  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

2.   The judge dismissed the appeal, on the basis that the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience and it was not accepted that the appellant  had
    resided in the United Kingdom with his sponsor Ms  [AD]  in  accordance
    with the Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

3.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had arguably erred with regard  to
    the burden of proof, and other matters concerning contended  inadequate
    findings in respect of witness  evidence  and  errors  with  regard  to
    perceived inconsistencies were also arguable.

4.   The judge noted the guidance in Papajorgii  [2012]  UKUT  00038  (IAC),
    having noted at paragraph 4 of his decision that the  burden  of  proof
    was initially on the respondent to show on a balance  of  probabilities
    that the marriage is one of convenience  and  that  if  the  respondent
    discharges the burden the burden is then on the appellant to show on  a
    balance of probabilities that the marriage is a genuine one.  The judge
    also  noted  relevant  provisions  of  the  Community  Regulations   on
    marriages of convenience, and the guidance in Rosa [2016] EWCA  Civ  14
    and Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54.

5.   The judge noted factors that had led the respondent  to  conclude  that
    the marriage was one of convenience.  The appellant on  return  to  the
    United Kingdom on 20 February 2012  had  been  interviewed  at  Gatwick
    Airport and was unable to state what his  wife's  job  was,  indicating
    that this was because of language difficulties.  He said  they  had  no
    joint bills or accounts.  Though he said he  lived  with  his  wife  in
    Barnsley a provisional driving licence was found in his shoe  giving  a
    London address.

6.   His wife had been contacted but was unable to  give  any  more  of  his
    name than Mohammad.  She was unable to recall when or where  they  were
    married and said that she had worked at a bakery for the last year  and
    could not account for why the appellant did not know this.

7.   The appellant was granted temporary admission and returned  to  Gatwick
    on 23 February 2012 with his wife.  He knew full details  of  his  wife
    and had brought the marriage certificate.  He had no bills in his  name
    in relation to the Barnsley address and indicated that he used to  work
    in London and travelled there to work and had not  bothered  to  change
    them.  He said that he had not been able to answer basic questions when
    initially stopped because he was tired and scared  of  the  Immigration
    Officer, and his wife said she had been tired and did not  believe  the
    Immigration Officer when he said they were calling from the UKBA.

8.   There was a visit by the South Yorkshire LIT team  to  the  address  in
    Barnsley where the occupant said that they had lived for the past  year
    and had no knowledge of the appellant or the EEA sponsor.  It was  said
    that a further address was visited and again there was no trace of  the
    EEA sponsor spouse.

9.   The judge noted what the appellant said in his witness statement of  27
    March 2018 that he had met Ms [D] in January 2011 at a club  in  London
    and their relationship began straightaway and they were  married  on  9
    May 2011.  He said that they had lived at the  same  address  i.e.  the
    flat in Barnsley since that date and continued to live there.  He  said
    that it was 2am when he was stopped by immigration control and  he  was
    tired and had the flu and had explained his wife worked for  an  agency
    and did different jobs.  When he saw her the  next  day  she  said  she
    believed the call had been a prank call and she had been asleep.

10.  He said that approximately a year later he was  again  stopped  at  the
    airport and asked questions and after producing a tenancy agreement and
    his wife's bank statements and pay slips, his passport was returned and
    he was allowed to proceed.  He said that he worked in London and  would
    stay in London where he rented a room and was there three or four  days
    a week and then returned to Barnsley.

11.  The judge thereafter set out in detail the  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant and Ms [D] about such matters as when and where they  started
    to live together and issues to do with  their  religion  and  work  and
    private life  together.   The  judge  found  inconsistencies  in  their
    evidence as to when  they  had  met,  when  their  relationship  became
    physical, when they actually moved in together, when Ms [D]  last  went
    to Latvia and what presents were given at their recent  birthdays.   He
    also considered that different answers were given  in  connection  with
    religious matters.  The judge noted the evidence of witnesses who  were
    provided to support the claimed relationship.  A Mr  Alamaira  said  he
    had known the appellant for about ten years and had met Ms [D] in  2011
    and had met her twice  since  they  were  married  though  he  saw  the
    appellant recently.  A Mr Al Adas said that they had both stayed at his
    property in the past and then he had been away  for  seven  months  and
    when he got back he had been told that the couple had  been  living  in
    London.  He said the couple had stayed at his home on  occasions  after
    they had been married.  A Mr Albkadle confirmed that he had known  them
    since 2009, they had been a couple and had gone out with  him  and  his
    partner in the past.  Other witness statements were also provided.

12.  The  judge  also  noted  and  took  into  account  additional  evidence
    submitted by the appellant, in particular evidence in  connection  with
    the address including bank statements and a tenancy agreement and other
    documents in connection with Ms [D] which confirmed that she resided at
    the Barnsley address.

13.  The judge then went on to say that after taking  into  account  all  of
    the  evidence  referred  to  by  the  respondent  together   with   the
    inconsistencies in the oral evidence he was  satisfied  the  respondent
    had discharged his burden of proof and that it was  therefore  for  the
    appellant to show on a  balance  of  probabilities  that  there  was  a
    reasonable explanation for those suspicions.

14.  The judge referred again to the oral evidence from the  appellant,  his
    wife and the witnesses but  concluded  that  there  were  a  number  of
    inconsistencies between the couple which would not be expected  between
    a couple who were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  The  judge
    found that the inconsistencies set out in the evidence  did  materially
    affect the overall credibility of the appellant's  claim  to  be  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship and durable  relationship  with  Ms
    [D].  He accepted that the respondent had discharged the initial burden
    of proof and on those findings was  not  satisfied  the  appellant  had
    shown on a balance  of  probabilities  that  this  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage nor that the  marriage  was  not  entered  into  in
    accordance to secure rights of residence into the United Kingdom.

15.  The grounds of challenge, on which Ms Asanovic  relied  and  which  she
    developed in her oral submissions, argued that the judge had  erred  in
    deeming that the burden of proof was  on  the  appellant  to  show  the
    marriage was genuine  and  not  one  of  convenience,  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 70.  As had been said in Sadovska, it was not for Ms Sadovska
    to establish that the relationship was a genuine and  lasting  one,  it
    was for the Secretary of State  to  establish  that  it  was  indeed  a
    marriage of convenience.

16.  In this regard Mr Melvin argued that the judge  had  applied  the  test
    correctly and argued that though the judge's wording  might  have  been
    better when drawing his conclusions on the appeal it was argued that it
    was abundantly clear that the judge had followed the path  set  out  in
    the case law dealing with marriages of convenience.

17.  It was also argued by Ms Asanovic that the Secretary of  State  had  in
    fact provided very little evidence to rebut the  initial  burden.   The
    interview notes had not been provided, the redacted document at Annex G
    to the Secretary of State's bundle was very terse, saying no more  than
    that the intelligence team had visited the relevant  property  and  the
    occupant for the last year had no knowledge of the subject or  her  new
    partner.  He went on to visit another address for her, again  no  trace
    of her.  No names are contained in this report and Ms  Asanovic  argued
    that it was essentially valueless.  She argued that despite the initial
    concerns from the first interview, there had been no attempt to  cancel
    his residence permit and the matter  had  simply  arisen  when  he  had
    applied for permanent residence some years later.  She also argued that
    the judge had failed to take any or any proper account of the  evidence
    of the witnesses which showed a continuity of relationship and had  not
    been given proper consideration.  It was also argued that  with  regard
    to  the  inconsistency  claimed  concerning  the   couple's   religious
    practices, there was no inconsistency as the appellant had simply  been
    asked whether his wife practised her religion and said he had not  seen
    her do so which was consistent with her answer that she went to  church
    when he was not around.  He was not asked whether to his knowledge  she
    went to church or whether he prayed and there was no definition of what
    was meant by practising his religion.  Also the inconsistencies  as  to
    precise dates when the coupled moved in together and when they met  had
    to be seen in the context of the passage of time.

18.  It is clear from paragraph 28 in  Sadovska  that  it  is  not  for  the
    appellant to establish the relationship was genuine and lasting but for
    the Secretary of State to establish that it was indeed  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  This contrasts with the judge's paragraph 70 where having
    said what he did about the initial burden of proof being discharged  by
    the respondent he was not satisfied that the appellant had shown  on  a
    balance of  probabilities  that  this  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage.  That inconsistency with the guidance in  the  Supreme  Court
    decision is such in my view that as in Sadovska  itself  it  cannot  be
    said with any confidence that the judge would have decided the case  in
    the same way had the burden of proof been properly applied.

19.  I am  also  concerned  that  inadequate  attention  was  given  to  the
    evidence of the witnesses.  The judge said no more in  his  conclusions
    that he had heard evidence from them and there were additional  witness
    statements and that he took account of all the evidence before him.   I
    consider he needed to say why he did not attach any more weight than he
    appears to have done to the evidence of the  three  witnesses  and  the
    other witness statements.  The evidence from the respondent's side  was
    fairly slender and also rather  elderly,  and  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant was more recent and in greater detail.  I also see some force
    in the points made about the discrepancies or at least some of them  as
    set out in the grounds.

20.  In conclusion therefore I consider that the judge did  err  in  law  in
    the manner contended for in the grounds.  In light of the fact that the
    whole matter will have to be reconsidered I conclude that  it  is  more
    appropriate for it to be reheard in full in the First-tier Tribunal and
    that rehearing will be at Taylor House.

21.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 19 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
