
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02161/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |On 19th June 2020                    |
|6th June 2020                        |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                  FUNKE [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

      1. FtT Judge Cruthers dismissed Ms [A]'s appeal against the refusal of
         a residence card as the claimed dependant adult sibling  of  an  EU
         national for reasons set out in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29th
         October 2019. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT  judge  Beach
         on 11th March 2020. Directions  for  the  further  conduct  of  the
         appeal were sent and, in the circumstances  surrounding  COVID  19,
         provision was made for the question of whether there was  an  error
         of law and if so whether the decision of the FtT  Judge  should  be
         set aside to be determined on the papers.

      2.  The  appellant's  legal  representatives  did  not  make   further
         submissions  other  than  confirm  reliance  upon  the  bundle   of
         documents filed with the FtT, the skeleton argument before the  FtT
         and the grounds seeking permission to appeal. The  respondent  made
         written submissions  albeit  a  little  late,  but  I  extend  time
         accordingly. Neither party objected to the decision on the error of
         law issue being taken on the papers and  the  respondent  expressly
         consented to that course of action.

      3. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
         and  the  respondent  together  with  the  papers  before  me   are
         sufficient to enable me to be able to take a  decision  on  whether
         there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  FtT  and  if  so
         whether the decision should be set aside, on the papers and without
         hearing oral submissions.

         FtT decision.

      4. The appellant claimed to be the adult dependant brother  of  an  EU
         national exercising Treaty Rights in the UK. There was no challenge
         to the claimed  familial  relationship  or  that  her  brother  was
         exercising  Treaty  Rights.  The  appellant  relied  upon   medical
         evidence that she was suffering from recurrent depressive  disorder
         and ([32]) the FtT judge stated that he proceeded with the  hearing
         having regard to the relevant vulnerable witness guidance and  that
         he had  borne  this  in  mind  throughout  his  assessment  of  the
         evidence. The FtT judge set out the oral and  documentary  evidence
         before him. He concluded the appellant had failed to discharge  the
         burden of proof that she was financially dependent upon her brother
         in accordance with EEA law.

         Error of law

      5. Permission was granted on both grounds pleaded: it was arguable the
         FtT judge had failed to consider whether the appellant had  been  a
         member of her brother's household, dealing only with the  financial
         aspect of the claim; and failed to  have  adequate  regard  to  the
         appellant's status as  a  vulnerable  witness  when  assessing  the
         evidence. The grounds also seem to take issue with aspects  of  the
         judge's commentary on the appellant's residence in Nigeria and  the
         UK and her other family members being in the  UK  not  being  taken
         into account. Those latter issues are not relevant to determination
         of the issue that  was  before  the  FtT  judge  which  was  solely
         concerned with whether she met the EEA Regulations as  an  extended
         family member.

      6. The grounds did not seek to challenge the finding by the judge that
         the appellant did not meet the financial requirements. The skeleton
         argument relied upon by the appellant before the FtT submitted that
         she was a member of her brother's household prior to him moving  to
         the Netherlands in 2004, remained a  member  of  his  household  in
         Nigeria thereafter until she moved to the UK in  2006  and  started
         living with him in his household in the UK from August 2016. In the
         intervening period she lived with  friends,  met  and  married  her
         husband (from whom she  separated  in  2011)  and  lived  in  local
         authority provided accommodation until 2016.

      7. The FtT judge found the appellant was not financially supported  by
         her brother during the period 2004 to 2006 ([44]). The judge  found
         that between 2006 and the appellant's marriage  in  2009  and  then
         their move to [~] (the matrimonial home)  in  2011,  there  was  no
         evidence of any financial or accommodation support from her brother
         ([45]).

      8. The judge specifically confirmed  in  his  decision  that  he  took
         account  of  the  appellant's  vulnerability  when  assessing   the
         evidence. The judge referred in detail to the documentary  evidence
         (or lack of it)  and  to  the  witness  evidence  in  reaching  his
         findings, such findings being plainly open to him on  the  evidence
         before him.

      9. On the findings made by the judge, there  has  been  no  continuous
         dependency by the appellant on her brother and she has not  been  a
         member of his household such that she meets the requirements of the
         regulations. Although the judge did not make  a  specific  numbered
         finding as to household membership, the findings made plainly  show
         that she was not a member of her brother's household as required to
         meet the regulations.

     10. There is no error of law in the decision by the FtT judge.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision; the decision of the FtT dismissing her
    appeal stands.


Jane Coker

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 06 June 2020
