
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02307/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 1 March 2018                  |On: 22 March 2018                        |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                           Mrs Ndeye Sophie Diagne
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant is a national of Senegal, born  on  16  March  1970.  She
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge dismissing her appeal against the decision of the  respondent  to
    refuse her application for a residence card under the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.


 2. On 6 October 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro granted the appellant
    permission to appeal.  It  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  misdirected
    himself in being guided by the decision of Kareem (Proxy Marriages - EU
    Law) [2014] UKUT 00024 which had been reversed by the Court  of  Appeal
    in Awuku [2017] EWCA Civ 178.


 3. The Judge also found that he had no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal
    under Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations  as  he  was  bound  by  the
    decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411.


 4. In her Rule 24 response the respondent does not oppose the  application
    for permission to appeal. The Tribunal was invited  to  set  aside  the
    decision.


 5. Mr Reza also sought to rely on the recent  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 and submitted that the First
    tier Judge found that he was bound by the decision in Sala, and that he
    accordingly had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.


 6. Mr Bramble accepted that in the circumstances the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal cannot stand. Both parties agreed that it should  be  set
    aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  to
    be made.


    Assessment


 7. The decision in Kareem is no longer good law.  Further,  following  the
    decision in  Khan,  the  First-tier  Judge  did  have  jurisdiction  to
    determine the appeal based  on  the  appellant's  durable  relationship
    under Regulation 8 of the Regulations.


 8. In the circumstances the decision is set aside.


 9. The parties submitted that the case should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.  I find that this is  an
    appropriate case to remit for re-hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.


    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. It is set aside.


    The case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Birmingham)  for  a
    fresh determination to be made by another Judge.


    Anonymity direction not made.






    Signed                              Date 20 March 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

