
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
ea/02200/2015

                                                  ea/02202/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th July 2017                        | On 8th August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        Afam Chidi Ezeamulunanma (1)
                      Ifeoma Aniunoh Ezeamulunanma (2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Al-Rashid (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  resident  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zucker, promulgated on 27th January  2017,  following  a
    determination, made without a hearing, at Taylor House on 19th December
    2016, whereby Judge Zucker took the view that he lacked jurisdiction to
    determine the appeal in the light of the guidance given in Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411,  because  the  application  by  the
    Appellants, for residence cards as confirmation of the right to  reside
    in the UK as the extended family member of a person exercising  "treaty
    rights", was made by two cousins.

Grounds of Application

 2. The grounds of application state that the principal  Appellant  is  the
    extended family member of an EU citizen exercising treaty rights in the
    UK, and he had made an application for a residence  card,  for  himself
    and his dependent wife and two children and this was refused on account
    of there being insufficient evidence of dependency or membership  of  a
    household of a qualified person.  After he had lodged his  appeal,  the
    hearing date was fixed, but shortly before the date of the  hearing  he
    was informed by the resident judge at the First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    case of Sala [2016] UKUT 411, so that he  proceeded  to  determine  the
    appeal "on the papers".  The grounds acknowledge that the Appellant was
    invited "to provide any reasons why the Tribunal should not proceed  as
    proposed", but since the Tribunal was not inviting submissions  on  the
    "substantive  law",  the  Appellant  saw  no  reason  to  provide   any
    objections to why the Tribunal should not follow the  "procedure"  that
    it had proposed.

 3. Second, nevertheless, Sala was not binding.  It was a reported, but not
    a Starred  decision.   The  Practice  Directions  do  not  provide  for
    determinations that are merely reported to be treated as  authoritative
    in any matter.  In fact, the Guidance states at paragraph 10 that,  "in
    the absence of a starred case  the  common  law  doctrine  of  judicial
    precedent shall not  apply  and  the  decisions  of  the  AIT  and  one
    Constitution of the Chamber do not  as  a  matter  of  law  bind  later
    Constitutions".

 4. Third, that the decision in Sala was  in  any  event  wrong.   This  is
    because it was wrong for  the  Tribunal  in  that  case  to  hold  that
    Regulation 2(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations do not  cover  the  situation
    where the EFM appeals against the refusal to  issue  a  residence  card
    under Regulation 17(4),  for  the  reason  only  that  an  exercise  of
    discretion is involved.  This is because  under  Regulation  17(4)  and
    Regulation 17(5) a person who claims to be an EFM,  and  who  satisfies
    the national conditions, is entitled to a residence card.

 5. Fourth, contrary to what the Upper Tribunal had decided in that case at
    paragraphs 22 and 23, the construction given above in the grounds  just
    cited, are consistent with the Citizens Directive 2004/38.  Chapter VI,
    which applies to Union citizens, and  their  family  members,  includes
    other beneficiaries as defined  by  Article  3(2)(a)  and  (b)  of  the
    Directive.

 6. Fifth, the Appellant, by virtue of not having a right  of  appeal,  was
    denied a remedy and this  was  inconsistent  with  Article  47  of  the
    charter, which provides for a fair and effective remedy.

 7. Finally, the position with respect to jurisdiction is  not  acte  clair
    and a reference has been sought to the CJU.  The appeal  in  this  case
    ought to be linked with the appeal in Banger [2017] UKUT 125  in  which
    the president has made a reference to the CJU and asked  the  following
    relevant question:

         "Is a rule of national law which precludes an appeal to a court  or
         Tribunal against a decision of the executive refusing  to  issue  a
         residence card to a person claiming to be an extended family member
         compatible with the Directive?"

    Until such time  that  an  authoritative  decision  is  given,  it  was
    appropriate for the appeal in this case to be allowed.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before Mr Al-Rashid, appearing as Counsel on  behalf  of
    the Appellants made an application for an adjournment  on  the  grounds
    that the position was clearly not  acte  clair  because  the  CJEU  was
    presently considering a application referred to it by the president  of
    the Tribunal in Banger, and  until  such  time  that  an  authoritative
    decision is given, this matter  should  be  stood  out.   Second,  this
    matter should also be stood out because the Supreme Court only in March
    2017 in the case of SM (Algeria) had also considered a  situation  such
    as this case, but had adjourned to another  day.   At  this  stage,  Mr
    Wilding, appearing as Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer  for  the
    Secretary of State, intervened to explain  that  in  SM  (Algeria)  the
    "Sala point" had not been argued, but now that it was a live issue,  we
    were awaiting, in case that this should  so  happen,  for  the  Supreme
    Court to reconvene again to hear arguments on the "Sala point".  Third,
    submitted Mr Al-Rashid, the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) only  last
    week  adjourned  a  hearing  on  the  same  point  because  of  a  late
    intervention by a interested party, but that case now was scheduled  to
    be heard in September this year.  For all these three reasons, it  was,
    submitted Mr Al-Rashid, expeditious and  correct  for  there  to  be  a
    adjournment.

 9. For his part, Mr Wilding, whilst accepting that there was some force in
    the submissions made today for the grant of an  adjournment,  submitted
    that it remained open to the Appellant at any stage, including after  a
    authoritative decision had been handed down, to remake a application on
    this matter.

10. Having considered the position, and applying the overriding  objective,
    I have concluded that it would not be appropriate to adjourn, and  that
    I should proceed on the basis of a reported  decision,  which  remained
    relevant for consideration by this Tribunal.

11. In his submissions before me, Mr Al-Rashid submitted that he  could  do
    no better than to simply rely upon the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   For  his
    part, Mr Wilding submitted that good reasons needed to be shown for why
    Sala should not be followed.  None were adduced.   Second,  this  is  a
    case where resident Judge Zucker had expressly set out  the  directions
    that he had given to the Appellants' representatives, expressly drawing
    attention to his intention to follow the case of Sala, and at paragraph
    2(3) it is stated that,  "if  you  wish  to  provide  reasons  why  the
    Tribunal should not proceed  as  proposed,  you  must  provide  written
    notification no later than 4pm on the fifth working day after the  date
    of these directions".   None  were  given.   The  judge  ended  with  a
    sentence that, "to date there has been no response from the  Appellants
    or the representatives.  In the circumstances the appeal  is  dismissed
    for want of jurisdiction" (see paragraph 3).  That was an approach that
    could not be criticised, submitted Mr Wilding.

12. In reply, Mr Al-Rashid submitted that, as his Grounds  of  Appeal  made
    clear, given that resident Judge Zucker was simply inviting submissions
    on  the  procedure  that  he  intended  to  follow,  rather  than   the
    "substance" of the reliability of the case of Sala in such a situation,
    it was considered  to  be  unnecessary  to  make  any  further  written
    submissions.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA) 2007 such that I should set aside the decision.  I come  to  this
    conclusion notwithstanding Mr Al-Rashid's precise and able  submissions
    before me.  As he openly accepted himself, no written notification  was
    given by the fifth working day of the date of the directions issued  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, or at any time thereafter.  It was open, in my
    judgment, for the "Sala point" to be  taken  at  that  stage,  and  any
    argument with respect to the Tribunal still retaining  jurisdiction  in
    cases of this sort, to be made then.  The reference by the president in
    Banger to the CJEU was not a point taken below, which could  have  been
    by way of a written notification to resident Judge Zucker.  The case of
    Sala is a reported decision, albeit not  a  starred  decision,  and  it
    remains of persuasive authority given the fact that the arguments  with
    respect to extended family members were  comprehensively  addressed  in
    that case.  It remains open to the Appellants in this case  to  make  a
    further application, should the position change  with  respect  to  the
    state of the law. As things stand at the moment, and  with  respect  to
    whether the Tribunal below had engaged in a material error of law, I am
    bound to come to the conclusion that it did not.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th August 2017





