
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/02326/2018
                                                               EA/02329/2018
                                                             & EA/02330/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice in  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 23 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                        Nooria [Z] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                        Sayed [Z] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                           [S Z] (THIRD APPELLANT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Barr, Simon Barr Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against a decision of  Designated
    Judge Murray promulgated on 8 October  2018,  dismissing  their  appeal
    against the decision the respondent made on 27 February 2018 to  refuse
    them residence cards as the  direct  family  members  of  Syed  [Z],  a
    British citizen, who had previously exercised treaty rights in Ireland.
     The  appeals  against  those  decisions  were  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. The appellants' case is that Mr Syed [Z] ("the  sponsor"),  husband  of
    the first appellant and father of the second and third  appellants  had
    been living in Belfast since 2013 working as a taxi driver.  He  sought
    to move to County Donegal and his family joined him in the Republic  of
    Ireland.  He worked in Letterkenny for around twenty hours a week.  The
    family applied for a residence card under EU law applicable in  Ireland
    and these were issued.  Mr Syed [Z] continued to work as a taxi driver,
    travelling  across  the  land  border  to  Ireland,  but  this   caused
    difficulties.  The Irish authorities interpreted his rights as a cross-
    border worker such that they required him to register, insure  and  tax
    his vehicle in Ireland but, if he did this, he could no longer  operate
    lawfully as a taxi driver in Northern Ireland.  He was  told  he  could
    not drive a car in Ireland in  future.   This,  and  difficulties  with
    respect to child benefit and disability payments in respect of his son,
    the third appellant, caused difficulties  such  that  they  decided  to
    return to Northern Ireland.

 3. The respondent's case is that the  appellants  had  failed  to  provide
    sufficient evidence to show that he had been employed  with  the  Halal
    Meat Centre from July 2015 to May 2016 noting the information submitted
    payslips  contradicted  information  given  on  the  application  form,
    casting doubt as to whether they were genuine; and, that there  was  no
    evidence that the husband  was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  Ireland
    before returning to the United Kingdom, the last payslip being dated 26
    August 2016.  The respondent considered also that  the  appellants  had
    not provided adequate evidence to show that they had resided in Ireland
    together and that the residence  was  genuine,  noting  an  absence  of
    evidence to show why they had moved there and absence of social, family
    and cultural ties the sponsor had  to  Ireland  nor  that  the  British
    citizen sponsor's life had transferred to Ireland noting  that  he  had
    been resident and financially active in the United Kingdom, being self-
    employed and in receipt of State benefits there.  It is noted also that
    the tenancy agreement was for only six months and there is no  evidence
    of the  integration  of  the  family  into  life  in  Ireland  such  as
    attendance at school.

 4. The respondent suspected that the residence in Ireland was in order  to
    circumvent the United Kingdom's immigration laws.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the sponsor  and  submissions  from  both
    representatives.  She also had before her bundle of  material  provided
    by both parties.

 6. The judge noted [21] that there  were  payslips  from  the  Halal  Meat
    Centre on file showing that the appellant worked twenty  hours  a  week
    from 3 June 2016 until 26 August 2016.  She noted also evidence working
    as a taxi driver in Belfast as well as bank statements from the bank in
    Dublin but that there appeared to be no payslips from pizza  places  in
    Ireland where he said that he had worked.  She noted also [22] a letter
    from Social Welfare Services in Letterkenny stating  that  because  the
    sponsor works as a self-employed taxi driver in Belfast  under  the  EU
    Regulations he has to pay national insurance  in  the  UK  and  so  the
    United Kingdom is the competent authority to pay  family  benefits  for
    the children.

 7. The judge found that: -

      i) the sponsor's main earnings from working in the United Kingdom take
         on that she was not satisfied with the reasons  he  had  given  for
         going to live in the Irish Republic and not bringing his family  to
         the United Kingdom, the  only  reason  which  made  sense  was  his
         intention to circumvent the United Kingdom's  domestic  immigration
         controls.

     ii) documentation from HMRC questioned by  the  sponsor  and  does  not
         tally with what he says his earnings were and she was not satisfied
         with his evidence that he worked for Halal meat  Centre  from  July
         2015 to May 2016, the payslips not tallying with information on the
         application form; and, that there are no payslips to show  that  he
         worked in Southern Ireland until 22 May 2007 when the  family  came
         to the United Kingdom.

    iii) the family were not  integrated  into  Ireland  noting  that  their
         accommodation in Ireland appeared to  be  short  term  only,  there
         being insufficient evidence that the children  attended  school  in
         Ireland and no sign of integration in  the  Irish  community  as  a
         whole.

     iv) the sponsor's residence in Ireland was not genuine;  and,  that  it
         was  a  means  of  circumventing  the  United  Kingdom's   domestic
         immigration policy.

 8. The judge  then  went  on  to  make  conclusions  with  regard  to  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8, dismissing the appeal both  under  the
    Immigration Regulations and human rights.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) In applying the "centre of life" test  which  has  no  place  in  a
         lawful assessment of a Surinder Singh case as, although it arose in
         the opinion of Advocate General Sharpston in O and B v  Netherlands
         [2014] EUECJ C-456/12 it is not adopted by the  final  judgment  of
         the Court and,  acquiring  the  appellant  to  satisfy  a  notional
         transfer of Life Test is not  compliant  with  free  movement  law,
         would be unfair and an error of law.

     ii) in making findings with regard to proportionality  in  relation  to
         Article 8 which were irrelevant rather than dealing with  O  and  B
         which sets out what  should  and  should  not  be  for  matters  of
         consideration with regard to free movement.

    iii) The judge had failed to appreciate the  appellants  in  the  United
         Kingdom the sponsor as a cross-border worker, his  protected  right
         under free movement, there had been no prohibition on reliance upon
         Surinder Singh rights whilst  working  moving  between  two  member
         states.

10. On 30 October 2018 Designated Judge Shaerf granted permission noting it
    was arguable that the judge had not paid proper attention to O and B  v
    Netherlands but the judge also stated:

         "I note there is no challenge to the findings of fact made  by  the
         judge and subsequent to her decision the Court of  Appeal's  handed
         down judgment  in  SSHD  v  Christy  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  2378  which
         addresses matters arising on O and B."

11. I heard submissions from both representatives.

12. Regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations seeks to put into domestic law  the
    decisions of the CJEU in Surinder Singh and O. and B.

13. In O and B, the Court of Justice said this:

         "Article 21(1) TFEU must be interpreted as  meaning  that  where  a
         Union citizen has created or strengthened  a  family  life  with  a
         third-country national during genuine residence, pursuant to and in
         conformity with the conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) and
         Article 16(1) and (2) of Directive 2004/38/EC ... in a Member State
         other than that of which he is a national, the provisions  of  that
         directive apply by analogy where that Union citizen  returns,  with
         the family member in question,  to  his  Member  State  of  origin.
         Therefore, the conditions for granting a derived right of residence
         to a third-country national who is a family member  of  that  Union
         citizen, in the latter's Member State of  origin,  should  not,  in
         principle, be more strict than those provided for by that directive
         for the grant of a derived right of residence  to  a  third-country
         national who is  a  family  member  of  a  Union  citizen  who  has
         exercised his right of freedom of movement by becoming  established
         in a Member State other than the Member State  of  which  he  is  a
         national."

14. The first point of note is that  the  sponsor  must  have  created  and
    strengthened a family life in conformity with  articles  7(1)  and  (2)
    which provide, so far as is relevant:

         "1.  All Union citizens shall have the right of  residence  on  the
         territory of another Member State for a period of longer than three
         months if they:

             (a)  are workers or self-employed persons in the  host  Member
             State; or

             (b)  have sufficient resources for themselves and their family
             members not to become a burden on the social assistance system
             of the host Member State during their period of residence  and
             have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member
             State; or

             ...

         2.   The right of residence  provided  for  in  paragraph  1  shall
         extend to family members who are not nationals of a  Member  State,
         accompanying or joining the Union citizen in the host Member State,
         provided that such Union citizen satisfies the conditions  referred
         to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c).2."

15. It is not submitted that the sponsor falls within reg 7 (3) nor  is  it
    suggested that  article  16  (the  right  to  permanent  residence)  is
    engaged.

16. In this case, there is an unchallenged finding of fact by the judge  is
    that she was should not satisfied that the sponsor had  worked  between
    July 2015 and May 2016.  He appears to accept that a  relatively  short
    period of employment from 3 June 2016 until 26 August 2016,  less  than
    three months.  The judge also, and again this is unchallenged, did  not
    accept that the appellant worked at a pizza place  (see  paragraphs  21
    and 23), the judge did stating that "there are also no payslips to show
    that the sponsor worked in Southern Ireland until 22 May 2017 when  the
    family came to the United Kingdom".  In context, this is a finding that
    there were no payslips confirming other employment.

17. Irrespective of whether the judge erred in her approach to O.  and  B.,
    given the finding about the sponsor's lack of employment, and a  period
    of employment of less than three months, the appellants could not  have
    succeeded.

18. While the appellants and the sponsor were issued with residence  cards,
    those are not determinative  of  whether  the  sponsor  was  exercising
    Treaty rights for the whole or substantially the whole of the  relevant
    period. Indeed, the evidence adduced in the form of letters from Social
    Welfare Services in Letterkenny  regarding  an  application  for  child
    benefit which state:-

         "I have decided that you do not  satisfy  the  condition  of  being
         habitually resident in this State for the following reasons:-

         (1)  your length of residence  in  Ireland  does  not  provide  for
             approval of habitual residence condition;

         (2)  your spouse is no longer employed in Ireland therefore you are
             no longer exempt from habitual residence condition;

         (3)  your centre of interest is not in Ireland;

         (4)  the evidence produced to date there is nothing to substantiate
             that you are habitually resident in the State."

19. While Mr Barr sought to persuade me that  the  sponsor  is  a  frontier
    worker, that is not a point put to the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  as  a
    ground of appeal. Nor does it appear that it was put  to  it  that  the
    issue of residence cards was determinative. The judge  was  aware  that
    they had been issued, but they were issued a significantly long  period
    before the sponsor was found to have stopped working. It cannot be said
    that this was in any way going behind  the  conclusions  of  the  Irish
    government in issuing a residence card; it is  not  arguable  that  the
    issue of such a card  is  anything  more  than  evidence  that  he  was
    exercising Treaty rights as at the date  of  issue.  Further,  in  this
    case, there was a substantial gap after the period of employment before
    the family relocated to Northern Ireland.

20.  Accordingly,  for  these  reasons,  the  appellants  have  failed   to
    demonstrate that the judge's errors in her approach  to  the  law  were
    material given that, in light of the unchallenged findings of  fact  as
    to the sponsor not exercising  Treaty  rights,  the  appellants  simply
    cannot show that they fell within the  scope  of  O.  and  B.  or  were
    otherwise entitled to a  derivative  right  of  residence  pursuant  to
    article 21 TFEU.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it


    Signed                                   Date 16 July 2019
[pic]

     Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





