
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02129/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2016                  |On 18 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Marcos Alberto Lima
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant", is  a  citizen
    of Brazil, born on 15 June 1969.   On  15  August  he  applied  to  the
    Appellant to whom I shall refer as "the  SSHD"  for  a  residence  card
    under Regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  as  the
    spouse of Sandra Cristina du Oliveira, an Italian citizen  born  on  15
    April 1970.

The SSHD's Decision

 2. On 8 February 2016 the SSHD refused the application on the  basis  that
    the Applicant had not shown that  his  wife  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.  The SSHD  made  no  decision  to
    remove the Applicant.

The Original Appeal

 3. On 21 February  2016  the  Applicant  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under
    Regulation  26  of  the  2006  Regulations  and  Section  82   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).
     The Applicant requested the appeal be decided  on  the  basis  of  the
    papers filed with the Tribunal.   These  included  three  original  pay
    slips for his wife.  The Applicant had previously  supplied  copies  of
    earlier pay slips for his wife and his wife's statement of account with
    Barclays Bank number ***817 for the period 13 March 2015-12  June  2015
    and 13 July-14 August 2015.  These showed the payment of weekly  salary
    to the Applicant's wife.

The Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. By a decision promulgated on 2 August  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Somal allowed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

 5. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the sole ground that the  Judge
    had been entitled to take  into  account  matters  after  the  date  of
    decision and had misdirected himself by failing to take account of  the
    evidence of the employment of the Applicant's wife  being  limited  and
    not extending beyond 14 August  2015,  a  year  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

 6. On 2 November 2016 Resident Judge Martin granted permission to  appeal.



Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 7. There was no appearance by the Applicant or any representative for him.
     I was satisfied that notice of the time, date and place  set  for  the
    hearing had  been  given  to  the  Applicant  in  accordance  with  the
    Procedural  Rules.   I  asked  the  Tribunal  clerk  to  telephone  the
    Applicant at the number supplied in the original notice of appeal.  She
    did so and indicated that her conversation with the Applicant had  been
    limited because of his lack of English and it had been  suggested  that
    she should call back when his son  was  available  to  take  the  call.
    Having reviewed the papers in the Tribunal file  and  noting  that  the
    Applicant had originally asked that the First-tier Tribunal  appeal  be
    decided on the papers, I decided that it was just to proceed  with  the
    hearing in his absence.

 8. Mr Nath had earlier requested sight of the papers because  he  had  not
    been supplied with the SSHD's file.  I had handed him  earlier  in  the
    day the core bundle prepared by the Tribunal.   At  the  start  of  the
    hearing I informed Mr  Nath  that  having  looked  at  the  papers  the
    chronology which I had prepared might be a basis from which  to  start.
    The chronology is:-

    15 August 2015    The Applicant applied for a residence card.

    8 February 2016   The SSHD decided to refuse the application.

    21 February 2016  The Applicant lodged notice of appeal to  the  First-
                      tier Tribunal.

    15 March 2016 The First-tier Tribunal issued a notice to the  Applicant
                      requiring him to file any documents for consideration
                      which he wished to be considered  by  no  later  than
                      12 April 2016.

    1 August 2016 The appeal is decided on the  papers  by  the  First-tier
                      Tribunal.

 9. I pointed out that the Applicant had submitted evidence of  his  wife's
    employment for the months of May, June and July 2015  in  the  form  of
    copies of pay slips and bank  statements.   He  had  submitted  further
    evidence of her employment in the form of three original pay slips  for
    the months December 2015, January  and  February  2016.   There  is  no
    evidence in the file that  the  Respondent  has  filed  any  additional
    documents or submissions to the First-tier Tribunal beyond  the  bundle
    dated 2 April 2016.

10. In the light of the information disclosed by the chronology I indicated
    to Mr Nath that it  would  appear  that  the  Applicant  had  submitted
    evidence of his wife's employment for periods ending shortly before his
    application and shortly before the last date for submission of evidence
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr  Nath  said  he  had  no  further
    submissions to make.

Findings and Conclusion

11. Section 85(4) states that the Tribunal may consider any matter which it
    thinks relevant to the substance of the decision,  including  a  matter
    arising after the date of the decision.  I note  that  the  Section  is
    permissive, rather than mandatory.

12. The Applicant produced evidence of his wife's employment up to a period
    shortly before he made his application.  After lodging notice of appeal
    he provided further pay slips for the three months ending with February
    2016. This may well have been in response to the notice from the First-
    tier Tribunal requiring any documents to be submitted for consideration
    of the appeal on the papers to be submitted  no  later  than  12  April
    2016.

13. In the circumstances I find that the  Applicant  has  submitted  recent
    documentation such as to show at the date of this  application  and  at
    the date of the decision his wife was  in  employment  and  would  have
    satisfied the requirements of Regulation 6  of  the  2006  Regulations.
    Given the information available to the Respondent from the date of  the
    application it would have been open to the Respondent at  any  time  to
    have made an inquiry pursuant to Section 40 of the UK Borders Act  2007
    to ascertain whether the Applicant's wife  was  in  employment.   I  am
    satisfied the combination of pay slips and bank statements covering the
    period of the first group of pay slips are sufficient to show that  the
    Applicant's spouse met the requirements of Regulation 6  and  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain any  error  of  law
    and shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.

    The effect is the original Applicant's appeal succeeds.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 04. i. 2017

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

