
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/02013/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 November 2017                       |On 21 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                          mrs oluwakemi adeoti mota
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Garrod, Counsel instructed by AO & Associates
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K. Pal, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal ("UT") from the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") promulgated on  16  February  2017  (by
    Judge I.A. Lewis who heard the appeal at Harmondsworth on  15  November
    2016) dismissing his appeal against the decision by the SSHD to  refuse
    to issue him with a residence card as  confirmation  of  his  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  or  partner  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty  rights  here.  The  FtT  did  not  make  an
    anonymity order, and I do not consider that such an order is  warranted
    for these proceedings in the UT.

Relevant Background

 2. The application was  refused  because  the  appellant  had  purportedly
    entered into a customary marriage by  proxy  with  his  Dutch  national
    sponsor, and the respondent did not accept that the proxy marriage  was
    valid either according to the laws of Nigeria or according to the  laws
    of the Netherlands. With regard to the former, it was not accepted that
    the marriage had been properly executed as required by Nigerian law  or
    that the marriage certificate had been issued by a competent  authority
    in Nigeria. With regard to the latter, it was not shown  that  a  proxy
    marriage involving a Dutch national was recognised by the  Netherlands,
    following Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The Judge  followed  Kareem,  and  declined  to  follow  Cudjoe  (Proxy
    marriages: burden of proof) [2016]  UKUT  180  (IAC)  which  Mr  Garrod
    relied on as establishing that it was not necessary in a case involving
    a Dutch national sponsor for the third country appellant to  show  that
    the proxy marriage was recognised under Dutch law. The  Judge  made  no
    findings on whether the appellant was in a  durable  relationship  with
    his sponsor pursuant to Regulation 8, as Mr Garrod acknowledged that he
    had no jurisdiction to hear an appeal on this  ground,  following  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. FtT Judge Page granted  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  on  all
    grounds, which included: (a) that there had  been  excessive  delay  in
    promulgation: and (b) that the judge had failed  properly  to  evaluate
    the evidence and the relevant case law.

Discussion

 5. The law has been clarified since the appeal was heard and  the  grounds
    of appeal to the UT were formulated.

 6. In Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that
    Kareem was wrongly decided. The validity of a proxy  marriage  did  not
    fall to be determined by the national law of the EU  country  of  which
    the EEA sponsor was a national.

 7. In Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 the Court of Appeal held that  Sala
    was wrongly decided, and that the appellant had a right  of  appeal  to
    the FtT against the decision to refuse to issue him  with  a  residence
    card as an extended family member under Regulation 8.

 8. The law always speaks, and so Judge Lewis was clearly wrong  to  decide
    the issue of the validity of the proxy marriage on the  basis  that  it
    was not shown to be recognised by Dutch law; and he was also  wrong  to
    direct himself - albeit with Mr Garrod's agreement -  that  he  had  no
    jurisdiction to entertain an appeal under Regulation 8.

 9. Ms Pal accepted that the decision should be set aside in its  entirety,
    and submitted that the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Mr Garrod sought to persuade me that the decision  should  be
    remade by me in the appellant's favour without a  further  hearing,  on
    the basis that there was no merit in the alternate  basis  advanced  in
    the refusal letter for contesting the validity of the  proxy  marriage,
    which was that the marriage had not been properly executed as  required
    by Nigerian law or that the marriage certificate had not been issued by
    a competent authority in Nigeria.

10. While the FtT Judge found for the appellant on this issue, I did not  -
    and do not - consider that his finding could be  regarded  as  safe  in
    view of the lengthy delay between the hearing and the  promulgation  of
    the decision, and the complaint of the  appellant  that  he  failed  to
    consider relevant evidence in his decision. Accordingly, I  ruled  that
    the appeal should be remitted to the FtT to be heard afresh.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the FtT contained an error of law, such that it must be
    set aside in its entirety and remade.

Directions

12. This appeal is remitted to the FtT  at  Taylor  House  for  a  de  novo
    hearing (Judge I.A. Lewis incompatible).

13. The agreed time estimate is two hours

Anonymity



No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date 19 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

