
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02125/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th October 2016                          |On 9 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       adedayo ganiyat salami-akintola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Salami-Akintola in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Barrowclough) who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 15th February 2016, allowed the appeal  of  Mrs  Salami-
    Akintola against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  her
    application for a permanent residence card as  a  confirmation  of  her
    right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

 2. Whilst this is the Secretary of State's appeal, for  sake  of  ease  of
    reference I intend to refer to the parties  as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Mrs Salami-Akintola was not  legally  represented
    but appeared before the  Tribunal  along  with  her  spouse.   For  the
    purposes of the proceedings, I ensured that I explained  the  procedure
    and gave her the opportunity to ask any questions  arising  from  that.
    In addition, she had provided a response to the Grounds of  Appeal  and
    permission that had been granted, in a  Rule  24  response  dated  20th
    August 2016 but received by the Tribunal on  1st  September  2016.   In
    that written document she sat out her reasons as to why the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not make an error on a point of law.

 3. There is no dispute as to the factual background to this  appeal.   The
    Appellant's Sponsor, Mr Akintola is an EEA  national  namely  he  is  a
    citizen of Austria.  The parties have been in a relationship and living
    as man and wife at least since April 2009.   The  history  demonstrates
    that on 9th September 2009 the Appellant was issued with a UK residence
    permit as a  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant  which  was  valid  until  9th
    September 2012.  On the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
    paragraph 5, he found that on the evidence before him the Appellant and
    her spouse had been living together as man and wife at the same address
    since April 2009.  In November  2010  the  Appellant  and  Mr  Akintola
    married in an Islamic ceremony and in 2011 they had a child together.

 4. In August 2011 the Appellant made an application for a  residence  card
    as a family member of an EEA national.   On  18th  November  2011  this
    application was refused for the reasons set out at paragraph 2  of  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes (decision promulgated
    on 21st February 2012).  In essence, the Secretary of State  considered
    that the Appellant had failed  to  show  that  she  was  in  a  durable
    relationship.  Having  considered  the  evidence  of  cohabitation  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that they had demonstrated that  they
    were in a durable relationship.  Whilst they had been married  in  2010
    in an Islamic ceremony it was  not  accepted  that  this  was  a  valid
    marriage.

 5. On 14th February 2012 the appeal came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Holmes).  In a determination promulgated on 21st  February  2012
    the judge set out his findings.  At paragraph 10  he  referred  to  the
    Appellant's evidence which only referred to the  Islamic  marriage  and
    had objected to the fact that the Secretary of State had treated her as
    being in an unmarried relationship.  As the judge  stated,  it  is  not
    disputed that they had entered into an Islamic  marriage  in  2010  but
    this was a marriage that had not been registered and thus at  [12]  the
    judge found that the parties were not validly married and therefore the
    Secretary of State correctly considered the application as an unmarried
    partner or an extended family member.

 6. At paragraph [15] the judge was satisfied that her partner was  an  EEA
    national as he was a citizen of Austria who  had  been  issued  with  a
    registration certificate in December 2006.  He was  also  satisfied  on
    the documentation that  he  was  a  "qualified  person"  and  therefore
    exercising treaty rights.

 7. At [16] the judge made a finding that they  had  been  living  together
    before 4th February 2010 and  therefore  found  that  they  were  in  a
    durable relationship.  The judge went on to consider  Regulation  17(4)
    of the 2006 Regulations and the  issue  of  discretion.   Therefore  he
    allowed the appeal to the limited extent  that  the  decision  of  18th
    November 2011 was not in accordance with  the  law  and  therefore  the
    application was outstanding as to whether or not the Appellant  was  an
    extended family member and as a matter of discretion should be  granted
    a residence card.

 8. On 31st May 2012 following the successful appeal and in  the  light  of
    those findings made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  was
    issued with an EEA residence  card  as  an  unmarried  partner  of  her
    spouse.  Following this her daughter was  born  in  2013  and  on  21st
    November 2014 the parties married in a civil ceremony.

 9. On 26th May 2015 the Appellant made  an  application  for  a  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of a right to reside  in  the  UK  as  a
    family member.

10. The application was refused by the Secretary of State on  21st  October
    2015.  In the notice of immigration decision entitled "refusal to issue
    a permanent residence card under Regulation 15(1)(b) the  Secretary  of
    State set out the reasons for refusing.  Namely that  she  had  applied
    for permanent residence on the basis of being a family member of an EEA
    national and that she had resided in the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years.  The decision letter
    went on to state "however you have not provided evidence that  the  EEA
    national resided in the UK in accordance with the EEA Regulations for a
    continuous period of five years."

11. However in the reasons for refusal letter different reasons were given.
     They are as  follows.   The  Secretary  of  State  applied  Regulation
    15(1)(b) as a family member who is not an EEA national but has  resided
    in the UK with the EEA national in accordance with the Regulations  for
    a continuous period of five years shall acquire the right to reside  in
    the UK permanently.  The decision set out the factual circumstances  of
    the Islamic marriage in 2010, the issuing of a  residence  card  as  an
    unmarried partner on 31st May 2012 and that  they  were  married  in  a
    civil  ceremony  in  2014.   The  refusal   letter   acknowledged   her
    relationship with her spouse and that it had existed prior to the issue
    of the EEA residence card on 31st May 2012.   However  it  went  on  to
    state that under the Regulations, the "Appellant is not  classed  as  a
    family member until  the  relationship  is  formally  recognised.   The
    earliest she could complete the qualifying period is  five  years  from
    the date of issue of the residence  card  and  therefore  by  31st  May
    2017."

12. On 21st October 2015 Mr Akintola  was  granted  a  permanent  residence
    card.

13.  The  Appellant  appealed  that  decision  and  it  came  before  Judge
    Barrowclough on the papers on 1st February 2016.  The parties  did  not
    attend before the judge.

14. In a determination promulgated on 15th February 2016 the judge made the
    following findings.  First of all he found that Mr Akintola was an  EEA
    national who had been  granted  a  permanent  residence  card  on  21st
    October 2015.  The judge found that  there  was  a  difference  in  the
    reasons given in the notice of immigration decision from  that  of  the
    refusal letter at [3] and found that the reasons given in  the  refusal
    letter were those relied upon by the Respondent.  At paragraph [5]  the
    judge found that they had been living together since April 2009 and the
    conclusions reached at paragraph 8 were as follows:-

         "8.  The Respondent's refusal and objections rest on the fact  that
             it was only on 31st May 2012 that  the  Appellant  was  issued
             with a residence card as the unmarried partner of Mr Akintola,
             her Sponsor.   That  seems  to  me  to  a  somewhat  arbitrary
             approach, in that it ignores and does not engage with  at  all
             with the significant  volume  of  evidence  produced  both  in
             support of the application and the appeal  which  proves  that
             the Appellant and Mr Akintola have lived together  essentially
             as husband and wife from about April 2009  onwards,  including
             getting married, at least in the eyes of  their  religion,  in
             November 2012,  and  having  a  child  born  in  February  the
             following year.  Put another way,  the  Respondent  recognised
             and accepted in May 2012 that the Appellant is the partner  of
             Mr Akintola, an EEA national and that that  is  sufficient  to
             entitle  her  to  a  residence  card  after  the  passage   of
             sufficient time; and I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has
             proved  beyond  doubt  that  their   relationship   had   been
             subsisting for the requisite period of at least five years  as
             at the date of the application in May 2015.  On any  objective
             review of the evidence, it seems to me that the Appellant  has
             indeed established that at the date of her  application  (26th
             May 2010) she had been living with Mr Akintola in the capacity
             of a family member for a continuous period for at  least  five
             years; and that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  that
             application in reliance on Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  2006
             Regulations was  misconceived  and  wrong.   Accordingly,  the
             appeal is allowed and she is lawfully entitled to a  permanent
             residence card as a confirmation of her right to reside in the
             United Kingdom."

15. Thus the appeal was allowed under Regulation 26 of the EEA  Regulations
    2006.

16. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and on
    18th July 2016 permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson for the following reasons:-

         "The Respondent submits that the judge:

         (a)  made a material misdirection in law  in  allowing  the  appeal
             under Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 EEA Regulations  as  the
             Appellant had not demonstrated that she had resided  with  the
             EEA national 'in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
             continuous period of five years';

         (b)  the Appellant is an extended family  member  under  Regulation
             8(5) of the 2006 Regulations and her right of residence is  at
             the discretion of the Secretary of State.  As  a  result,  her
             right of residence is  not  recognised  until  issued  with  a
             residence card under Regulation 17(4)  (see  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
             meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340).   As  the  Appellant  was
             issued with that residence card on 31st May 2012, she has only
             been residing in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  these
             Regulations upon that date;

         (c)  consequently the Appellant has not yet attained the  requisite
             five years' residence in line with the  Regulations  and  will
             not do so until 31st May 2007 at the earliest.

         It is arguable that the judge has erred in  his  interpretation  of
             Regulation 15(1)(b)."

17. At the hearing Mr Bates relied upon those  grounds  and  the  grant  of
    permission by Judge Simpson.  He submitted that when she had originally
    applied for a residence card up until that point she  was  only  asking
    the Secretary of State to consider them as an  extended  family  member
    because they were not married.  That was  upheld  by  the  decision  of
    Judge  Holmes  who,  whilst  he  found  that  she  was  in  a   durable
    relationship with Mr Akintola, the Secretary of State had not exercised
    discretion.  As a result of those findings of fact  the  Appellant  was
    issued with a residence card under Regulation 17(4) on 31st  May  2012.
    It is at that time  she  became  recognised  as  a  family  member  and
    therefore the time started from that date irrespective of the length of
    time that they had been living together prior to that date.

18. Thus he submitted that whilst the judge had found that  they  had  been
    living together and had had a civil ceremony since April 2009 they  had
    not been in a marriage that was valid or recognised as such.  The judge
    in essence by accepting the relationship as  going  back  to  2009  was
    retrospectively considering the exercise of discretion.

19. Thus he submitted that the decision of the judge was in error and  that
    there was no dispute that she is a family member and that the residence
    card is in force as the decision letter sets out  until  May  2017  and
    that in those circumstances there  is  no  removal  or  any  Article  8
    grounds that can be advanced.  He submitted that she would be  able  to
    apply before the end of the period in May 2017.

20. Ms Akintola relied upon her Rule 24 response.  She submitted  that  she
    had applied for a permanent residence card as a family member of an EEA
    national exercising treaty rights for more than five years.   She  said
    the first application was made in 2011 after living together as husband
    and wife for more  than  two  years  as  part  of  the  criteria.   She
    submitted  that  she  and  her  husband  had  provided   the   relevant
    documentation to prove the relationship with  him  of  more  than  five
    years from 2009 and this had not been  disputed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

21. Looking at the history, she stated that she had been given a  residence
    permit as a Tier 1 migrant on 9th September 2009 valid until  September
    2012 which was valid at the time that she had made her application as a
    family member of an EEA national.  She confirmed  that  whilst  it  had
    been refused, the First-tier Tribunal had allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that she was in a durable relationship for  at  least  two  years
    prior to the application.  As the Secretary of State had  examined  her
    individual circumstances, it  must  have  been  acknowledged  that  the
    relationship had been in existence and they had  been  living  together
    since 2009 thus the Secretary of State had provided a residence card in
    May 2012.

22. She submitted that an EEA family member did not have  to  apply  for  a
    residence card after the duration of five years for permanent residence
    and that they only needed to show that they had been a family member of
    an EEA national exercising their treaty rights for a continuous  period
    of five years to apply for permanent residence.  As  the  Secretary  of
    State had acknowledged that the Respondent was in a continuous  durable
    relationship since 2009,  she  had  already  demonstrated  five  years'
    residence in accordance with the Regulations.

23. Mr Bates had not been sent a copy of the Rule 24 response and  was  not
    aware of its existence.  He was therefore given time  to  read  it  and
    consider it.  It became apparent to him that the  issue  raised  within
    the grounds and relied upon by Mrs Akintola by way of a response to the
    Secretary of State's grounds were that because it had been accepted  by
    the Secretary of State that they had been living together  since  April
    2009 that the period of five years had accrued from that time and  that
    between 2009 until the date of the hearing, she had accrued more than a
    five year period.  Mr Bates had been taken by surprise by that argument
    and sought to have some time  to  consider  if  there  were  any  legal
    authorities relevant to that issue.  I therefore gave directions to the
    parties that the Secretary of State will have seven days to provide any
    further  submissions  in  writing  which  should  be  served  upon  the
    Appellant.  Thereafter any reply should be received  within  a  further
    seven days  after  that  time  and  thereafter  I  would  consider  any
    submissions made by each of the parties that had been made in writing.

24. I observe that since I made those directions on 13th  October  2016  no
    further submissions have been made by either party and therefore  as  I
    indicated at the hearing after the expiry of the time limits given  for
    the directions, I would consider the submissions as they stand.

25. Having considered the submissions of each of the parties I am satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law and that  the  decision
    made should be set aside.  I have set out earlier in the  determination
    the reasons given by the judge for allowing the appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations as set out at paragraph 8. Those  reasons  in  my  judgment
    fail to  take  into  account  the  content  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  Whilst it was open to the judge to find  that  their
    relationship had been subsisting for at least five years as at the date
    of the application that was not the test that  the  judge  should  have
    applied in reaching a conclusion on  the  relevant  issue.   Under  the
    Regulations the appellant was required  to  demonstrate  that  she  had
    resided with the EEA national, the appellant's spouse,  "in  accordance
    with the Regulations for a continuous period of five years".  Following
    the successful appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary  of
    State recognised her status by issuing her with an EEA  residence  card
    on 31st May 2012.  Thus, as the Secretary  of  State  submits,  as  her
    right of residence was not recognised until the issue of that residence
    card on 31st May 2012, she has only been residing in the United Kingdom
    "in accordance with the Regulations" from  that  date.   Thus  for  the
    appellant to succeed she would be required to demonstrate  five  years'
    residence in line with those Regulations and as set out in the decision
    letter that period will not be reached until 31st May 2017.

26. As set out in the Regulations once a residence card is issued, the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 place extended family members in the same position  as
    "family members" ("treated  as  family  members")  provided  that  they
    continue to satisfy the conditions in Regulation 8  which  resulted  in
    their being  extended  family  members  and  that  their  documentation
    remains valid and has not been revoked.  Regulation 7 lists  those  who
    are  to  be  treated  as  family  members  for  the  purposes  of   the
    Regulations, including in Regulation 7(3):

         "(3) ... A person who is an extended family  member  and  has  been
             issued with an EEA family permit, a registration  certificate,
             or a residence card should be treated as a  family  member  of
             the relevant EEA national for  as  long  as  he  continues  to
             satisfy the conditions in Regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5)  in
             relation to that EEA national and the permit,  certificate  or
             card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked."

    Thereafter, the extended family member has the same right to  admission
    and residence under the EEA Regulations 2006 as does a "family member".

27. Consequently, as her right of residence was not recognised until  being
    issued with a residence card under Regulation 17(4) and  that  was  not
    issued until 31st May 2012, the appellant has only been residing in the
    United Kingdom "in accordance with the Regulations" from that date.

28. Thus the judge erred in law in  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  2006
    Regulations by finding that she was entitled to a  permanent  residence
    card as a confirmation of her right to reside in the United Kingdom.  I
    therefore set aside that decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   I  re-
    make the decision dismissing the appeal.

29. As Mr Bates pointed out at the hearing, that the appellant will be able
    to make a further application before the expiry of her residence permit
    on 31st May 2017.  The findings of fact that were made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge which have not been challenged in  the  grounds  of
    the Secretary of State will be before the Secretary of State and  taken
    account of in any further application.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error on a point of  law;  the  decision  is
set aside.  The decision is remade as follows.  The  appellant's  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

