
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/02304/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 February 2020                          |On 10 March 2020                    |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between


|           |MR SAHEED OLAWUNMI OGUNREMI                       |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT    |Respondent   |


Representation:


For the Appellant:     Mr R Obiakor, of Moorehouse Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cockrill (hereafter  the  "judge")  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated 5 September 2019  following  a  hearing  on  8  July  2019,
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a national of Nigeria born on 13
    February 1972, against the decision of the respondent of 18 April  2019
    for a residence card on the basis that he was the former family  member
    of Ms Magdalena Lakatosova, an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in
    the United Kingdom. Ms Lakatosova is a Slovakian national.

 2. I shall refer to Ms Lakatosova as EEA national 1.

 3. The  only  reason  given  in  the  decision  letter  for  refusing  the
    appellant's application was that the  respondent  considered  that  the
    appellant was not validly married to EEA national 1. In  reaching  this
    decision, the respondent relied upon a previous decision  letter  which
    stated that the decision-maker had seen evidence that  EEA  national  1
    was married to another person when she entered into the  marriage  with
    the appellant on 5 October 2009. The decision-maker concluded that this
    other lady and EEA national 1 were one and the same person.

 4. The only evidence that the judge had before her on the question whether
    this other lady and EEA national 1 were one and the same person  was  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R Caswell  promulgated  on
    10 October 2016. This decision concerned an appeal by a Mr  Ezeh  Frank
    Onwuegbusi who had applied for a residence card as the family member of
    Ms Magdalena Lakatsovo.

 5. As will be observed, the  spelling  of  the  person  mentioned  in  the
    decision of Judge Caswell is slightly different. I shall refer  to  the
    person mentioned in Judge Caswell's decision as EEA national 2.

 6. In the decision letter, the  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant
    satisfied all the  remaining  requirements  for  a  retained  right  of
    residence.

 7. At the hearing before me,  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law.

 8. I agree, for the following reasons:

      i)    There was simply no positive evidence at all  before  the  judge
        that EEA national 1 and EEA  national  2  were  one  and  the  same
        person.  The  judge  drew  this  inference  from  Judge   Caswell's
        decision.

      ii)   The surname of EEA national 2 in Judge  Caswell's  decision  was
        spelt slightly different from the surname of EEA national 1.  Judge
        Caswell's decision did  not  mention  the  date  of  birth  of  EEA
        national 2.

      iii)  There was no evidence of the prevalence of the name:  "Magdalena
        Lakatosova" or the name "Magdalena Lakatsovo" in Slovakia or  other
        relevant country.

 9. I am therefore satisfied that there was no  evidential  basis  for  the
    judge's finding that EEA national 1 and EEA national 2 were one and the
    same person. The judge therefore erred in law for this reason.

10. In addition, the burden of proof was upon the respondent to  establish,
    on the standard of the balance of probabilities, that  the  appellant's
    marriage was void, on the basis of the principle that he who alleges  a
    fact must prove it. It was not for  the  appellant  to  show  that  his
    marriage was valid. The judge plainly reversed the burden of proof when
    he said:

      i)    at para 31, "what the appellant has not done ...  is  really  to
        clear up this very serious challenge that has been  raised  by  the
        respondent about the lawfulness of his marriage"; and

      ii)   at para 32, "it has not been  shown  that  [the  appellant]  was
        lawfully married to [EEA national 1] ..."

11. In the absence of any positive evidence to establish that EEA  national
    1 and EEA national 2 were one and the same person, the only  conclusion
    that the judge could have reached was

12.  that the respondent had not discharged the burden of proof upon her to
    show that the appellant's marriage was void.

13. Ms Everett therefore agreed that  the  judge's  decision  must  be  set
    aside. I agree. I therefore set it aside.

14. I proceeded to re-make the decision on the appellant's appeal. There is
    still no positive evidence to show that EEA national 1 and EEA national
    2 are one and the same person.  Accordingly,  the  respondent  has  not
    established that the appellant's marriage was void. The respondent  had
    accepted in the decision letter that all the remaining requirements for
    a retained right of residence were satisfied.

15. Accordingly, Ms Everett agreed that she could not persuade  me  not  to
    allow the appeal.

16. I allow the appellant's appeal for the reasons given at para 14 above.

      Decision

    The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law requiring it to be set aside.  The  decision  was
    set aside in its entirety.

      I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


[pic]
Signed                            Date: 28 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
