
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/02291/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th September 2017                 |On 12th September 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              NATALIIA KRYVENKO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bradshaw instructed by LS Legal solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant's application for an EEA permit under retained rights of
      residence as the former spouse of an EEA national was refused  by  the
      respondent on 17th February 2017 on the basis that the  appellant  had
      failed to provide adequate evidence that the appellant's former spouse
      had been exercising Treaty Rights at the date of divorce or  that  she
      was exercising Treaty Rights from the date of divorce.  The  appellant
      appealed the decision.


   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Tully considered the appeal  on  the  papers
      and found

          i) The appellant's former spouse was exercising Treaty Rights  on
             the date of the divorce and  she  therefore  meets  regulation
             10(5)(b).
         ii) Although finely balanced, the appellant was  employed  at  the
             date of her divorce.


        The First-tier Tribunal judge therefore allowed the appeal.


   3. Permission to appeal was sought on the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  judge  had  applied  the  wrong  test  in  connection   with
      regulation 10(6) because the evidence before the judge  (covering  the
      period May to July 2016 and a contract from  an  unobtainable  company
      dated 31st January 2017) falls short of the requirement  to  show  the
      appellant has been a worker, self-employed  or  self-sufficient  since
      the date of divorce. The respondent submitted that the finding by  the
      judge that she had been employed at the date of divorce was the  wrong
      test and constitutes an error  of  law.  The  SSHD  did  not  seek  to
      challenge the finding of the judge that the  former  spouse  had  been
      exercising Treaty Rights at the date of divorce.


        Error of law

   4. Payslips for  February  and  March  2017,  a  bank  statement  showing
      corresponding entries, her P60 for the year ended 5ht April 2017  were
      included in the bundle. There was no submission by  the  SSHD  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal that these documents could not be relied  upon  to
      support Ms Kryvenko's submission that she had been  exercising  treaty
      Rights since her divorce.


   5. Although the First-tier Tribunal judge found that she  was  exercising
      Treaty Rights at the date of the divorce and did not  make  a  finding
      that she had continued to exercise Treaty  Rights,  it  is  plain,  as
      acknowledged by Mr McVeety, that there was evidence before  the  judge
      that supported the submission that  she  met  regulation10(6)[1];  the
      failure of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to  make  that  specific
      finding, although an  error,  is  not  material  given  that  had  she
      expressed herself correctly the ultimate conclusion  would  have  been
      the same, namely that the Ms Kryvenko meets the  requirements  of  the
      Regulations for the issue of  a  residence  permit  on  the  basis  of
      retained rights of residence


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  stands,  namely  the
appeal is allowed.

[pic]
                                    Date 6th September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] It is more than possible that the drafter of the grounds of appeal to
the Upper Tribunal did not have all the documents before him and thus was
not aware that there was evidence before the judge and that the judge
appeared to have expressed herself incorrectly rather than making a
fundamental material error of law.

