
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
EA/03166/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided on the papers                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 August 2017                         |  On 8 August 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               MR ZEESHAN ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by a national of Pakistan who applied for a residence
    permit as the extended family member of the EEA national  (Swiss)  wife
    of his sponsor who is said to be his uncle. The Appellant claims to  be
    able to demonstrate a prior and current dependency on his uncle and the
    EEA national wife.  The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 17 November 2015 refusing to issue him with a  residence
    card.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas in a
    decision promulgated on 24 November 2016 ("the Decision").

 2. Neither the Appellant nor the Respondent attended or  were  represented
    at the hearing.  The Judge found, based  on  the  documentary  evidence
    before him that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  make  out  his  case.
    Unfortunately,  the  Judge  failed  to  recognise  that   he   had   no
    jurisdiction to decide the appeal following the  case  of  Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) UKUT 00411 (IAC).   The  Appellant's  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal do not address this issue.

 3. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy  by
    a decision sent on 30  May  2017.   She  too  failed  to  consider  the
    jurisdiction issue following Sala.

 4. On application to this Tribunal, I granted permission on the basis that
    the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision and this amounts  to
    an arguable error of law.  If a Judge  lacks  jurisdiction  to  make  a
    decision, then the decision is wrong in law and should not  be  allowed
    to stand.  Accordingly, I granted permission by decision dated  4  July
    2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-

         "[3] In relation to the challenge to the substance of the Decision,
         this is an appeal which is affected by the Upper Tribunal  decision
         in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).   In  that
         case, the Upper Tribunal decided that there is no right  of  appeal
         in extended family member cases such as this.  As such, there is an
         arguable error  of  law  disclosed  by  the  Decision  because  the
         Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear and decide this  appeal.   The
         Judge does not refer to Sala which had been  promulgated  prior  to
         the Decision.  The refusal of permission to appeal similarly  fails
         to recognise the relevance of that decision in this case.  Although
         the First-tier Tribunal (and indeed the Upper Tribunal) did not and
         does not have jurisdiction to substantively decide the  appeal,  it
         retains jurisdiction to decide whether the appeal is a  valid  one.
         Since, as Sala decides, there is no valid appeal in cases  such  as
         this, I grant permission on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal
         did not have jurisdiction to make the Decision.  This amounts to an
         arguable error of law although not for the reasons  argued  in  the
         grounds."

    I then gave directions as follows:-

         "Unless either party files and serves objections in writing  to  be
         received within 14 days from the date when this decision is sent, I
         propose to find an error of law in the Decision on the  basis  that
         the Judge lacked jurisdiction to make it.  I then  propose  to  set
         aside the Decision and re-make it dismissing the appeal."

 5. The Appellant has submitted written  objections  dated  18  July  2017.
    Those in large part repeat the original grounds of appeal.  In relation
    to Sala, the objections note at [14] that the  Tribunal  in  that  case
    questioned whether a person in the Appellant's situation has a right of
    appeal (in fact the Tribunal determined that he did not)  and  at  [15]
    pointed out that if there is no right  of  appeal,  then  an  Appellant
    should be able to judicially review the decision which is  correct  but
    has no bearing on the correctness of Sala.  The  Appellant  appears  to
    recognise at [30] and [32] of the objections that both Judge Lucas  and
    Judge Foudy made an error of law by failing to  have  regard  to  Sala.
    However, inexplicably the objections suggest that I should re-determine
    the appeal without explaining how I have the  jurisdiction  to  do  so.
    The objections make no submission that Sala is wrongly decided.   Based
    on the correctness of that decision, therefore, I have no  jurisdiction
    to decide the substance of the appeal.

 6. The Respondent has also filed a Rule 24 reply agreeing with the  course
    which I proposed based on the lack of jurisdiction following Sala.

 7. As indicated in my grant of permission, the  Judge  made  the  Decision
    after the decision in Sala was promulgated.     The  decision  in  that
    case was promulgated on 19 August 2016.  I do not need to go  into  the
    substance of that decision in detail because neither  party  challenges
    the decision on the basis that it was wrongly decided.  In  short,  the
    Upper  Tribunal  (Mr  CMG  Ockelton,  Vice  President  and  UTJ  Grubb)
    concluded that in a case such as this involving the refusal to issue  a
    first residence permit to an extended family member there is  no  right
    of appeal against that refusal.  In that case, the Tribunal  found  for
    that reason that there was an error of law because there was  no  right
    of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The  Tribunal  therefore  set
    aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  substituted  its  own
    decision finding that there was no valid appeal.

 8. As I indicate, neither party challenges the correctness of the decision
    in Sala in this appeal.  For the same reasons as given in Sala, I  find
    that the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision.   I  therefore
    set aside the Decision for that reason.  Since there  is  no  right  of
    appeal to the Tribunal, I have no jurisdiction to decide the appeal.  I
    therefore substitute my own decision finding that there was and  is  no
    valid appeal.   I make it clear that the only basis  for  my  grant  of
    permission  and  for  setting  aside  the  Decision  is  the  lack   of
    jurisdiction.  I have reached no view on  the  merits  of  the  grounds
    relating to the substance of the appeal.  I do note though that if  the
    Appellant wishes the  Respondent  to  consider  his  entitlement  to  a
    residence permit based on further documentation submitted only  in  the
    course of the appeal, it is of course open to him  to  make  a  further
    application for a residence permit.


Decision
The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas discloses an  error  of  law
because he made the decision when he had no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
appeal as the appeal was not valid.  I therefore set aside the  decision  of
First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  promulgated  on  24  November  2016  and
substitute a decision that there was and is no valid appeal in this case.



Signed[pic]                         Dated:  7 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith



