

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
EA/03841/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 July 2017                            |On 5 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                 DINA OWUSU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Moksud, International Immigration Advice
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

       1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  She made an  application  on
          13 August 2015 for an EEA residence card,  on  the  basis  of  her
          marriage to  an  EEA  national.   The  appellant  claims  to  have
          entered into a marriage by proxy in Ghana on  7  May  2011.   This
          application was refused by the respondent in a  detailed  decision
          letter dated  1  December  2015.   The  respondent  recounted  the
          relevant chronology  and  noted  that  similar  applications  were
          refused in 2013 and 2014.  The respondent then concluded that  the
          instant  application  failed  because   the   marriage   was   not
          contracted in accordance with the law  and  the  evidence  of  the
          claimed relationship was unsatisfactory.  A home visit  found  the
          appellant and her spouse were not resident on 7 November 2015.


       2. After hearing evidence from the  appellant  and  her  spouse,  the
          First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   in   a
          decision dated 1  November  2016.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was
          satisfied that the marriage was valid  according  to  the  law  of
          Ghana but in accordance with Kareem (Proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)
          [2014] UKUT 00024 found that the marriage was  not  recognised  in
          the law of the Netherlands.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make
          any findings regarding the genuineness of the relationship.


       3. In a decision dated 26 April 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly
          granted permission to appeal in light of Awuku v SSHD [2017]  EWCA
          Civ 178.  In a rule 24 notice dated 11  May  2017  the  respondent
          indicated that she did not oppose the appeal and  that  it  should
          be redetermined.

       4. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  McVeety  accepted  the  following
          matters:

              i) The First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to  accept  that  the
                 marriage was valid in accordance with the law of Ghana;
             ii) There was  no  requirement  to  consider  the  law  in  the
                 Netherlands for the reasons outlined in Awuku;
            iii) At the hearing the appellant and her spouse  gave  evidence
                 regarding their marriage and this evidence was not disputed
                 by the respondent's representative;
             iv) There had never been any suggestion that the marriage was a
                 sham and it was now  accepted  that  the  relationship  and
                 marriage are genuine;
              v) It follows that the appeal  must  be  allowed  because  the
                 appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  to  be  granted  a
                 residence card.


       5. As Mr McVeety did not dispute that the relevant  requirements  are
          met and the appellant has provided evidence that is  now  accepted
          to establish that she is validly married as claimed and  is  in  a
          genuine relationship, it follows that the appeal must be allowed.



       6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

       7. I have remade the decision and allow  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
          Regulations 2006 (as amended).



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
5 July 2017
