

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/03152/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|on 11 May 2017                         |        on 16 May 2017              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                SHERAZ AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Bates - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Miss Kular of SH & Co Solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Ghani ('the  Judge')  promulgated  on  26
        October 2016.



Background


     2. Mr Ahmed is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2  February  1982.  On  2
        July 2015, he applied for a Residence Card  as  confirmation  of  a
        right to reside in the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
        national exercising treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.  On  16
        November  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  issue  the
        Residence Card for the following reasons:


        You have applied for a Residence Card as  a  person  who  is  in  a
        durable relationship with an EEA  national.  Your  application  has
        been considered in accordance with Regulation 8 of the  Immigration
        (EEA) Regulations 2006 but you have failed to prove that you are in
        a durable relationship with an EEA national.


     3. The Judge considered the evidence and noted that Mr Ahmed  and  his
        partner had married in an Islamic ceremony on 11 December 2014  and
        have lived together in a relationship akin to marriage. At [21] the
        Judge found that the evidence relied upon in support of  the  claim
        led to a finding that "I find that this is  not  just  evidence  of
        cohabitation but in fact a subsisting relationship".
     4. At [22] the Judge found:


        I find both the Appellant and the witness credible witnesses.  They
        gave straightforward answers to the questions put to  them.  I  did
        not find them to have rehearsed  their  evidence  in  this  manner.
        There is photographic evidence of their relationship. The interview
        as  a  whole  must  be  considered  and  I  find   that   the   few
        inconsistencies, to  which  the  Respondent  has  alluded,  do  not
        undermine in any realistic sense the genuineness and subsistence of
        their relationship. I therefore find that the Appellant  does  meet
        the requirements of relevant 2006 Regulations.


     5. At [23] the Judge  states  "I  allow  the  appeal  under  the  2006
        Regulations."
     6. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the basis that an Islamic marriage is not  accepted  in
        the United Kingdom as a valid  legal  ceremony,  meaning  that  the
        parties are therefore not legally  married.  The  Judge  found  the
        parties were in a durable relationship and it was  noted  that  the
        Secretary of State was not previously satisfied  Mr  Ahmed  was  an
        Extended Family Member and so had not proceeded to the second stage
        of deciding whether to exercise discretion in Mr Ahmed's favour  by
        granting a Residence Card. The judge granting permission to  appeal
        decided it was arguable that the Judge was constrained to  allowing
        the appeal on the basis that the respondent's decision was  not  in
        accordance with the law, only.




Error of law


     7. There is no challenge to the factual findings  made  regarding  the
        relationship between Mr Ahmed  and  his  partner.  They  are  in  a
        durable relationship. It is not disputed  the  partner  is  an  EEA
        national exercising treaty rights in United Kingdom.  As  they  are
        not married Mr Ahmed is therefore the Extended Family Member of the
        EEA national.
     8. It is settled law that there are two elements to an appeal of  this
        nature, the first being whether the individual concerned  satisfies
        the definition of an Extended Family Member and  secondly  whether,
        having exercised discretion, the Secretary of  State  considers  it
        appropriate to grant the Residence Card. This is the  second  stage
        referred to in the grant of permission.
     9. The Judge did not assist the decision by failing to  specify  which
        Regulation Mr Ahmed met, either at [22]  or  [23].  Had  the  Judge
        specified it was Regulation 8 this may have focused the  mind  upon
        the second aspect in relation to which appropriate  findings  would
        need to be made or, as suggested by the Secretary of State, for the
        matter to be returned to the decision maker  for  the  exercise  of
        discretion to be considered.
    10. There is however a more  fundamental  error  in  relation  to  this
        decision. The date of the hearing at Sheldon Court in Birmingham is
        8 August 2016. The date the decision  was  promulgated  is  the  26
        October 2016. On 19 September 2016, the  Upper  Tribunal  published
        its decision in Sala (EFMs: Right  of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  00411
        (IAC) in which it was found  that  there  is  no  right  of  appeal
        against a refusal of a Residence Card to an Extended Family Member.
    11. A judgment 'speaks' from the date it is handed down or promulgated.
        Therefore, on the 26 October 2016 the Judge should have been  aware
        of the Upper Tribunal decision and either reconvened the hearing to
        receive further submissions or recognised there was no jurisdiction
        to consider the merits of the appeal.
    12. In any event, lack of jurisdiction is a matter that would have been
        equally  applicable  on  8  August  2016  as  there  had  been   no
        intervening change in the provisions relating  to  Extended  Family
        Members between this date and the publication of Sala.
    13. We find the Judge erred in law to the extent that the  decision  is
        set aside.
    14. We cannot go on to remake the decision as in light of  the  finding
        in Sala we have no jurisdiction to do so. This  Upper  Tribunal  is
        entitled to raise the jurisdictional  point  even  if  it  was  not
        raised before the First-tier Tribunal - Virk v Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 652 refers.
    15. The correct avenue of challenge where no statutory right of  appeal
        exists is by way of Judicial Review.


Decision

    16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside
        the decision of the original Judge.
    17. We are unable to remake the decision for want of jurisdiction.


   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          We make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure           (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11th of May 2017










