
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03527/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                           mr Ifeanyi Pius Ezeobi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Ikegwuruka (Almond Legals)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 28 November 1975.  On  29
    October 2017 he applied for a residence card as the spouse of  [SS],  a
    citizen of Bulgaria.  The application was refused by the respondent  on
    27 April 2018.  The parties were married by proxy on 27 March  2017  in
    Nigeria but the respondent was not satisfied  that  the  uncle  of  the
    sponsor had attended the wedding or was resident in Nigeria as claimed.
     It was also the respondent's position that it was  not  credible  that
    the appellant happened by chance to meet a sponsor whose uncle happened
    to live in  Nigeria.   The  Secretary  of  State  also  considered  the
    appellant's visit visa applications on 9 November 2010 and  3  December
    2010.  The applications were both for a five day  holiday.   The  first
    application  was  refused  as  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was genuinely seeking entry as  a  visitor
    for a limited period as claimed and while the  second  application  was
    granted, the visa issued was valid from 6 December 2010 to 6 June 2011.
     The appellant had said he had  entered  on  1 January  2011  and  had
    remained in the UK ever  since.   This  impacted  on  his  credibility.
    Following abortive attempts to  arrange  an  interview  the  respondent
    decided to conduct a home visit but on  arrival  it  was  said  by  the
    person who answered the door that the appellant did not reside  at  the
    address.

2.   The respondent noted that the evidence provided  did  not  include  any
    jointly named evidence and the address was simply used as a postal drop
    in order  to  support  the  application  for  a  residence  card.   The
    respondent stated:

         "Taking into account of the points made above regarding your  proxy
         marriage, we do not accept that your  proxy  marriage  was  validly
         registered.  Your application is therefore refused  with  reference
         to Regulation 7(1)(a)."

    It was also considered that the appellant had attempted to  enter  into
    the proxy marriage for the  sole  purpose  of  gaining  an  immigration
    advantage and was a  marriage  of  convenience.   In  relation  to  the
    appellant's sponsor exercising treaty rights, the respondent noted that
    the wage slips relied upon covered a period from January to  July  2017
    and in a telephone call the sponsor's employers stated that the sponsor
    had left their employment a few days  after  the  application  for  the
    residence card had been submitted.  Accordingly it was not possible  to
    confirm that the sponsor was a qualified person.

3.   The First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  his
    wife.  She referred in paragraph 9 of her  decision  to  Cudjoe  (Proxy
    marriages: burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 180 (IAC).  In relation to  the
    issue of whether the appellant's marriage was one  of  convenience  she
    reminded herself of the relevant  authorities,  including  Rosa  [2016]
    EWCA Civ and Agho v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ 1198.  The legal
    burden was on the respondent to prove that an otherwise valid  marriage
    was a marriage of convenience, but if evidence was adduced  capable  of
    pointing to the conclusion that the marriage was one of convenience the
    evidential burden  shifted  to  the  applicant.   The  burden  was  not
    discharged merely by  showing  reasonable  suspicion.   The  evidential
    burden might shift to the applicant by proof of  facts  that  justified
    the inference that the marriage was not genuine.

4.   The judge gave her reasons for her findings in relation  to  the  proxy
    marriage as follows:

         "11. Although in Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  178  the  Court  of
             Appeal  found  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  erred  in  its
             reference to the law of  the  EU  member  state  in  order  to
             determine the marital status of a spouse it did not  undermine
             the Upper Tribunal's findings about  the  mechanics  of  proxy
             marriage in Nigeria.


         12.  In this appeal the respondent does not rely on an  absence  of
             documentation  but  casts  doubt  on  the  validity  of  those
             submitted because of an absence  of  evidence  to  corroborate
             that the sponsor's uncle, Plamen Penev, is resident in Nigeria
             as the documents purport. I find that the reasons for  refusal
             letter clearly sets out the evidence that the respondent would
             expect to see to satisfy him in  this  regard  (and  which  he
             would have expected to have been provided in Nigeria). Despite
             this, and the fact that the appellant is legally represented I
             find that he has failed to provide  any  documentary  evidence
             that Mr Penev is resident in Nigeria and neither  he  nor  the
             sponsor were able to explain this nor provide an  address  for
             Mr Plenev or why he is living there.


         13.  I also find that  my  overall  assessment  of  the  witnesses'
             credibility is relevant to my consideration of the documentary
             evidence on which they rely (AHMED (Documents  unreliable  and
             forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 00439)  and  for  the  reasons
             that I will set out below I have very significant concerns  in
             this regard."

5.   Accordingly the judge was not satisfied that  the  proxy  marriage  was
    valid and the appellant was not a family member under Regulation  7  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

6.   In relation to the issue of whether the appellant's  marriage  was  one
    of convenience, the judge said that even if she had been wrong  in  her
    assessment of the proxy marriage she would nevertheless have  concluded
    that the marriage was one of convenience as defined in the Regulations.
     The judge made the following findings:

         "16. The legal burden of proof initially falls  on  the  respondent
             and in this matter his initial doubts regarding  the  marriage
             were aroused by concerns pertaining to  the  validity  of  the
             proxy marriage (set out above), the lack of  credibility  that
             the appellant happened to meet an  EEA  national  whose  uncle
             lived in Nigeria, the appellant's immigration history (he  has
             overstayed since January  2011)  and  a  lack  of  documentary
             evidence regarding cohabitation such as a tenancy agreement or
             joint correspondence (which have not, I find, been  remedied).
             Further, although the respondent accepts the reasons that  the
             couple failed to attend two marriage interviews  his  concerns
             led him to carry out a home visit  at  which  the  person  who
             answered the door on 24 April 2018 claimed not to know  either
             the appellant or the sponsor. I  find  that  the  totality  of
             these concerns suffice to persuade me that the respondent  has
             discharged the legal burden of proof that  falls  on  him  and
             that the evidential burden has shifted to the appellant.






         17.  The oral evidence of the appellant and  the  sponsor  is  that
             their current address, Flat 3, 809 Romford Road, is  the  only
             address at which they have  cohabited.  I  find  however  that
             whilst the appellant said  that  the  couple  moved  into  the
             property at the same time,  had  not  previously  visited  one
             another's homes  and  that  they  live  with  their  landlord,
             William, the sponsor said that  the  property  was  where  the
             appellant had been living, that she has visited ten to fifteen
             times prior to moving in and that their landlord does not live
             with them, although two other people who she does not know do.
             I find that these are significant,  unexplained  discrepancies
             on simple issues which undermine the couple's credibility.


         18.  I also find very significant the sponsor's evidence  that  the
             appellant's parents and brother live in Nigeria  and  that  he
             has  regular  contact  with  them.  In  contrast  however  the
             appellant's evidence is that his mother is dead. I  find  that
             the sponsor was unable to  explain  this  inconsistency  which
             undermines, in my view, the reliability of  the  witnesses.  I
             also find that whilst the appellant said that the sponsor  was
             in contact with her father and brother in Bulgaria  (and  that
             he had once said "hi" to the sponsor's father) her evidence is
             that she does not have any contact with her  father  and  does
             not know where he is.


         19.  I also find that in relation to  cohabitation  the  respondent
             has placed weight on a lack of documentary evidence which  has
             not been remedied  by  the  appellant;  there  is  no  tenancy
             agreement, letter from the landlord, evidence of rent paid  or
             joint correspondent. There is however evidence of the  sponsor
             a different address to Flat 3 809 Romford  Road  in  her  most
             recent  invoices  for  work  (October-November  2018)  of   64
             Mottisfont Road. This is  apparently  the  sponsor's  cousin's
             address although I find that she was wholly unable to  explain
             her  reason  for  using  it  and  that  this   casts   further
             significant doubt on the couple's claim to cohabit.


         20.  Although Dr Ikegwuruka asked me to balance the inconsistencies
             against what  he  submitted  were  the  consistencies  in  the
             evidence (such as how much the rent was, how it was  paid  and
             by whom) I  find  that  the  areas  in  which  the  discrepant
             evidence has arisen is so significant, and without  reasonable
             explanation that, taken  alongside  the  lack  of  documentary
             evidence,  my  concerns  about  the  proxy  marriage  and  the
             appellant's immigration history I am lead to conclude that  on
             the balance of probabilities the marriage  is  a  marriage  of
             convenience. In reaching this conclusion  I  have  not  placed
             weight on the visit conducted by immigration officials because
             I accept Dr Ikegwuruka's submission that  the  respondent  has
             failed to provide a copy of any contemporaneous note and/or  a
             witness  statement  from  one  of  the  visiting   Immigration
             Officers to corroborate the  assertions  in  the  reasons  for
             refusal letter."

7.   Finally the judge dealt with the question of whether the sponsor was  a
    qualified person, noting the limited documentary evidence  before  her.
    Given the significant concerns that she had regarding  the  credibility
    of the witnesses and the documents on which they had sought to rely she
    was not satisfied that the sponsor was a qualified person.

8.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

9.   There was an application for permission  to  appeal.   The  application
    was refused by the First-tier Tribunal.  The  application  was  renewed
    and it was said that the main  issue  was  whether  the  judge  or  the
    respondent could validly challenge the process leading to the  issuance
    of a marriage  certificate  in  another  jurisdiction  by  a  competent
    authority without recourse to that authority.  The judge had  erred  in
    challenging the competence of a  competent  authority.   Reference  was
    made to CB (Validity of marriage: proxy marriage) Brazil  [2008]  UKAIT
    00080.

10.  Issue was also taken with the findings by the judge that  the  marriage
    was one of convenience.  It  was  said  that  the  respondent  had  not
    discharged the initial burden of  proof -  the  judge  had  relied  on
    speculations or allegations - and cohabitation was not  a  requirement
    for a valid marriage under EU law.  There was ample evidence  that  the
    sponsor was a qualified person.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  doubt  the
    validity of the appellant's marriage under Nigerian law given  that  it
    was issued by the competent Nigerian authority.

12.  At the hearing Dr Ikegwuruka  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submitted that the process by which the competent authority had reached
    its conclusion  could  not  be  challenged.   It  was  clear  that  the
    procedure was valid.  The judge had accepted the  submission  that  the
    respondent had failed  to  provide  proper  corroborative  evidence  to
    justify the assertions in the refusal letter about  the  visit  to  the
    claimed matrimonial home.  There was no requirement in EU law that  the
    couple should reside together.  The respondent had not  discharged  the
    burden of showing that the appellant's marriage was one of convenience.
     There were sufficient invoices relied upon to show  that  the  sponsor
    was in bona fide employment.

13.  Mr Tarlow relied on the points made in the decision where it  was  made
    clear that proxy marriages were accepted if the marriage is  recognised
    as valid in the country in which it took place  and  the  marriage  was
    performed and registered so that it satisfied the laws of  the  country
    in which it took place.  The Secretary of State had given  reasons  for
    concluding as he had done on page 3 of the decision.   The  points  had
    been dealt with properly  at  paragraphs  11  and  12  of  the  judge's
    decision.  Even if the marriage certificate was valid, the marriage was
    one of convenience for the reasons found by the  First-tier  Judge  and
    set out in the respondent's decision.  The decision of  the  First-tier
    Judge should stand.

14.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

15.  I have carefully considered the points made on both sides.   The  judge
    noted that the appellant, although  he  was  legally  represented,  had
    failed to deal with the question raised by the Secretary  of  State  in
    the decision concerning the sponsor's uncle.  It  was  argued  that  if
    there was some fraud involved then the question should be sent back  to
    the competent authority.

16.  This is not a case in which the certificate itself is alleged  to  have
    been fraudulently obtained - it is  therefore  on  its  face  a  valid
    certificate - but the procedures were tainted by fraud and there was no
    response when this matter was raised by the Secretary  of  State.   The
    appellant had the opportunity to explain matters and chose  not  to  do
    so.  It is not clear what it would achieve to refer matters back to the
    competent authority where the Secretary  of  State  had  raised  proper
    concerns which had not been answered.  However, as Mr Tarlow submits in
    the alternative, the respondent's decision needs to be read as a  whole
    and the respondent was entitled to conclude for the reasons given  that
    the marriage was one of convenience.

17.  It was open to the judge to conclude as she did on  the  issue  of  the
    proxy marriage but in any event to find that the marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.  I do not consider the issue  of  the  uncle  tainted  the
    findings as suggested by the Upper Tribunal when  granting  permission.
    I find that the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience was reasonably open to her for the reasons she gives.   Her
    approach was fair and for example she did not place weight on the visit
    conducted by the immigration officials as she  explains.  There  is  no
    material error of law in her decision.

18.  The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Judge  shall
    stand.


Anonymity Direction

19.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 25 April 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
