
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03623/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 19 April 2017                    |On 01 June 2017                         |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 SRCRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Manjot Singh Dhami
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar, instructed by M-R Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is brought  by  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department ("SSHD").  I shall  refer  herein  to  Mr
    Dhami as the claimant.

 2. The claimant, a citizen of India born 8 April 1988, entered the  United
    Kingdom on 22 January 2010 as a student.  His  leave  was  subsequently
    extended in the same capacity so as to eventually expire on the 28  May
    2015. On that same date, he applied for an EEA Residence  Card  as  the
    "Dependent family member" of an "EEA national or British citizen", this
    being the claimant's brother-in-law, Maljit Singh. Maljit  Singh  ("the
    EEA sponsor"), who is  both  a  British  national  and  a  national  of
    Republic of Slovakia, married the claimant's sister on 23 January 2008.

 3. The SSHD refused this  application  by  way  of  a  decision  dated  30
    November 2015. In this decision (headed "Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 Regulation  2  with  reference  to  9")  and  in
    combination with a further reasons letter attached thereto,  the  SSHD,
    inter alia:

 i) Observed that the EEA sponsor is a British national;

ii) Concluded that the EEA sponsor had never exercised his EU free movement
    rights;

iii) Concluded, in reliance both on the decision of  the  CJEU  in  McCarthy
    (C434/09) and on regulation 2 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
    ("the 2006 EEA Regulations"), that as a consequence of the finding  set
    out in 3(ii) above the EEA sponsor could not benefit from the "terms of
    the free movement directive"; and,

iv) Found that the requirements of regulation 9 of the 2006 EEA Regulations
    were not met - the claimant not being the EEA sponsor's spouse or civil
    partner.

    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 August 2016 the FtT allowed  the  claimant's  appeal,
    concluding (i) that the SSHD ought to have considered regulation  8  of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations and (ii) that her failure to  do  so  required
    the ''case... [to  be]  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  be
    considered under the appropriate regulation.

    Setting aside of the FtT's Decision

 5. The SSHD appealed to the Upper Tribunal  asserting  that  the  FtT  had
    exceeded its jurisdiction, it being submitted that the FtT had no power
    to remit the matter back to the  SSHD  for  further  consideration  but
    instead was required to determine the appeal for itself.

 6. In an oral decision given on the 1 February 2017 I set aside the  FtT's
    decision for the following reasons.

 7. The grounds of appeal that can be deployed in an EEA case such  as  the
    instant one are set out in Schedule 1  to  the  2006  EEA  Regulations,
    which states:

         "1. The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002  Act  have
         effect in relation to an appeal  under  these  Regulations  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal  as  if  it  were  an  appeal
         against a decision of the Secretary of State under section 82(1) of
         the 2002 Act -

            Section 84(b) (grounds of appeal, as though the sole  permitted
            ground  of  appeal  were  that  the   decision   breaches   the
            appellant's rights under the EU treaties in respect of entry to
            or residence in the United Kingdom ('an EU ground of appeal')".

 8. The words "sole permitted ground of appeal"  plainly  permit  no  other
    ground to be deployed by an appellant before the FtT (in this  context)
    other than an "EU ground of appeal", which is defined  within  Schedule
    1.

 9. The FtT must have  concluded  that  the  SSHD's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, and it was for this reason that the matter was
    remitted back to the SSHD. As is clear from what I say above,  this  is
    not a ground upon which the FtT was permitted to found its decision. It
    was required decide for itself whether the SSHD's decision would breach
    the claimant's rights under the EU Treaties. The FtT did  not  do  that
    and, consequently, its decision was set aside.

    Re-making of the Decision under Appeal

    Preliminary matters

10. The SSHD  initially  took  a  jurisdictional  point  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, asserting that the claimant did not have a  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of 30 November 2015 for the reasons identified  in
    Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411.  This  submission  was,
    correctly in my view, withdrawn at the outset of  the  hearing  on  the
    basis that  the  SSHD  had  made  an  'EEA  Decision',  the  claimant's
    application  having  been   determined   (albeit   incorrectly)   under
    regulation 9 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

    Law

    2006 EEA Regulations

11. It is necessary at this stage to set out briefly the  regulations  that
    are pertinent to a decision in this appeal.  Of most relevance  to  the
    instant appeal is the definition of "EEA national" in regulation  2  of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations.  As originally enacted, the definition of  an
    EEA  national  was:  "a  national  of  an  EEA  state".  However,  this
    definition was twice amended in 2012. First, by the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Amendment   Regulations   2012   [SI   1547/2012]   ('2012    Amendment
    Regulations') which defined an EEA national as "a national  of  an  EEA
    state who is not also a United Kingdom national" and, thereafter, on  8
    November 2012 by the Immigration (EEA) Amendment No. 2 Regulations 2012
    [SI 2560/2012] which defined an EEA national as "a national of  an  EEA
    state who is not also a British national".

12. Regulation 8 of the 2006 EEA Regulations  is  headed  "Extended  Family
    Member".  Regulation 8 reads:

         "(1) In these Regulations 'extended family member' means  a  person
          who is not a family member of an  EEA  national  under  Regulation
          7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in  paragraph
          (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         (2) A person satisfies the  condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
          person is a relative of an  EEA  national,  his  spouse  or  civil
          partner and -

             (a) the person is residing in a country other than the  United
             Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a  member
             of his household...;

             (c) the person satisfied the condition in (a), has joined  the
             EEA national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  continues  to  be
             dependent upon him or to be a member of his household. "

Directive 2004/38/EC

13. Directive 2004/38/EC is commonly known as "the Citizens' Directive". It
    is this Directive which the 2006 EEA  Regulations  transposed  into  UK
    law. Article 3 of the Directive states as follows;


           "1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to
           or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are  a
           national, and to their family members as defined in point  2  of
           Article 2 who accompany or join them.


           2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence
           the persons concerned may have in  their  own  right,  the  host
           Member State shall, in accordance with its national legislation,
           facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:


           (a) any other family members, irrespective of their nationality,
           not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in
           the country from which they have come, are dependants or members
           of the household of the Union citizen having the  primary  right
           of residence, or where serious health grounds  strictly  require
           the personal care of the family members by the Union citizen;


           (b) the partner with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
           relationship, duly attested.


           The host Member State shall undertake an  extensive  examination
           of the personal circumstances and shall justify  any  denial  of
           entry or residence to these people."

    Discussion

14. Mr Gajjar properly conceded  that  the  claimant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the 2006 EEA Regulations. This is  so  because  of  the
    definition of EEA national found in regulation 2  thereof,  which  does
    not include a person, such as the EEA sponsor,  who  also  has  British
    nationality.

15. This concession is, however, not determinative of the appeal before me.
    As identified above, the ground that  may  be  deployed  in  an  appeal
    against an EEA Decision  is  not  directly  related  to  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations, but rather requires an appellant to demonstrate  that  the
    "...decision breaches the appellant's rights under the EU  Treaties  in
    respect of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom".

16. The claimant asserts that the SSHD's decision breaches his rights under
    the Citizens' Directive, and in particular  article  3(2)  thereof.  In
    support of this the claimant submits that:

 i) He was dependent on his EEA sponsor when living in  India,  immediately
    prior to coming to the UK;

ii) He is both dependent on, and a member of  the  household  of,  his  EEA
    sponsor in the UK;

iii) His EEA sponsor is  a  relevant  Union  citizen  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 3(2) of the Citizens'  Directive,  despite  him  also  being  a
    British Citizen.

17. There is dispute between the parties as to whether the EEA sponsor  can
    be treated as a Union citizen under the Citizen's Directive - the  SSHD
    asserting that the same rationale applies to a consideration of article
    3(2) thereof as applies under the 2006 EEA Regulations. It is submitted
    in the alternative that the claimant cannot  demonstrate  that  he  was
    dependent on the EEA sponsor whilst he [the  claimant]  was  living  in
    India.

18. It is prudent for me to consider these  two  issues  in  reverse  order
    because in relation to the  former  the  question  also  arises  as  to
    whether a preliminary reference should be made to the CJEU  for  it  to
    consider the legal issue  in  play.  However,  there  is  no  value  in
    considering whether to make a reference if the factual  matrix  of  the
    case is not such so as to make a reference necessary.

19. Turning then to factual matrix. There is no dispute in this  case  that
    the claimant is either currently dependent on the EEA sponsor, or is  a
    member of the EEA sponsor's household.

20. Focus, therefore,  turns  to  the  position  prior  to  the  claimant's
    departure from India in January 2010.  The  claimant  does  not  assert
    that he was a member of the EEA sponsor's household in India. He  does,
    however, assert that he was dependent on the EEA sponsor whilst he [the
    claimant] was living there.

21. In his witness statement, signed on 3 August 2016, the claimant  states
    that the sponsor sent money to India for his welfare and upkeep, but it
    would not be sent in his name.   Neither  he,  nor  the  sponsor,  kept
    evidence of such remittances.

22. The claimant supplemented his evidence on this  issue  orally,  stating
    that the sponsor would send money to his [the claimant's] father  three
    times per year, and his  father  would  then  pass  monies  on  to  the
    claimant as necessary. The purpose of the monies was  to  pay  for  the
    claimant's education and school/college fees, which were the equivalent
    of approximately �60 per month. His parents did not work, save  for  on
    the land that the family own (approximately one canal in  size)  -  his
    father having given up work prior to 2007. The claimant's brother,  who
    lives in Germany, currently provides financial support for his parents,
    although the claimant is unaware as to how much support is provided.

23. In his statement, also dated 3 August 2016,  the  EEA  sponsor  asserts
    that "he used to send money". There is, however, no  indication  as  to
    the sum of monies sent, how often monies were sent, to whom  they  were
    sent or for what purpose.

24. In oral evidence the EEA sponsor confirmed that he became  a  Slovakian
    national in 2002 and a British national in 2012.  He  further  asserted
    that: (i) he sent money to the claimant's  father  whenever  money  was
    required; (ii) the money was for the claimant, but it was a matter  for
    the claimant's father how the monies were used;  (iii)  the  claimant's
    parents worked their own land which financially provided only  for  the
    expenses of running the household; and,  (iv)  the  claimant's  parents
    "might have been selling something [from the farm] to get some  money".
    Having been asked what the claimant's circumstances would have been had
    money not been sent, the EEA sponsor stated that they would  have  been
    "very difficult because he is the youngest".

25. In an affidavit signed on 21 May 2015 the  claimant's  father  affirmed
    that:

         "... [the EEA sponsor] has been financially assisting me since 2009
         in order to lead my family comfortably. It  is  worthy  to  mention
         here that [the EEA sponsor] has been totally financially  assisting
         me for the study of [the claimant] since  2009  and  even  all  the
         expenses of the study of [the claimant] in the UK... ."

26. The question I must determine is whether the claimant  has  established
    on the balance of probabilities  that  he  was  dependent  on  the  EEA
    sponsor prior to leaving India in January 2010.  In  doing  do  I  must
    consider what is meant by the term 'dependent' in article 3(2).

27. The issue of dependency has recently been considered by CJEU, in  Reyes
    v Migrationsverket 2014/C-423/12, [2014] QB 1140. Although the court in
    Reyes was concerned with the question whether an EU  direct  descendant
    aged 21 or older could be treated as a dependant within the meaning  of
    article 2(2)(c) of the Citizens Directive, I can see no reason why  the
    principles enunciated therein would not apply equally in relation to  a
    consideration under article 3(2) of the Directive.   In  its  judgment,
    the Court concluded:

         "[20]  In that regard, it must be noted that, in order for a direct
         descendant, who is 21 years old or older, of a Union citizen to  be
         regarded as being a 'dependant' of that citizen within the  meaning
         of Article  2(2)(c)  of  Directive  2004/38,  the  existence  of  a
         situation of real dependence must  be  established  (see,  to  that
         effect, Jia, paragraph 42).


         [21]  That dependent status is the result of  a  factual  situation
         characterised by the fact that material  support  for  that  family
         member is provided by the Union citizen who has exercised his right
         of free movement or by  his  spouse  (see,  to  that  effect,  Jia,
         paragraph 35).


         [22]  In order to determine the existence of such  dependence,  the
         host Member State must assess whether, ... a Union citizen, is  not
         in a position to support himself.  The need  for  material  support
         must exist in the State of origin ... or the State whence  he  came
         at the time when he applies to join  that  citizen  (see,  to  that
         effect, Jia paragraph 37)."

28. In Siew Lian Lim v ECO (Manila) [2015] EWCA  Civ  1383,  the  Court  of
    Appeal addressed its mind to the decision in  Reyes,  as  well  as  the
    decisions in Jia (Case C-105) and Maria Pedro v SSWP  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    1358, Elias LJ giving judgment of the Court:

         "[25] In my judgment, this makes it unambiguously clear that it  is
         not enough simply  to  show  that  financial  support  is  in  fact
         provided by the  EU  citizen  to  the  family  member.   There  are
         numerous references in these paragraphs which are  only  consistent
         with a notion that the family member must need  this  support  from
         his or her relatives in order to meet his or her basic needs. ...

         [29]  Receipt  of  support  is  a  necessary  but  not   sufficient
         condition. It is still necessary to determine that a family  member
         is dependent in the sense of being in need of  the  assistance.   I
         accept that the authorities clearly establish that it is irrelevant
         why he or she is dependent, whether because he has given his  money
         away or because he is unwilling to work..." (my emphasis)

29. Turning back to the instant case. On the evidence before  me  I  accept
    that the EEA sponsor provided the claimant's father  with  monies.  The
    only specific evidence relating to the period of time over  which  such
    monies were sent by the EEA sponsor to the claimant's father  is  found
    in the claimant's father's affidavit, in which it is said that the  EEA
    sponsor has been assisting him "since 2009".  The EEA sponsor stated in
    oral evidence that he was sending monies to the claimant's sister  (the
    EEA sponsor's wife) when she lived in India and that she came to the UK
    in 2009. There is no evidence, however, that these monies were for  the
    use of the family  generally,  or  the  claimant  specifically  and  no
    mention is made in this  regard  by  the  claimant's  father.   On  the
    available evidence, I accept that the EEA sponsor was sending monies to
    the claimant's father in 2009 and early 2010 (until the  claimant  came
    to the UK), but not before 2009.

30. I further accept that; (i) The EEA sponsor  sent  the  money  with  the
    intention that it  be  for  the  claimant's  use  (EEA  sponsor's  oral
    evidence); (ii) that  monies  were  used  to  pay  for  the  claimant's
    education  in  2009  (the  claimant's,  claimant's  father's  and   EEA
    sponsor's oral evidence), and (iii) the claimant's father  also  worked
    on the family land, the money from which was used for the  expenses  of
    running the household (the claimant's, and EEA sponsor's, evidence).

31. Despite all I say above I conclude that it has not been demonstrated to
    the balance of probabilities that the monies provided  by  EEA  sponsor
    were required in order for  either  the  claimant  (or  the  claimant's
    family members living in the same household as the  claimant)  to  meet
    their basic needs.  I  find,  therefore,  that  the  claimant  has  not
    established that, for the purposes of article  3(2)  of  the  Citizens'
    Directive, he was dependent on the EEA sponsor prior to coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.

32. There is no direct evidence to this effect nor, in my  conclusion,  can
    the fact that the claimant was dependent on the EEA  sponsor  prior  to
    coming to the UK be inferred from the limited evidence  that  has  been
    provided.

33. The evidence  that  has  been  provided  is  incomplete.  There  is  no
    information or evidence regarding the financial  circumstances  of  the
    family in 2008 i.e. after the claimant's father stopped working  (other
    than on the family land) and before  monies  were  being  sent  to  the
    claimant's father by the EEA sponsor.  It  is  not  asserted  that  the
    claimant was unable to continue his education during that  period,  nor
    is it said that in order for him to do so the family were  required  to
    forgo other basic needs so as to be able to afford  the  cost  of  this
    education. One could speculate that it maybe that the claimant's father
    had surplus savings from his time in employment that he  used  in  2008
    which had been depleted by 2009, but there is  simply  no  evidence  in
    this regard.

34. The claimant's father, who is in the best position to give evidence  on
    the issue I must determine, does not address  it  directly.  Whilst  he
    states that the monies were sent by the EEA  sponsor  to  pay  for  the
    claimant's education and "in order to lead my family more comfortably",
    there is nothing in his evidence addressing the other financial aspects
    of the family's circumstances or what the circumstances would have been
    for the claimant had the EEA sponsor not sent monies in 2009.   Insofar
    as any inference can be drawn from the claimant's father's evidence, it
    is not that the family required the  monies  in  order  to  ensure  the
    family's, or the claimant's, basic needs were met.  The  evidence  from
    the EEA sponsor adds little in this regard, although I have taken  full
    account in coming to my conclusions that the EEA  sponsor  stated  that
    the claimant's circumstances, absent the EEA  sponsor's  monies,  would
    have been "very difficult because he is the youngest".

35. As I have already identified above, having looked at all  the  evidence
    before me in the round I find that it does not discharge the burden  on
    the claimant to establish that he was  dependent  on  the  EEA  sponsor
    prior to coming to the UK. Consequently, the claimant cannot  meet  the
    requirements imposed by article 3(2) of  the  Citizens'  Directive.  In
    such circumstances, I need not grapple with the issue  of  whether  the
    EEA sponsor is to be treated as an EEA national  for  the  purposes  of
    article 3(2) of the Directive.

    Decision

For the reasons given above, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set
    aside.

    Upon remaking the decision under appeal, I conclude that the claimant's
    (Mr Dhami's) appeal is to be dismissed - the SSHD's decision  does  not
    breach the EU Treaties.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Signed: 16 May 2017


