
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/03485/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st October 2018                           |On 12th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
     JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                  Rita Ovie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        IMMIGRATION OFFICER, HEATHROW

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr C Ikegwuruka, Legal Representative Almonds Legals
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


In a decision dated 6 April 2018, I set aside for material error of law  the
decision of Judge James of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent  on  18  March
2017 dismissing the appeal of the appellant a  citizen  of  Nigeria  against
the decision made by the respondent on 3 April 2016  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 deciding to revoke  the  residence
card issued to him on 1 July 2015 as the family member of  an  EEA  (French)
national because he had left  the  UK.   The  respondent  also  set  removal
directions under Regulation 19(3).

2.At paras 10-13 I stated that I did not consider I was in a position to re-
make the decision, as clearly two central issues in the  appeal  had  arisen
(1) whether the appellant's partner is currently  exercising  treaty  rights
(and (2), given the burden of  proof  as  regards  revocation,  whether  the
respondent was entitled at the date of decision to  revoke  the  appellant's
residence card.  In relation to both,  the  HMRC  evidence  was  incomplete.
Given the backdrop of possible domestic violence, this was a  case  where  I
considered it would be  appropriate  to  direct  that  the  respondent  take
immediate steps to obtain  the  relevant  tax  history  of  the  appellant's
partner. I also directed the  appellant's  representatives  to  adduce  such
evidence as they could of the appellant's partner's correct whereabouts  and
employment.


3.In view of the fact that the appellant's case had already been before  the
FtT once before in relation to the same relationship, I did not consider  it
would be appropriate to remit to the FtT.  I stated that the step  would  be
a CMR (to be fixed for a date in May) at which the Tribunal  would  have  an
opportunity, in light of the further  tax  history  evidence  available,  to
take stock of whether a further hearing is necessary.


4. A CMR was  held  in  August  2018  at  which  further  clarification  was
provided about relevant documents that needed to be submitted and  the  case
was set down for a further hearing before me on 1 October.

5. In light of my previous directions the appellant  submitted  DWP  letters
concerning Direct Earnings Attachments for the appellant's partner  covering
the period 2015-2017 and the respondent produced a letter from  DWP  stating
that the HMRC confirming that the  appellant's  husband  was  in  employment
during tax year April 2015-April  2016.  There  was  also  produced  by  the
respondent a witness statement from HMRC Case Investigation Officer  R  Drew
confirming that Construction Industry  Scheme  records  confirmed  that  the
appellant's husband received income from employment in  tax  year  2017-2018
and had received income from employment in tax years 2015-6,  2016-2017  and
2017-2018.

4. Mr Bramble  stated  that  in  light  of  the  further  documentation  now
available it  was  clear  that  the  respondent's  decision  to  revoke  the
appellant's residence card dated 1 July 2015 was taken on a mistaken  basis.
He observed that it  was  also  accepted  that  the  removal  decision  made
against the appellant could  not  stand.  He  confirmed  as  well  that  the
evidence showed that the appellant was still the family member of  a  person
exercising Treaty rights, irrespective of whether they  were  in  a  durable
relationship or  whether  the  appellant  had  been  a  victim  of  domestic
violence.

5. Having considered the above documentation and Mr  Bramble's  submissions,
the decision I re-make is  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
decision of the respondent to revoke  the  appellant's  residence  card  and
also her appeal against the decision  giving  directions  for  her  removal.
There can be no public interest in her removal given that  her  presence  is
protected by her ongoing EEA right of residence.

To summarise:

The decision of the FtT judge has already been set aside for material  error
of law.

The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 8 October 2018


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




