
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03062/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2019                    |On 10 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                        jenny isabel lopez almenariz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Submanian, Legal Representative, Lambeth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Davey promulgated on 20 December 2018, in which the Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse her application for an  EEA
    Residence Card dated 27 February 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Ecuador, born  on  3  August  1978,  who
    applied on 18 October 2017 for an EEA  residence  card  as  the  former
    spouse of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom who has retained a right of residence.  The Appellant married a
    Portuguese national on 6 April 2005 at  the  Consulate  of  Ecuador  in
    London, a marriage validly recognised by  the  Ecuadorian  authorities.
    The Appellant's husband died in 2012, following which  her  application
    the basis of retained rights of residence was made.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    marriage was not legally recognised in the United Kingdom, nor  was  it
    accepted that the Appellant was in a durable relationship as a partner;
    no death certificate for the Appellant's partner had been provided  and
    there was no evidence that the Appellant had been living in  accordance
    with the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016  in  the
    year prior to her partner's death or since.

 4. Judge Davey dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  20
    December 2018 on the sole basis that the Appellant's marriage  was  not
    valid in English law.  The Tribunal identified that the  difficulty  in
    this case is that under the Marriage Act of 1994,  it  is  only  if  an
    embassy or consulate is listed as  an  'approved  building'  for  civil
    marriages in the United Kingdom that a marriage therein conducted  will
    be recognised as having  taken  place.   Otherwise  persons  cannot  be
    married in the United Kingdom in the sense of having it recognised here
    if it is taken place in an embassy.  Embassies are not  treated  as  if
    they foreign territory for the  purposes  of  the  Marriage  Act.   The
    decision records that it was common ground between the parties that the
    Ecuadorian embassy or consulate is not on the approved list of premises
    and although the marriage is valid  in  Ecuador,  it  is  not  a  valid
    marriage for UK purposes.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found in the Appellant's favour on all  of  the
    other initial reasons for refusal  following  the  provision  of  death
    certificate and  further  information  about  the  exercise  of  treaty
    rights.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on  the  grounds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in concluding that the Appellant's marriage was
    not a validly recognised in the United Kingdom.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hemingway on 4 March 2019  on
    the basis that the Tribunal had not explained how it reached  the  view
    it did by reference to any particular sections of the Act to  which  it
    refers, so that the question of  law  can  be  fully  considered.   The
    Appellant's  representatives  were  forewarned   that   clearer   legal
    submissions and the legal basis for them  would  be  required  for  the
    error of law hearing than had been advanced to that point.

Findings and reasons

 8. At the oral hearing, Mr Submanian relied on his skeleton  argument  and
    expanded  upon  it  in  oral  submissions.   In  essence,  it  was  the
    Appellant's case that her marriage in the Ecuadorian embassy on 6 April
    2005 was legal and valid, with a number of  different  and  alternative
    submissions made in support of that.

 9. I indicated to Mr Submanian as the  outset  of  the  hearing  that  the
    initial question to determine was in  whose  territory  the  Ecuadorian
    embassy was situated and what law it was  subject  to;  this  being  an
    essential basis upon which to  determine  whether  this  is  a  foreign
    marriage which could be recognised in the United Kingdom or a  domestic
    one  which  must  comply  with  English  law.   Although  a  number  of
    contradictory responses were  given  to  this  question,  Mr  Submanian
    accepted, consistently with the grounds of appeal and submissions  made
    before the First-tier Tribunal, that the Ecuadorian embassy  in  London
    was within the territory of the United Kingdom and subject  to  English
    law, supplemented by provisions in the Vienna convention on  Diplomatic
    Relations 1961 (the "Vienna Convention").

10. However, Mr  Submanian  further  submitted  that  as  the  marriage  is
    recognised by the Ecuadorian government, it should be considered  as  a
    foreign marriage and validly recognised as such.  Specific reliance was
    placed on the letter from the Consulate of Ecuador in London  dated  10
    January 2006, which so far as material stated as follows:

         "This  letter  has  the  purpose  to  certify  that  the  marriages
         celebrated  at  this  Consulate  fulfil  all   legal   requirements
         requested by the sovereign state of Ecuador and, consequently, have
         the same validity as  the  marriages  celebrated  in  Ecuador.   To
         assist its nationals, the Government of Ecuador in  its  own  right
         and  competence,  has  determined  that  all  Ecuadorian   Consular
         Missions have the authority to celebrate civil marriages within the
         diplomatic premises since, backed by International Law  principles,
         those are part of Ecuadorian territory.  These  marriages  will  be
         ruled under Ecuadorian legislation.

         Based on this, I would like to  confirm  that  the  civil  marriage
         celebrated at this Consulate on 6 April 2005 between the Portuguese
         citizen Joaquim Martins Pinto ... and the Ecuadorian citizen  Jenny
         Isabel Lopez Almendariz ..., Fulfilled all the  legal  requirements
         requested by Ecuador and therefore, it  is  legitimate,  valid  and
         legal for Ecuadorian, all countries and International Law."

11. Neither the letter itself, nor Mr Submanian, could identify  the  legal
    basis upon which it was  asserted  that  this  is  a  foreign  marriage
    validly recognised in United Kingdom.  Mr Submanian was unable to  cite
    any statutory provision, any Article within the  Vienna  Convention  or
    any other authority or  basis  upon  which  this  would  be  the  case,
    particularly in light of the acceptance that the Ecuadorian embassy  is
    in the territory of the United Kingdom and subject to English law.

12. It is uncontroversial that a marriage celebrated outside of England and
    Wales is governed by the law of the country in which it was celebrated,
    the lex loci, and if valid in accordance with the laws and requirements
    in that country, would normally be recognised as a  valid  marriage  in
    the United Kingdom.  However, for that to  assist  the  Appellant,  she
    needs to show that her marriage  was  in  fact  celebrated  outside  of
    England and Wales and she can not do so on the facts of this case or on
    the basis of English or International Law.  There is nothing in English
    law or in the Vienna Convention to support the assertion in the  letter
    from the Consulate of Ecuador that the diplomatic premises are part  of
    Ecuadorian territory.  They are not, as accepted by Mr Submanian,  they
    are within the territory of the United Kingdom and subject  to  English
    law, subject to the provisions of the Vienna Convention.  The Appellant
    must therefore show that the marriage complied with English law,  there
    being no specific exemptions or amendments to the same with regards  to
    marriages in an embassy either in domestic legislation or in the Vienna
    Convention.

13. The Appellant's alternative submissions were first, that  the  Marriage
    Act 1994 does not in any event apply  to  a  marriage  in  an  embassy;
    secondly, the marriage is valid because it is recognised in family  law
    and the parties could legally have divorced in the United Kingdom;  and
    finally, that there is no standard definition of marriage applicable in
    EU law.  In relation to the last two, no specific legal basis could  be
    given for either submission (save for reference to the case of Awuku  v
    Secretary of state for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  178,  the
    relevance of which to the issues in the  present  appeal  was  entirely
    unexplained) and oral submissions on these points  were  not  developed
    further.

14. As to the Marriage Act 1994, Mr Submanian suggested  that  it  did  not
    apply first because of the  special  provision  for  embassies  in  the
    Vienna Convention; and secondly that it could not apply as  an  embassy
    could not be an 'approved premises' because it is private and because a
    fee would need to be made for an application for approval.

15. Although in broad terms it is correct to say that the Vienna Convention
    makes specific provision for diplomatic missions and  their  personnel,
    there is no specific provision in relation to marriages and no  general
    provision to disapply the  local  law  of  the  territory  in  which  a
    diplomatic mission is situated or apply the law of the  sending  state.
    Instead, specific provision is made  for  specific  matters  which  are
    expressly set out in the Vienna Convention and  include,  for  example,
    the inviolable nature of the premises of a diplomatic mission  (Article
    22) and immunity for the diplomatic agent, including not  being  liable
    to any form of arrest or detention  (Article  29)  or  subject  to  the
    criminal jurisdiction (Article 31).   Mr  Submanian  was  not  able  to
    identify any provision in the Vienna Convention that has any  relevance
    to the celebration of marriages or applicability of local law  in  this
    field.

16. The Marriage Act 1949  sets  out  in  Part  III  the  requirements  for
    marriages  to  be  solemnized  under   a   Superintendent   Registrar's
    Certificate (as an alternative to marriage according to  the  Rites  of
    the Church of England in Part II of the Act), which includes, so far as
    potentially relevant to this  appeal,  a  marriage  of  any  couple  on
    approved premises in section 26(1)(bb) (as inserted by the Marriage Act
    1994).  It was not suggested on behalf of the Appellant that any of the
    other  options  in  section  16(1)  of  the  same   applied   for   the
    solemnization of marriage.

17. Section 46A and 46B of the Marriage Act  1949  (also  inserted  by  the
    Marriage Act 1994) make provision  for  the  approval  of  premises  in
    pursuance of section 26(1)(bb) and a regulation making power for  these
    purposes, including power in relation to the determination and charging
    by local authorities  of  fees  in  respect  of  applications  for  the
    approval of premises.

18. It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the Ecuadorian  embassy
    could not legally become an 'approved premises' because  under  Article
    23 of the Vienna Convention, the head  of  the  diplomatic  mission  is
    exempt from all national, regional  or  municipal  dues  and  taxes  in
    respect of the premises of the mission, other than  such  as  represent
    payment for specific services rendered.  None of the  regulations  made
    under the power in section 46A were cited or referred to at all  by  Mr
    Submanian and in fact, none of the regulations specify that a fee  must
    be paid for an application, only that a local authority may charge  one
    subject to certain conditions.   There  is  no  evidence  submitted  on
    behalf of the Appellant that any fee would be charged by  the  relevant
    local authority in an application by the Ecuadorian embassy and in  any
    event, I find that any such fee would clearly be payment for a specific
    service rendered and therefore outwith the exemption in Article  23  of
    the Vienna Convention.  In any event, even if the Appellant were  right
    that this is a municipal due in respect of the premises, the fact  that
    Article 23 of the Vienna Convention exempts the head of the  diplomatic
    mission from payment for an application for approval of premises  would
    not have the effect that the Marriage Act 1949 generally,  nor  section
    26(1)(bb) combined with sections 46A and 46B simply would not apply  to
    the embassy meaning marriages would somehow become valid in English law
    if conducted there.

 1. The alternative reason relied upon by the  Appellant  is  that  embassy
    could not be an approved premises because it  is  private.   Again,  Mr
    Submanian submitted no authority  as  to  why  that  would  exempt  the
    embassy from being able to satisfy the  requirements  for  an  approved
    premises and in any event,  how  a  marriage  could  be  valid  if  not
    conducted  in  approved  premises  and/or  in   accordance   with   the
    requirements of the Marriage Act 1994.

 2. Although as noted in the grant of permission, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not set out the relevant  statutory  provisions  relied  upon  when
    concluding that an embassy must be an approved  building  for  a  civil
    marriage (and in  particular  there  is  no  such  requirement  in  the
    Marriage Act 1994) and the Ecuadorian embassy was not,  such  that  the
    marriage was not recognised as valid in the United Kingdom; it is clear
    for the reasons set  out  above  that  the  conclusion  was  unarguably
    correct.  The Appellant has not been able to identify any  legal  basis
    upon a marriage conducted in the territory of the  United  Kingdom  (as
    the Ecuadorian embassy is), but in accordance with Ecuadorian law would
    be a validly recognised marriage according to  the  applicable  law  of
    England and Wales.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  therefore
    contains no error of law and the decision to dismiss the appeal on  the
    basis that the Appellant was not validly married to an EEA national  is
    confirmed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]   Date 5th April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
