
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
EA/03268/2016

                                                  EA/03270/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 April 2018                          | On 18 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                    miss Sulifa Kokohu (first Appellant)
                      master B W k P (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The first named appellant is a citizen of Tonga born on 18 March  1974.
     She had been married to an EEA national, a Portuguese citizen  between
    24 December 1998 and 8 September 2005 - decree absolute was pronounced
    on that day.  There were no children of the marriage but the  appellant
    had a son, the second appellant, who was born on 17 February  2006  and
    he is a citizen of Nigeria.  An application was made in September  2015
    for a residence card as the former family member of  an  EEA  national.
    This application was refused on 25 February 2016.  The  basis  for  the
    refusal was that  while  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
    appellant's marriage to  her  former  EEA  national  husband  had  been
    dissolved this had taken place  prior  to  the  enactment  of  the  EEA
    Regulations in 2006.  It  was  submitted  that  applicants  could  only
    retain a right of residence if they divorced after 1 May 2006.

2.   It was pointed out to the appellant that  she  could  make  a  separate
    application under the Rules  in  respect  of  Article  8.   No  removal
    directions were issued.

3.   The appeal came before a First-tier  Judge  on  3  October  2017.   The
    appellant was represented on that occasion.  The judge  summarises  the
    appellants' immigration history as follows:

         "3.  The appellant has an extensive immigration history.   Although
             no chronology was provided,  it  appears  from  the  available
             documents that she first came to the UK in February 1994 as  a
             visitor, with leave valid for six months.  Thereafter she  was
             granted leave as a student until 30 November 1998.   She  left
             the UK for six months in the course of that year, returning in
             September 1998 with Mr Correia.   She  was  refused  leave  to
             enter as a visitor but was granted temporary admission.


         4.   She was granted a residence card based on her marriage  to  Mr
             Correia, valid from 16 June 2001 to 16 June 2006.


         5.   During 2006, two applications for indefinite leave  to  remain
             were refused and a further application made in June  2014  was
             refused.  At least one of those applications was based on long
             residence."

    The judge notes that the  previous  Regulations  were  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2000 and under those Regulations a
    family member was defined in Regulation 6  as  including,  inter  alia:
    "(2A) if the other person has divorced his spouse, the  person  is  his
    divorced spouse provided she is the primary carer  of  their  dependent
    child who is under 19 and attending an educational course in the United
    Kingdom."

4.   The appellants' residence card had been issued on 16 June 2001 and  was
    valid for five years.

5.   The hearing was dealt with on submissions and  the  appellant  was  not
    invited to give evidence.  The appellants' representative  (Mr  Offiah)
    relied on Directive 2004/38/EC and submitted that the 2006  Regulations
    were merely a formality and that their  implementation  was  of  little
    consequence.  The Presenting Officer argued that the Directive did  not
    confer rights on individuals and the appellant could not  benefit  from
    it and she did not meet the requirements of  the  EEA  Regulations.   A
    separate application in respect of the second appellant could be  made.



6.   The judge's decision concludes as follows:

         "20. The  purpose  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2006, which came into force on 30 April  2006,  is
             to give effect to  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  29  April  2004.
             Article 40 the Directive stated  that,  "Member  States  shall
             bring into force  the  laws,  regulations  and  administrative
             provisions necessary to comply with  this  Directive  by  [two
             years from the date of entry into force of  this  Directive]."
             The 2006 Regulations were brought into force on 30 April 2006,
             within the two year period required under the Directive.


         21.  I cannot accept Mr Offiah's submission that from 29 April 2004
             the Directive conferred direct rights on the appellant.  It is
             plain from  the  Directive  itself  that  Member  States  were
             required to bring into force laws in order to comply with  the
             Directive within a specified timeframe and that  is  what  the
             2006 Regulations did.


         22.  It is accepted that the appellant was granted a residence card
             which gave her a right to reside (not leave to remain) in  the
             United Kingdom so long as she remained a family member of  her
             husband in the UK.  Regulation 14 of the Immigration (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2000 stated that a family member of
             a qualified person is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom
             for as long as he remains the family  member  of  a  qualified
             person.  The 2000  Regulations  did  not  contain  a  specific
             Regulation dealing with family members  who  have  retained  a
             right of residence equivalent to Regulation  10  of  the  2006
             Regulations.  They did, however, as I have set out above, make
             provision for divorced spouses, subject to conditions.


         23.  The appellant ceased to be a family member of an EEA  national
             on 8 September 2005.  There were no children of the family to
             whom Regulation 6(2A) could apply.  She  was,  therefore,  not
             entitled to reside in the UK pursuant to Regulation 14 because
             she was no longer a family member of a qualified person.


         24.  The appellant cannot take advantage of Regulation 10(5) of the
             2006 Regulations because by the time they came into  force  on
             30 April 2006, she was no longer a family  member  of  an  EEA
             national.   The  issue  of  whether  the  EEA   national   was
             exercising Treaty rights in the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
             Regulations becomes academic in the circumstances.


         25.  It was submitted that the Tribunal should consider the  matter
             under Article 8 and Section 55.  I indicated to Mr Offiah  the
             difficulty with that  submission  in  light  of  the  case  of
             Amirteymour & others [2017] EWCA Civ 353.  The Court of Appeal
             confirmed the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  that  where  no
             notice under Section 120 of the 2002 Act has  been  served  by
             the respondent and where no directions  to  remove  have  been
             made, an appellant cannot bring a human  rights  challenge  to
             removal in an appeal under the EEA Regulations.


         26.  The appellant had submitted a Statement of Additional  Grounds
             under Section 120, claiming that her removal to Tonga would be
             in breach of Article 3 or Article 8. However,  the  respondent
             had not  issues  [sic]  a  Section  120  notice  inviting  the
             appellant to put her case in full and there  were  no  removal
             directions issued. In the circumstances any  appeal  on  human
             rights grounds cannot succeed."

    The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

7.   There was an application for permission to  appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted on 12 February 2018 by the Upper Tribunal in respect
    of Article 8 issues.  Before me the appellants were unrepresented.   Mr
    Kotas helpfully explained the respondent's position.   He  pointed  out
    that the notice of decision was drafted  in  the  same  terms  for  the
    second appellant as for the lead appellant, his mother.   Reliance  had
    been placed on Regulation 10(5) of the 2006 Regulations. However, while
    it was accepted that the  appellant's  marriage  to  her  EEA  national
    husband had been dissolved,  as  the  EEA  Regulations  had  only  been
    enacted in 2006 the appellants could not retain a right of residence if
    they divorced after they came into effect in May of that  year  as  had
    been explained in a previous refusal letter.  In relation to Article  8
    the judge had referred to Amirteymour and the judge had no jurisdiction
    to go into Article 8 issues.  An application under Article 8  could  be
    made.  There was the question whether the fee would be waived or not.

8.   In response the appellant said that she had applied for  a  fee  waiver
    which had been refused.  She had not been granted indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  She did not mind making  a  new  application  but  she  had  a
    financial problem.  She had tried to get advice for  example  from  the
    CAB without success.  She did not know what else to do.

9.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I can only  interfere
    with the decision of the First-tier Judge if it was  materially  flawed
    in law.

10.  It is quite clear that the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    limited  in  this  case.   This  is  confirmed  by  the   decision   of
    Amirteymour.  In the absence of service by the Secretary of State of  a
    notice under Section 120, the Tribunal has no power to entertain a case
    based on Article 8 - see for example paragraph 40 of the  judgment  of
    Sales, LJ.

11.  The notice of refusal made it clear that if  the  appellant  wished  to
    raise Article 8 then a separate charged application needed to be  made.



12.  The appellant states she has taken steps to make  such  an  application
    but has been  unable  so  far  to  obtain  a  fee  waiver.   I  am  not
    unsympathetic to her position but the law is quite clear that there  is
    no jurisdiction in this case to  go  into  Article  8  issues  for  the
    reasons given by the First-tier Judge.

13.  For the reasons  I  have  given  the  appeals  of  the  appellants  are
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Judge is confirmed.

Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.






Signed                                  Date: 17 April 2018


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
