
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/03969/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                                  |                                   |
|On: 20 November 2018                    |On 20 December 2018                |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                             HAFIZ MUHAMMAD UMAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           -
For the Respondent:         Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  who  seeks  recognition  of  a
    Zambrano right of residence under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 ("the Regs") as the primary carer of his British
    mother.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Tully) rejected  the  claim  on
    the 20th June 2018 and the Appellant  now  has  permission  to  appeal,
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge EM  Simpson  on  the  21st  August
    2018.


 2. The Appellant did not attend the hearing on  the  20th  November  2018.
    His previous representatives had withdrawn from the record.    I  noted
    that the Appellant had, on the 6th November 2018, applied for the  case
    before me to be adjourned, on the grounds  that  various  witnesses  he
    wished to call were unavailable. That application was  refused  on  the
    8th November 2018 on the grounds that  none  of  these  witnesses  were
    necessary for the determination of whether the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was flawed for error of law. No application to renew that
    adjournment request was made. I therefore proceeded  to  determine  the
    appeal, having heard very brief submissions from  Mr  McVeety  for  the
    Secretary of State, who defended Judge Tully's decision.

 3. By Regulation 15(A) of the 2016 Regs the Appellant was required to show
    that a) he was the primary carer for a  British  national  residing  in
    this country and b) that if the Appellant were compelled to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, so would  that  British  national  have  to  leave  the
    country, and therefore the territory of the EU.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal rejected, as a matter of fact,  the  Appellants
    claims to both limbs of Reg 15A. The determination is long and detailed
    but its reasons can fairly be summarised as follows:

              i) The Appellant and his witnesses gave inconsistent  evidence
                 about where he, and his mother, were living, and with whom.
                    The Appellant told the Tribunal that he lived  with  his
                 mother  in  [                            ].  When  it   was
                 pointed out that her address, on her  medical  records  and
                 witness statement, was given as his  sister's  house  in  [
                                        ], the Appellant had said  that  his
                 mother no longer lived at that property but had  maintained
                 it as her 'official' address. He could not explain why  she
                 had not told her  doctors,  nor  why  it  appeared  as  her
                 current address on her sworn statement;


             ii) The Appellant had told the Home Office that  there  was  no
                 other person available who could care for  his  mother.  He
                 had said that her marriage had broken down. It then emerged
                 at hearing that his father was  in  fact  living  with  his
                 mother, a fact not mentioned in any of the 4 family witness
                 statements;

            iii) The GP had  written  to  say  that  the  Appellant  is  his
                 mother's main carer, but the weight to be attached to  that
                 statement was diminished by the  fact  that  the  GP  still
                 believed the lady to be living at [                  ].  It
                 was clear therefore that the GP had not conducted  a  house
                 visit and that the statement as to who was  providing  care
                 was dependent upon what the GP had been told by the family;

             iv) A letter from the Mosque  couched  in  similar  terms  also
                 attracted little weight given that it made  no  mention  of
                 the other family members,  including  the  Appellant's  two
                 adult sisters and the Appellant's father;

              v) The weight to be attached to a  report  by  an  independent
                 social worker was diminished by  the  lack  of  information
                 regarding how much time the social  worker  actually  spent
                 assessing the family, and again it appeared likely that the
                 information in the report was based upon what he  had  been
                 told;

             vi) Whilst the Appellant may well contribute  to  his  mother's
                 care there are two other adult children living  very  close
                 by to the Appellant's  mother.  These  two  daughters  gave
                 evidence that they were unable to look  after  her  because
                 they were too  busy  or  did  not  want  to.  The  Tribunal
                 rejected both these  reasons.  The  sister  who  claimed  a
                 degree of  estrangement  had  nevertheless  supported  this
                 appeal. The sister who was too busy because she was married
                 and had children: this was  not  a  reasonable  explanation
                 given that the Appellant is also married with children;

            vii)  There  was  no  suggestion  in  the  evidence   that   the
                 Appellant's mother would in fact leave the  United  Kingdom
                 if he were  required  to  go  to  Pakistan.  There  was  no
                 credible reason why one or both  of  the  lady's  daughters
                 could not take that role,  her  husband  is  here  and  she
                 receives  extensive  support  and  treatment  from   social
                 services and the NHS.

 5. I can find no arguable defect in any of that reasoning.   The  Tribunal
    did not overlook the "myriad" of documents that the Appellant supplied.
    It accepted that he does contribute to his mother's care, but  for  the
    very careful reasons given it rejected the contention that this was the
    sum total of the care that this 54 year-old lady required, or  that  is
    given. She has two adult daughters who live close to her and there were
    no credible reasons why they would not currently be contributing to her
    care, or more importantly would not do so  were  their  brother  to  be
    denied a residence  permit.   There  is  no  evidence  to  support  the
    suggestion in the grounds that the Tribunal jumped to  conclusions,  or
    that it unfairly  characterised  the  Appellant  has  someone  who  was
    prepared to  lie.   The  Tribunal  did  not  impugn  the  integrity  or
    professionalism of the social  worker.  It  simply  observed  that  his
    comments had to be read in the context that he had not been  given  the
    full picture. As to the point that the  proper  legal  basis  for  this
    decision may have been the 2006 Regulations  as  opposed  to  the  2016
    Regs, nothing turns on  it,  since  on  the  cogent  and  well-reasoned
    analysis of the First-tier Tribunal, this claim would fail under both.

    Decision


 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no errors of  law  and
    the decision is upheld.


 7. There is no order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          20th November 2018


