
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03554/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision made without a              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing under rule 34                |On 20th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                GHULAM FATIMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (SHEFFIELD)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 06 June 2019  to
      refuse to issue a family  permit  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
      national.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 21 February 2020. The Upper Tribunal concluded that the
      decision involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law  in  a  decision
      promulgated  on  01  September  2020  (annexed).  Unfortunately,   the
      respondent was not able to make submissions on remaking at the hearing
      held in the Upper Tribunal on 29 July 2020 because Mr Melvin  did  not
      have a copy of the appellant's up to date bundle. The  parties  agreed
      that, subject to any further  submissions  relating  to  the  mode  of
      hearing, it was likely that the decision could  be  remade  without  a
      further hearing.

3.   The appellant filed written submissions and a copy of the bundle on  06
      August 2020. On behalf of the  respondent,  Mr  Melvin  filed  written
      submissions on 24 September 2020 in the following terms:

         "Having carefully considered the bundles of evidence  submitted  by
         the solicitors the Respondent is content for the Upper Tribunal  to
         proceed to remake the decision without the need for an oral hearing
         or further oral or written submissions.

         The  Respondent  accepts  that  the  sponsor  has  been   providing
         financial support for all family members in Pakistan.  (It  appears
         that both the sponsor's wife and daughter have been  granted  entry
         clearance and they resided at the same address as this appellant)

         Whilst there is still no evidence, outside of that provided in  the
         form of the affidavits of the appellant and other  family  members,
         to explain how  the  money  remitted  by  the  sponsor  covers  the
         essential needs of this appellant the Respondent  acknowledges  the
         difficulties  in  providing  such  evidence   in   these   specific
         circumstances.

         The Respondent does not concede this appeal  but  understands  that
         the Upper Tribunal may  conclude  that  enough  evidence  has  been
         provided for the appeal to succeed.

         If that is the outcome it is  unlikely  that  the  Respondent  will
         challenge that conclusion."

4.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  finding  that  the  EEA  sponsor   provides
      financial support to his mother in Pakistan is preserved  and  in  any
      event is accepted by the respondent. The  only  outstanding  issue  is
      whether the appellant is a dependent direct relative in the  ascending
      line and is therefore a 'family member' of a  Union  citizen  for  the
      purpose of Article 3(1) of the Citizens'  Directive  (2004/38/EC)  and
      Regulation 7 of The Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
      2016 ("the EEA Regulations 2016"). A person is  dependent  within  the
      meaning of European law if the support is necessary to meet her  basic
      needs: see Lim v ECO (Manila) [2016] Imm AR 421.

5.   I am satisfied that the evidence shows on the  balance  of  probability
      that the appellant is dependent on  the  EEA  sponsor  for  her  basic
      needs. There is no evidence to suggest  any  material  change  in  the
      appellant's circumstances since I made the following findings  in  the
      error of law decision:

         "6.  At the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing  the  appellant
             was a 75-year-old woman who lived in a joint family  household
             with the sponsor's wife  and  child  in  a  rural  village  in
             Pakistan. The appellant's evidence,  the  sponsor's  evidence,
             her daughter's evidence and that of her son-in-law,  was  that
             she was dependent upon the sponsor's financial support for her
             basic needs. The appellant produced a more detailed  statement
             in support of the appeal, which she signed with a thumb print,
             indicating a lack of  literacy.  Her  evidence  was  that  her
             husband died many years ago and that she  has  been  dependent
             upon her son since then. She did not receive financial support
             from any other source. Her daughter lived with her husband  in
             a separate home and did not work. They would not  be  expected
             to support her. The appellant said  that  she  rarely  travels
             outside the rural village where she has lived  all  her  life.
             She does not have a bank account because the nearest  bank  is
             about an hour away. Her son transfers money to her son-in-law,
             Ghulam Abbas, who  brings  her  cash  to  pay  for  her  daily
             expenses.

         7.   Their evidence was consistent with cultural norms in Pakistan.
             The appellant is a widow, not of working age, and is seemingly
             illiterate. It is still common for  women  to  be  financially
             dependent upon male family members in Pakistan. It  is  common
             for  elderly  family  members  to  live  in  a  joint   family
             household. It is common for family members  who  live  abroad,
             and particularly  the  eldest  son,  to  send  remittances  to
             support elderly members. It is consistent with daily life in a
             rural village  that  the  appellant  would  use  cash  and  is
             unlikely to be able to produce detailed  documentary  evidence
             of her expenses."

6.   The sponsor says that his father's  shop  was  sold  after  his  death.
      There is nothing inherently implausible about  his  account  if  there
      were no other family members to run the  business.  It  is  consistent
      with cultural norms for the eldest  son  to  take  responsibility  for
      supporting his mother. She is not of  working  age  and  there  is  no
      evidence to suggest that she has  any  other  source  of  income.  The
      evidence of various family members has been consistent in saying  that
      she lives in the family home with her son's wife  and  child.  Despite
      having been granted a family permit it seems that the  sponsor's  wife
      and child remain in Pakistan to  support  his  mother.  She  forms  an
      integral part of the sponsor's family unit. I am  satisfied  that  the
      evidence shows that she is likely to be dependent on the  EEA  sponsor
      and his family for financial and  emotional  support.  The  respondent
      does not concede the appeal but goes so far as  to  suggest  that  the
      Upper Tribunal may conclude "that enough evidence  has  been  provided
      for the appeal to succeed." The respondent does not  submit  that  the
      appeal should be dismissed.

7.   For the reasons given above I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  a
      dependent family member in the  ascending  line  and  that  she  is  a
      'family member' within the meaning of Article 2(2)(d) and Article 3(1)
      of  the  Citizens'  Directive  and  Regulation  7(1)(c)  of  the   EEA
      Regulations 2016.

8.   I conclude that the  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a  family  permit
      recognising a right of residence as the 'family  member'  of  a  Union
      citizen breaches the appellant's  rights  under  the  EU  Treaties  in
      respect of entry into or residence in the United Kingdom.



DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED under the EEA Regulations 2016


Signed   M. Canavan    Date 16 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


[ANNEX]
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03554/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote hearing heard at              |Decision Promulgated                 |
|Field House 29 July 2020             |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                GHULAM FATIMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (SHEFFIELD)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr O. Sobowale, instructed by Morgan Wiseman
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 06 June 2019  to
    refuse to issue a  family  permit  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 21 February 2020. The judge commented on  the
    way in which the evidence was presented [13] and  outlined  aspects  of
    the evidence that supported the sponsor's claim to send remittances  to
    his family in Pakistan via his  cousin/brother-in-law  [15].  He  noted
    that there was no evidence of the appellant's expenditure or  financial
    needs even though the issue was raised as a  concern  in  the  decision
    letter [17]. The judge concluded:

         "18. The gaps notwithstanding there is sufficient evidence to  show
             that the Sponsor sends money to his  mother  in  Pakistan  and
             that it is received by Ghulam Abbas. The affidavit from  Gulam
             Abbas,  in  addition  to   being   silent   on   the   precise
             relationships involved, does not indicate whether  or  not  he
             provides any form of assistance. With his being  described  as
             the Sponsor's brother that would imply a family connection and
             obligation to assist.

         19.  What the evidence does not show is whether his mother  depends
             on the funds the  Sponsor  sends  for  her  daily  needs.  The
             evidence was that his father owned a shop,  it  is  not  clear
             what happened to that and there is no evidence to show whether
             it was sold and whether or not it is now rented out.

         20.  Taking all of the above into account while there  is  evidence
             that some support is provided by the Sponsor to the  Appellant
             the evidence does not show that she is  dependent  on  him  as
             required by the EEA Regulations. In  those  circumstances  the
             appeal cannot succeed."

3.   The appellant appealed the First-tier Tribunal  decision.  The  grounds
    are unparticularised and tend  towards  general  submissions,  but  the
    following points can be discerned:

      i) The fact that the judge referred to the appellant  as  Indian  when
         she is from Pakistan indicated a lack of care and scrutiny  of  the
         evidence.

     ii) The judge failed to make any findings relating to the oral evidence
         given by the appellant's son (the sponsor). Both the appellant  and
         the  sponsor  confirmed  that  the  appellant  is  reliant  on  the
         sponsor's support to meet  her  essential  needs.  The  appellant's
         dependency on her son is consistent with cultural norms.

    iii) It was unreasonable to expect the appellant,  a  75-year-old  woman
         who lives in a rural village in Pakistan,  to  document  her  daily
         expenses in the way expected by the judge.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in an order sent on 29 May 2020.

5.   A face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable  due
    to public health measures put in place to control the spread of  Covid-
    19. The appeal was heard by way  of  a  remote  hearing  by  Skype  for
    Business with the parties' consent. All issues could be determined in a
    remote hearing. The documents before the Upper Tribunal  include  those
    that were before the First-tier Tribunal (i) the  respondent's  bundle;
    (ii) the appellant's bundle; (iii) statement  of  the  appellant;  (iv)
    remittance receipts; and (iv) a skeleton  argument  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. Mr Melvin did not have copies of  many  of  the  papers.  He
    confirmed that he had enough documents to proceed with the error of law
    hearing and was content to do so.



Decision and reasons

6.   At the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing the appellant was a  75-
    year-old woman who lived in a joint family household with the sponsor's
    wife and  child  in  a  rural  village  in  Pakistan.  The  appellant's
    evidence, the sponsor's evidence, her daughter's evidence and  that  of
    her son-in-law, was that she was dependent upon the sponsor's financial
    support for her basic needs. The appellant  produced  a  more  detailed
    statement in support of the appeal,  which  she  signed  with  a  thumb
    print, indicating a lack of literacy. Her evidence was that her husband
    died many years ago and that she has been dependent upon her son  since
    then. She did not receive financial support from any other source.  Her
    daughter lived with her husband in a separate home and  did  not  work.
    They would not be expected to support her. The appellant said that  she
    rarely travels outside the rural village where she has  lived  all  her
    life. She does not have a bank account  because  the  nearest  bank  is
    about an hour away. Her son transfers money to her  son-in-law,  Ghulam
    Abbas, who brings her cash to pay for her daily expenses.

7.   Their evidence was consistent with  cultural  norms  in  Pakistan.  The
    appellant is a widow, not of working age, and is seemingly  illiterate.
    It is still common for women to  be  financially  dependent  upon  male
    family members in Pakistan. It is common for elderly family members  to
    live in a joint family household. It is common for family  members  who
    live abroad, and particularly the eldest son, to  send  remittances  to
    support elderly members. It is consistent with daily life  in  a  rural
    village that the appellant would use cash and is unlikely to be able to
    produce detailed documentary evidence of her expenses.

8.   The judge accepted that there was sufficient evidence to show that  the
    sponsor sends remittance to his mother via his cousin/brother-in-law in
    Pakistan. However, he was not satisfied that there was enough  evidence
    to show that she relied on this income for her basic needs.  The  judge
    failed to consider whether the appellant's explanation for being unable
    to document her daily expenses was reasonable in the context  of  rural
    life in Pakistan. The judge failed to make any findings as  to  whether
    he accepted the sponsor's evidence (as well  as  the  other  consistent
    testimonies) that the appellant was wholly financially dependent on her
    son. There is no requirement for all  evidence  to  be  in  documentary
    form; oral evidence is  still  evidence.  Having  noted  the  sponsor's
    evidence at the hearing, that his father used to own a shop, the  judge
    suggested at [19] that this might be an alternative source  of  income.
    If this was a concern, fairness demanded that the  issues  should  have
    been clarified with the sponsor during the hearing, but it was  not.  I
    was told that the sponsor's oral evidence was that  his  father's  shop
    was sold after his death.

9.   For these reasons, I conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    take into account relevant considerations, failed to make  findings  on
    material matters and failed to  provide  a  fair  opportunity  for  the
    sponsor to address a key area  of  concern.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error on a point of law. The finding
    relating to the sponsor's provision of financial support  is  preserved
    but the conclusion is set  aside.  It  is  appropriate  to  remake  the
    decision in the Upper Tribunal. The only  issue  for  determination  is
    whether the appellant is dependent on the financial  support  from  the
    sponsor to meet her basic needs.

10.  If Mr Melvin had the relevant papers it would  have  been  possible  to
    hear submissions and to remake the decision, but in the  circumstances,
    it is necessary to prolong  the  proceedings  to  allow  time  for  the
    respondent to consider the evidence, and what is said in this decision,
    before making  submissions.  Both  parties  agreed  that  it  would  be
    possible to remake the decision by way of written submissions.

Directions

1.   The appellant shall file  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
    respondent an electronic copy of the evidence relied upon  and  written
    submissions relating to remaking by Friday 07 August 2020.

2.   The respondent shall file  written  submissions  by  Friday  21  August
    2020.

3.   The appellant shall file any response by Friday 28 August 2020.

4.   The Upper Tribunal will consider the written submissions,  and  subject
    to any submissions made about the mode of hearing,  shall  then  decide
    the case without a hearing.

5.   Liberty to apply.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision will be remade by the Upper Tribunal without a hearing


Signed   M. Canavan    Date 30 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
