

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal no: Ea/03838/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Field House                            |  Decision signed:            |
|                                             |21.11.2017                    |
|on    20.11.2017                             |  Sent out:  22. 11. 2017     |


                                   Before:

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                  Between:

                           Nneka Theresa CHIKEZIE

                                                    Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                     Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:  Matthias Ume-Ezeuke (counsel instructed by MJ Solomon &
Partners)
For the respondent: Mr Tom Wilding

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Buster Cox), made at Taylor  House  without  a  hearing
    (the appellant ) on 9 February 2017, to  a family member residence card
    appeal by a citizen of Nigeria, born in 1980, and married to a  citizen
    of the Netherlands.

 2. On the facts as found by the judge, the sponsor was  living  here,  and
    registered in this country, paying tax and National Insurance as a self-
    employed person. However his business  involved  buying  motor  vehicle
    parts for a company in Nigeria, from one in the Netherlands, and he did
    no actual business in this country. The judge took the view that he was
    not exercising Treaty rights here, though he noted that the Home Office
    had previously accepted that he was, and so dismissed the appeal.



 3. The definition of self-employed person at reg. 4 (b) of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  [the  EEA  Regulations]  is
    hardly very illuminating:

       "self-employed person" means a person who establishes himself in
       order to pursue activity as a self-employed person in accordance with
       Article 49 of the treaty on the Functioning of the European Union

 4. Mr Wilding, having considered that article, and other relevant European
    Union legislation, took the view that, on the facts found by the judge,
    the appellant had to be accepted as coming within that definition.  The
    judge's point is an interesting one, and one which will no  doubt  have
    to be considered at length on some future occasion where the facts  are
    in dispute; but the present appeal is allowed by consent.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
