
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/03668/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28th February 2018                     |On 11th April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                            saleem hussain mughal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Fujiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, d.o.b. 10th February 1972.   He
    appeals against a decision of the Respondent, made on 3rd  March  2016,
    to refuse his application for a residence card as  an  extended  family
    member of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   His appeal was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This
    was on the basis that it was established by the  reported  decision  in
    Sala (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) that the  Tribunal
    had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

 2. It has now been held that Sala was wrongly decided.  There is indeed  a
    right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against decisions  taken  by
    the Respondent refusing applications pursuant to the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006, as decided by the Court of  Appeal  in  Khan  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.

 3. The decision under challenge  in  the  present  proceedings  was  taken
    pursuant to the 2006 Regulations. Therefore it follows it was an  error
    of law for the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction.

 4. This means that the appeal has not yet started its process through  the
    First-tier Tribunal and therefore there remains outstanding  a  triable
    issue which needs to be resolved.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
    allowed therefore to the extent that the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined fully on its merits.

Decision

In dismissing the appeal for want of jurisdiction  the  First-tier  Tribunal
materially erred in law.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed  to  the  extent  that
this appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge I. Howard)  to
be determined on its merits.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     01 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
