
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03003/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype for    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 29 January 2021                   |On 25 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     PH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - UKVS SHeffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Neal Robb, Gray & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie promulgated on 15 April 2020.  The judge dismissed an  appeal
    by the appellant, a citizen of Cameroon,  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse his application for entry clearance  in  order  to
    settle with his aunt whom I shall refer to as AH, or "the sponsor".  AH
    lives in Scotland with her  daughter  and  has  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee  by  the  respondent.   AH  shares  some  of  the   appellant's
    distinctive names, so in order to ensure her  continuing  anonymity,  I
    have granted this appellant anonymity, to avoid jigsaw identification.

 2. The date of birth of the appellant is an issue in the proceedings.

 3. By way of a preliminary procedural observation, and as noted  by  Judge
    Gillespie, although the Tribunal has categorised these  proceedings  as
    an EU appeal using an 'EA number' in the appeal  reference,  it  is  in
    fact a human rights appeal.  Nothing turns on this but for completeness
    I should mention this.

 4. On 4 December 2018 the appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  under
    paragraph 319X(ii) of the Immigration Rules, to live with the sponsor.

 5. Paragraph 319X(ii) provides that the requirements for a person  seeking
    leave in these circumstances are that:

         "(ii) the relative has limited leave in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian  protection  and  there  are
         serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  make
         exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable  arrangements  have
         been made for the child's care..."

 6. In his  application,  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  been  born  on
    9 December 2000.  That was some five  days  before  his  claimed  18th
    birthday on 9 December 2018.  Accordingly, on the  appellant's  claimed
    date of birth he was still a child at the time he made this application
    for entry clearance.

 7. The respondent refused the application.  The basis for the refusal  was
    primarily because, during the asylum process,  the  sponsor  had  given
    dates of  birth  to  the  respondent  of  her  relatives  in  Cameroon,
    including that of the appellant, which was at odds  with  the  date  of
    birth the appellant had given to the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  his
    application for entry clearance.  Further, the Entry Clearance  Officer
    stated that the birth certificate he relied  upon  lacked  clarity  and
    reliability.  The certificate date was said to be unclear, and appeared
    to have been altered on the  basis  that  it  had  been  written  in  a
    different ink to the rest of  the  certificate.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer also noticed that the birthdate for the appellant on his school
    certificate  was  written  in  different  ink  to  the  rest   of   the
    certificate.  Those concerns caused  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    question the appellant's assertion that he remained a child at the time
    the application was made.

 8. In his decision, the judge noted that the sponsor had indeed  given  at
    least three different dates of  birth  for  the  appellant  during  the
    asylum process.  Those were  9  March  1998,  an  unspecified  date  in
    December 1999 and 9 December 2000.  The judge had before him a copy  of
    the appellant's Cameroonian passport.  That document states that he was
    born on 9 December 2000.  The judge also  recorded  that  he  had  been
    provided with a copy of a birth certificate produced  in  Cameroon  for
    the appellant and another birth certificate.  Both  birth  certificates
    recorded 9 December 2000 as the appellant's date of birth but each  had
    been registered in different  subdistricts  within  the  administrative
    areas in Cameroon and had been completed in different handwriting.   At
    [16] the judge said:

         "In regard to the respondent's assessment  of  the  age  issue  the
         decision maker  as  noted  said  it  was  unclear  when  his  birth
         certificate was  actually  issued,  as  the  certificate  date  was
         unclear and appeared to have been altered, as it had  been  written
         in a different ink to the rest of the certificate.  Similarly,  the
         birthdate noted for his school certificate was also  written  in  a
         different ink to the rest of the certificate.  This caused  him  to
         doubt whether both documents accurately reflected  his  birthdate."



 9. The judge added:

         "these original documents were not produced at the hearing so I  am
         unable to make any finding on the issue."

10. In the next paragraph the judge  outlined  his  operative  analysis  in
    relation to the date of birth issue.  He said:

         "As noted three different dates were given, or can be  inferred  as
         noted above and  there  is  uncertainty  in  regard  to  the  birth
         certificate, again as noted above.  Moreover, I find it implausible
         that a woman who had care of these three  children  was  unable  to
         give what he now says is his correct  birthday:  9  December  2000,
         when she prepared her [asylum] statement with her  solicitors.   If
         he was born on that  date,  the  millennial  year,  it  is  a  very
         memorable one indeed."

Grounds of Appeal

11. There are three grounds of appeal relating  to  the  judge's  analysis.
    Only the first ground targets the date of birth issue.  Grounds 2 and 3
    concern the judge's subsequent analysis  relating  to  the  substantive
    criteria contained in paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules.

12. As Mr Robb realistically accepted during the  hearing  before  me,  the
    remaining grounds of appeal stand or fall with his success in  relation
    to ground 1,  the  attempted  challenge  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    findings of fact concerning the  claimed  date  of  birth.   For  those
    reasons it is not necessary to go into further detail  in  relation  to
    grounds 2 and 3.

13. Ground 1 concerning the passport and birth certificate  issue  contend,
    first, the judge was  provided  with  the  original  documents  at  the
    hearing, contrary to his assertion in the decision that he had not been
    provided with them.  Secondly, at an earlier hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the respondent's representative  had  on  that  occasion
    revealed that he did not share the  concerns  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer relating to the discrepancy with the handwriting and ink on the
    birth certificates.  Thirdly, the respondent had provided  no  reliable
    evidence to dispute the age provided in the appellant's passport.   The
    only inference possible  submitted  the  grounds  in  relation  to  the
    passport was that the appellant had  obtained  a  fraudulent  passport.
    That was a serious allegation and one  which  the  respondent  had  not
    provided any evidence to substantiate.



Discussion

14. Mr Robb relied on his written grounds of appeal and two further sets of
    written submissions that had been directed by the Tribunal prior to the
    hearing before  me.   Ms  Everett  submitted  that  the  judge  reached
    findings of fact which were open to him on the evidence he heard.   She
    referred to the established doctrine principles to the  high  threshold
    to be met in the event that a  finding  of  fact  reached  by  a  first
    instance judge is to be challenged, and submitted that it was  entirely
    reasonable for the judge to look at the three dates of birth given  for
    the appellant by the sponsor, to take into account the concerns  raised
    by the Entry Clearance Officer concerning the quality  and  reliability
    of the birth certificates and the absence  of  original  documentation.
    Those factors were considerations which were  not  irrational  and  nor
    were they in any way perverse.

15. In my judgment, this  is  a  case  which  may  be  resolved  relatively
    swiftly.  At [16] when the judge said that the original documents "were
    not produced at the hearing", adding that he had therefore been  unable
    to conduct a reliability assessment in relation to  them,  it  appears,
    unusually for this experienced judge, he was mistaken.

16. There were two original documents which remained on the Tribunal's file
    following the First-tier Tribunal hearing, including one of the  school
    certificates which the judge had only moments earlier in  his  decision
    said that he did not have an original copy of.  I  was  assured  by  Mr
    Robb that full copies of all relevant documents were made available  to
    the judge at the hearing.  Most original documents were retained by  Mr
    Robb's firm of solicitors, and he assured me remained on  the  file  in
    his premises, but nevertheless had been made available  to  the  judge.
    That accords with the Tribunal's file in relation to  a  hearing  which
    took place some two weeks or so before the substantive  hearing  before
    Judge Gillespie on 8 January 2020.  On that date, the matter had  been
    adjourned and by a different judge specifically to enable the appellant
    to retrieve the original documents, many of which she had left at home,
    in order for them  to  be  considered  by  the  Tribunal  on  a  future
    occasion.  The Secretary of State's written submissions accord with the
    Tribunal's file in relation to what took place on 8 January 2020.

17. Of course, appeals to this Tribunal lie only on a point of law and  not
    on a point of fact.  However it is possible  for  certain  mistakes  of
    fact to amount to an error of law.  So much is  clear  from  the  well-
    known authority of R (Iran) v the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  At [9] the Court of Appeal  summarised
    the established bases for an appellate court or tribunal  to  interfere
    with a finding of fact reached by a first instance judge.  At  [(vii)],
    it states that an error of fact may amount to an error of law where  it
    involves:

         "Making a mistake as to a material fact which could be  established
         by objective and uncontentious evidence, where the appellant and/or
         his advisors were  not  responsible  for  the  mistake,  and  where
         unfairness resulted from the fact that a mistake was made."

18. I find, therefore, that the documents were available to  the  judge  at
    the hearing, and it was a mistake of fact for the  judge  to  say  that
    they were not produced.  It was a corresponding mistake for  the  judge
    to conclude that he was unable to make any findings  on  those  issues.
    Many of the remaining elements of the grounds  of  appeal  set  out  on
    behalf of the appellant, in particular grounds 2 and 3 amount primarily
    to disagreements of fact.

19. I consider that unfairness did result from this mistake because at [17]
    the  judge  highlighted  the  "uncertainty  in  regard  to  the   birth
    certificate" as one of the reasons he declined to  find  the  documents
    reliable.

20. I  add  at  this  stage  that  Ms  Everett  candidly  accepted  in  her
    submissions that, had it been the case that the judge made an error  of
    fact of this nature, the submissions advanced by the Secretary of State
    would not apply with equal measure.  She was right to  acknowledge  the
    reality of the facts of this case in that way.

21. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Gillespie on the basis that
    it involved the making of an error of law as set out  above  and  remit
    this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be  reheard  by  a  different
    judge.  I do not preserve any of the findings of  Judge  Gillespie.   I
    accept Mr Robb's submission that the remaining elements of the  judge's
    analysis stand or fall with the  approach  taken  to  the  age  of  the
    appellant.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.   The  decision  of  Judge  Gillespie  involved  the
making of an error of law and is set aside.  The  proceedings  are  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a  different  judge  with  no
findings of fact preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 4 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

