
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/03681/2015
                                                               EA/03683/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 01st December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                 NKECHI [E]
                                    [P E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R O Ojukotola, The Law Crest
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cope)  dismissing  their  appeal  against   the
    respondent's  decision  made  on  30  November  2015   refusing   their
    applications for permanent residence cards.

Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of Nigeria  born  on  7  May  1970  and  18
    October 2006 respectively.  The first appellant is the  mother  of  the
    second appellant and they are the wife and  stepson  of  Kingsley  [E],
    their sponsor, a German citizen who has been exercising  treaty  rights
    in the UK.

3.   On 15 July 2010 the appellants were issued with EEA residence cards  as
    the family members of their sponsor, valid until 15  July  2015.   They
    applied for permanent residence cards on 9  July  2015.   In  order  to
    qualify for the right to reside in the UK permanently as family members
    of an EEA national they had to show that they had  resided  in  the  UK
    with the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of  five  years:  reg  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).   For  the
    reasons given in the respondent's decision letter of 30 November  2015,
    she was not satisfied that  the  appellants  were  able  to  meet  this
    requirement.   Amongst  the  documents  submitted  in  support  of  the
    application were P60s for the years 2010-2011, 2011-2012, 2012-2013 and
    2013-2014 and 2014-2015 and wage slips dated from August 2014  to  June
    2015 and tax returns from 2012-2013.

4.   It was the respondent's view that P60s alone  were  not  sufficient  in
    proving the sponsor's employment for  the  entire  year  as  the  total
    income for the year could reflect less than twelve months' work.   Bank
    statements submitted dated 2010 to 2015 failed to show income  received
    from the sponsor's employers and in these circumstances the  respondent
    expected to see further evidence to support  employment  such  as  wage
    slips, employer's letters,  etc.   Further,  it  was  stated  that  the
    sponsor was self-employed throughout 2012-2013 and this  was  evidenced
    by a tax return for  that  period  but  that  document  alone  was  not
    sufficient in proving that he was self-employed throughout that period.
     It was the respondent's conclusion that the appellants had  failed  to
    provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the  sponsor  had  been
    exercising treaty rights in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years whilst employed or self-employed and accordingly the  application
    was refused.

5.   The appellants appealed against this decision arguing in  substance  in
    the grounds that the sponsor had completed five years  as  mandated  by
    the Regulations  and  the  respondent's  decision  was  irrational  and
    breached the appellants' rights as family members of an  EEA  national.
    The grounds further assert that the finding that the  sponsor  had  not
    completed five years as required was without logic as the  tax  returns
    certificate issued by the HMRC was evidence of exercising and  residing
    in the UK at the relevant periods. The appellants  opted  to  have  the
    appeal decided without a hearing and further documentary  evidence  was
    submitted in support.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The judge noted that there was no issue that the appellants  were  non-
    EEA nationals whereas the sponsor was an EEA  national,  a  citizen  of
    Germany.  The respondent had not suggested that the appellants did  not
    meet the other requirements for the issue of an EEA permanent residence
    card save for a failure to show that the sponsor had resided in the  UK
    in accordance with the EEA Regulations  for  the  requisite  five  year
    period.

7.   The judge rejected a  submission  that  the  only  year  of  contention
    relating to when the sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights  was  2012-
    2013, the year when it was said  he  was  self-employed.   This  was  a
    misunderstanding of what the respondent actually  said.   She  had  not
    been satisfied with the evidence of self-employment  in  the  tax  year
    2012-2013 or with the evidence relating to the  employment  during  the
    other relevant tax years.  The respondent's view was that there  was  a
    lack of evidence to show that the sponsor had been continuously working
    or otherwise exercising treaty rights in  the  tax  years  involved  as
    opposed to being employed for the discrete  periods  during  those  tax
    years.

8.   The judge reviewed  the  evidence  in  paras  36-46  and  concluded  as
    follows:

         "47.  In  the  absence  of  documentary  evidence  or  satisfactory
             explanation for the periods  which  are  not  covered  by  the
             documents which have been supplied, whilst it is a possibility
             I do not consider that it has been shown  to  be  more  likely
             than not that Mr [E] has in fact exercised treaty rights for a
             continuous period  of  five  years  as  required  by  the  EEA
             Regulations whether through employment or  self-employment  or
             being a jobseeker.

         48.  I furthermore note that there is no evidence before me to show
             that [the sponsor] has in fact exercised  treaty  rights  here
             for any earlier five year period which might give rise to  the
             Appellants  being  able  to  obtain  EEA  permanent  residence
             cards."

    Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

9.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the production of  P60s  was
    evidence of economic activity and it was  not  open  to  the  judge  to
    insist upon evidence not required by the Regulations.  Secondly, it  is
    argued that the qualifying period in the present  case  was  continuous
    residence from the date of marriage for the following five  years  i.e.
    from 2010 to 2015 and that the judge had acknowledged in  his  decision
    that P60s were provided to cover continuous work and residence  in  the
    UK and  that  the  issue  of  a  P60  was  confirmation  of  continuous
    employment and evidence that the EEA national was engaged  in  economic
    activity for the qualifying period.  Thirdly, it is  argued  that  five
    years' P60s supported  by  the  tax  records  from  HMRC  covering  the
    qualifying period  were  sufficient  evidence  as  required  under  the
    Directives as evidence of five years' continuous residence.

10.  Permission was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge had erred in rejecting the P60s as evidence of being economically
    active and that five years' P60s supported by tax records from the HMRC
    covering the qualifying period were arguably sufficient evidence.

11.  Mr Ojukotola adopted the grounds in his submissions  arguing  that  the
    evidence in the P60s together  with  the  letter  from  HMRC  dated  10
    December 2015 was sufficient evidence  of  continuous  employment.   He
    referred to the Tribunal decisions in Begum (EEA -  worker  -jobseeker)
    Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00275 and  Idezuna  (EEA  -  permanent  residence)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 474.  He asked rhetorically what  kind  of  further
    evidence the judge could reasonably expect to be produced  in  addition
    to the evidence already produced.  It had been shown that  the  sponsor
    was exercising treaty rights for five years  as  required.   There  was
    evidence that he had been in paid employment and  self-employment.   He
    referred to para 6 of Begum, submitting that work could be temporary or
    permanent and that the right to residence as a worker was  not  subject
    to any condition relating to the type of employment or to the amount of
    income derived from it.  He submitted that the  judge  had  been  wrong
    implicitly to impose the kind of requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE
    of HC395 of producing specific evidence in support of the  application.
    The evidence produced supported, so  he  argued,  a  finding  that  the
    sponsor had been in paid employment throughout the relevant  five  year
    period.

12.  Mr Staunton submitted that Idezuna and Begum did not cast any light  on
    the issues  in  the  present  appeal  which  was  whether  five  years'
    continuous activity as a qualified person had  been  established.   The
    judge had identified and explained why he was not satisfied that it had
    been shown that the sponsor had been exercising  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years.  By way of example, in [37] the judge,
    having been through the 94  pages  of  the  National  Westminster  bank
    statements submitted,  was  satisfied  that  the  respondent  had  been
    correct to say that these statements  did  not  show  evidence  of  the
    sponsor, as opposed to the first  appellant,  receiving  payments  from
    employment into that bank account and certainly not  from  any  of  the
    employers mentioned in the HMRC letter and in [39], although there were
    various cash deposits into the National Westminster account, there  was
    no identification of the source of those funds and, in the  absence  of
    any  supporting  documentary  evidence  or  evidence  from  the   first
    appellant or the sponsor to say exactly  what  the  sources  were,  the
    judge  was  unable  to  assume  that  they  related  to  the  sponsor's
    employment.  The judge took the view  that  the  aggregated  P60  forms
    alone could not show continuous working for the purposes of reg  15  of
    the Regulations.  He submitted that the judge had  reached  a  decision
    properly open to him on the evidence  and  the  grounds  relied  on  to
    challenge the decision did not disclose any error of law on his part.

Assessment of the Issues

13.  I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  his  decision
    should be set aside.  The issue at the heart of this appeal is  whether
    the P60s taken with the letter from HMRC setting out the record of  the
    sponsor's employment together with the  other  evidence  produced  were
    sufficient to establish that the sponsor  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights for a continuous period of five years.

14.  The judge took into account the letter from HMRC describing it in  [36]
    as particularly useful because it identified the sponsor's  employments
    during the  tax  years  2010-2015  showing  employment  with  Polyguard
    Security Services Ltd and subsequently with Cascade Care Ltd and London
    Cyrenians Housing Ltd.  I am satisfied that the judge was  entitled  to
    take the view that  the  P60s  only  showed  that  a  person  had  been
    economically active through employment upon which they had paid  income
    tax in a particular tax year but it did not identify when  or  for  how
    long during that tax year the  employment  had  taken  place.   He  was
    entitled to  find  that  the  aggregated  P60s  alone  could  not  show
    continuous  working  for  the  purposes  of  reg  15  [40].   In   such
    circumstances further evidence of employment was needed  to  show  that
    the sponsor was in fact  exercising  treaty  rights  for  the  relevant
    continuous period as opposed to working intermittently.  As  the  judge
    pointed out, the respondent in the refusal letter put the appellants on
    notice of this but they had not responded [41].

15.  The judge turned to  the  issue  of  self-employment  during  2012-2013
    acknowledging  the  existence  of  the  financial  statement   accounts
    prepared by accountants but on an unaudited basis which meant that  the
    accountants had relied on information given by the sponsor rather  than
    having audited that information [43].   The  judge  commented  that  no
    supporting documentation such as invoices or receipts had been provided
    for the sponsor's self-employment.  The explanation given was that when
    the sponsor and appellants had moved house those documents  were  lost.
    The judge said that that may well be so but the unfortunate consequence
    was that there was  no  supporting  evidence  to  show  self-employment
    beyond the submission of a tax return which  in  any  event  showed  no
    income tax paid [44].  In the judge's view the appellants' difficulties
    were  compounded  by  the  fact  that  the  National  Westminster  bank
    statements did not show any payments made into the account as a  result
    of the sponsor's self-employment.

16.  I am not satisfied that the production of the  P60s,  the  letter  from
    the HMRC together with the other documents produced  in  evidence  were
    such that they by themselves established continuous exercise of  treaty
    rights.  There may well be cases when such documentation will do so but
    that depends on the facts of each case.  It was for the judge to decide
    what inferences could properly be drawn from the documents relied on by
    the appellants.  He has explained clearly why he was not satisfied that
    the documents produced established on a balance of  probabilities  that
    the requirements of the Regulations had been met.

17.  This is not a case where the judge sought to  impose  requirements  not
    set out in the Regulations.  The decisions in Idezuna and Begum do  not
    take the matter any further.  The issue was  whether  the  sponsor  had
    been residing in accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a  continuous
    period of five years. It was for the appellants to establish  that  the
    requirements of the Regulations were met and they failed to do  so  for
    the reasons the judge gave after a careful analysis of the evidence. In
    summary, I am satisfied that the judge reached findings  properly  open
    to him on the evidence.  The grounds and submissions do not satisfy  me
    that he erred in law.





Decision

18.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  and  accordingly  its
    decision stands. No anonymity direction was made.


Signed   H J E Latter  Date: 28 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
