
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03850/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2017                           |On 10 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                ALIE SUMAREH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.  The  appellant  appeals  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State
       refusing him a residence card as the spouse or alternatively  family
       member of an EEA national working in the United Kingdom.

    2. There are  two  problems  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.
       Firstly, and understandably, the First-tier Tribunal ruled  that  it
       had no jurisdiction to hear an appeal against a refusal based on the
       appellant's claim to be an extended family member because the First-
       tier Tribunal considered itself bound by the decision of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Sala which we now know was wrongly decided.  It  follows
       therefore that the appellant is entitled to have is appeal based  on
       his claim to be  a  family  member  determined.   It  has  not  been
       considered before and the appropriate place for this is in the First-
       tier Tribunal.

    3. The second problem is that the First-tier Tribunal  ruled  that  the
       appellant was not free to marry because, at the  relevant  time,  he
       was married to someone else.  The difficulty with this is  that  the
       judge did not necessarily understand correctly the  significance  of
       different dates on the Register  of  Divorces  which  was  provided.
       This shows the date of divorce to be 11 January 2013.   If  in  fact
       the divorce was effective on that date then the appellant  was  free
       to marry.  He says that is the case.  The divorce was not registered
       until 19 November 2013.  If the divorce had  no  effect  until  that
       date then the appellant was not free to marry.   The  difficulty  is
       that the judge has assumed that the  divorce  had  no  legal  effect
       until 19 November 2013 but did not take the point with the appellant
       who has explained to me this morning his very clear  belief  that  a
       Muslim divorce, even a Muslim divorce by proxy as is  said  to  have
       occurred here, is effective when it happens, in this case 11 January
       2013, and the date of registration is not significant.   I  make  no
       finding on whether this is right,  I  simply  record  this  was  the
       effect of his evidence and if this had been asked of the witness the
       judge would have had to have ruled upon it.

    4. It follows that I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
       and order that the  case  be  determined  again  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    5. I have explained to the appellant that he may be able to assist  the
       Tribunal if he is able to produce evidence of the effective date  of
       his divorce but that might be something  that  is  difficult  for  a
       litigant in person to achieve.  I have also asked Mr McVeety  if  he
       is able to assist, although I have reminded myself and  record  here
       that the burden of proof is on the appellant and I  certainly  would
       not criticise the Secretary of State if she is not able to  come  up
       with an answer.  Nevertheless, I hope she will be able to make basic
       enquiries because it may be that the answer  to  this  conundrum  is
       apparent and readily available if  the  appropriate  expert  can  be
       contacted.  Be that as it may, it remains for the appellant to  show
       that his divorce was effective on 11 January and if he  is  able  to
       establish that then his case has  to  be  decided  properly  on  its
       merits both as a spouse and as an extended family member  and  these
       things have not been done.

Decision

    6. I therefore allow the appeal and order the case to be heard again in
       the First-tier Tribunal.








|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 9 January 2018                |
|Judge                                |                                     |







