
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03045/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|8 November 2018                               |26 November 2018              |


                                   Before


                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between


                                 MONTA UDINE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Latvia.  She appeals with permission  to
    this Tribunal against the decision of Judge Fowell  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
    on 24 February 2016 refusing  her  application  for  a  residence  card
    confirming a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom.

 2. At the hearing before Judge Fowell  the  appellant's  husband,  also  a
    national of Latvia, appealed against a similar decision.  In  his  case
    Judge Fowell allowed the appeal, because although the full facts became
    apparent only at the hearing, the evidence then  produced  was  clearly
    sufficient to show that he had, at  the  date  of  the  decision,  been
    residing in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (SI   2006/1003)   ('the
    Regulations') for a continuous period of five years: he  has  been  for
    the whole of the relevant period in employment as an NHS  doctor.   The
    appellant's  position  is,  however,  as  Judge   Fowell   said,   less
    straightforward.

 3. A certain amount of confusion may have arisen from assumptions that the
    appellant's status as a national of a Member State herself, rather than
    merely the wife of one, had been ignored.  It does  not  appear  to  us
    that that particular factor has any bearing on the case.  The permanent
    right of residence is acquired by an EEA national, like the  appellant,
    in the circumstances prescribed by art 16.1 of the  Citizens  Directive
    2004/38/EC, as transposed into the Regulations at reg  15(1)(a),  which
    are that she 'has resided in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
    these  Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years'.   "In
    accordance with these Regulations" means, in effect, that for the whole
    of a continuous period of five years she would need to  show  that  her
    presence and activity in  the  United  Kingdom  was  permitted  by  the
    Citizens Directive or the Regulations.

 4. The history is not in any serious doubt.  The appellant and her husband
    have been in a relationship together for  a  considerable  time.   They
    came together to the United Kingdom in 2010.  The  appellant's  husband
    came to work and as we have said has been doing  so  ever  since.   The
    appellant came as a student: she first studied  at  Southampton  Solent
    University and undertook a course there which ended in  about  November
    2013.  She then trained with a view to offering  beauty  therapy  on  a
    self-employed basis.  The training ended in February 2014, and she then
    registered as self-employed for tax purposes.  There is evidence of her
    pursuing that activity in the two following tax years at least.  On  28
    August 2015 she and her husband were  married.   She  is  now  again  a
    student, and also of course the wife of her EEA national  husband  (who
    accompanied her to the hearing).

 5. The problem is that that history does not, as the judge noted, show any
    continuous period of five years of  presence  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations.  That is because there is  and  was  no  evidence  of  the
    actual pursuit of the self-employed activity during the tax year  2013-
    4.  She stopped being a student in  November  2013;  but  even  if  her
    subsequent training were to be regarded as being a student that  itself
    finished in February 2014, and there was  apparently  no  self-employed
    tax return for the year.  Thus the appellant's actual (as distinct from
    desired, hoped-for or fully-trained for) activity in  the  period  from
    February to the end of the tax year is not established, and it  follows
    that the evidence does not establish  that  for  that  period  she  was
    residing in accordance with the Regulations.  That period prevents  any
    continuous period of five years lawful residence between 2010  and  the
    present from being established.  She began with a period as a  student,
    and in more recent years has qualified as  a  self-employed  person,  a
    spouse and a student, but in between there is a gap.

 6. For these reasons, as we attempted  to  explain  at  the  hearing,  the
    present appeal cannot succeed.  The appellant's presence in the  United
    Kingdom now  is  clearly  lawful,  and  she  is  well  on  the  way  to
    establishing a continuous period of five years residence in  accordance
    with the Regulations, but had not done so at the date of  the  decision
    against which she appeals, and has not done so yet.

 7. For these reasons we dismiss the appeal to  this  Tribunal  and  affirm
    Judge Fowell's decision.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 13 November 2018.
