

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03184/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2019                 |On 19 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                        JORGE PABLO FERREYRA OLIVERA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Dingley of Ison Harrison Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Roblin promulgated on 4 April 2019, following consideration of  the
        merits of the appeal  on  the  papers,  who  dismissed  the  appeal
        pursuant to the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  against  the
        respondent's refusal to issue the appellant  a  residence  card  in
        recognition of a right to permanently reside in the United Kingdom.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Uruguay born on 23 August  1982.  The
        appellant's sponsor is a [NP], a British citizen, who the appellant
        stated commenced her employment in Tenerife in Spain in March 2004.
        The appellant claims they met in May 2004 and married on 30 January
        2006. The sponsor remained employed in Spain until December 2011.
     3. The Judge sets out a chronology of the sponsors employment in Spain
        at [5] as follows:


             5.    It  is  suggested  the  appellant's   sponsor   obtained
             employment in Spain as follows:


                  a) On 28 March 2004 until November 2004 with Thomas  Cooke
                     as a holiday representation
                  b) From 19 January 2005 to July 2011 as  a  waitress  with
                     Snappys Bistro.
                  c) From July 2007 to January 2010 as  a  receptionist  and
                     telemarketer at Palm Beach Club.
                  d) From March 2010 until June 2011 on maternity leave.
                  e) From July 2011 to December 2011 as an administrator for
                     the Eze Group.


     4. The appellant states the sponsor was employed following her  return
        to the United Kingdom and commenced maternity leave in August  2017
        after the birth of their second child
     5. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [23].
     6. The Judge notes it is not disputed the appellant is a family member
        of his sponsor or that he was issued with a residence  card  on  23
        May 2013 valid to 14 May 2018.
     7. The Judge accepts the sponsor worked for  Eze  Group  from  January
        2011 to December 2011 [27] but finds he had not been provided  with
        documentary evidence of the sponsors employment in  Spain  although
        does refer to a number  of  documents  in  the  appellant's  bundle
        including evidence  the  appellant  and  his  sponsor  purchased  a
        property in Spain in 2006 - 2007.
     8. At [29 - 33] the Judge finds:


             29.  I accept that I do have  within  the  appellant's  bundle
                  details of his sponsor's  bank  accounts  and  information
                  from the sponsor's employer which supports the appellant's
                  position that  the  sponsor  was  working  in  the  United
                  Kingdom since 27 February 2012.  I  have  no  evidence  to
                  confirm that the appellant and his sponsor  were  residing
                  in  Spain,  Tenerife  prior  to  January  2011  the   date
                  confirmed in the letter from Eze  group  dated  29  August
                  2012 that the Appellant's sponsor commenced employment  in
                  Tenerife with  them.  However  the  Appellant  claims  his
                  sponsor was employed  by  various  companies  in  Tenerife
                  before 2011 namely by Thomas Cooke in 2004, Snappy  Bistro
                  2005 - 2011 and the  Palm  Beach  Club  2007  -  2010.  No
                  evidence in support of these periods employment  has  been
                  provided.


             30.  I accept that  the  appellant  has  been  issued  with  a
                  residence card under Regulation 18(1) such card. Paragraph
                  18(6) specifies that a residence  card  is  issued  for  a
                  period of 5 years.


             31.  Thus I  have  found  that  the  appellant's  sponsor  was
                  working in Tenerife from January 2011  to  December  2011.
                  However by reference to Regulation 9 while I  accept  that
                  the appellant and his sponsor purchased  the  property  in
                  Tenerife in 2006 which was registered in 2007  I  have  no
                  evidence other than proof of purchase of the property that
                  this  was  the  location  of  the  appellant's   principal
                  residence  nor  that  of  his  sponsor.  Although  it   is
                  suggested that the sponsor worked  in  Spain  for  various
                  organisations from 2004  until  January  2011  I  have  no
                  documentary  evidence  of  that   employment.   The   only
                  information is that set out in  the  appellant  solicitors
                  letter. Furthermore I have no utility bills, wage slips or
                  bank statements for  that  period  other  than  those  few
                  documents which are provided in Spanish.


             32.  Having regard to the factors I have  outlined  I  am  not
                  satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the sponsor
                  moved  the  centre  of  life  to  Tenerife  and  that  the
                  appellant and  his  sponsor  integrated  significantly  in
                  Tenerife.


             33.  I find the appellant was in  a  position  to  obtain  the
                  evidence and due to the fact he did not do so I  find  the
                  appellant does not meet the Regulations and the appeal  is
                  dismissed.


     9. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal, the operative part of the
        grant being in the following terms:

             3.   On 16 November 2011 the Appellant was  granted  admission
                  to the UK on the basis  he  was  a  spouse  of  a  British
                  citizen who had been exercising treaty rights  by  working
                  in Spain. Thus the Surinder Singh route  was  accepted  as
                  applying to him.


             4.   When the Appellant's 2017  application  for  a  permanent
                  residence card was refused, no objection was taken by  the
                  Respondent to whether the sponsor had genuinely moved  the
                  centre of her  life  to  Spain.  Since  she  had  provided
                  evidence that she had worked there  for  many  years,  had
                  purchased property in Spain,  had  married  the  Appellant
                  there, had  conceived  and  borne  the  Appellant's  child
                  there, and had been granted Spanish residency that  stance
                  was unsurprising. Arguably, it was not open to  the  Judge
                  to take the point for himself, and to resolve  it  against
                  the Appellant, in the course of considering an  appeal  on
                  the papers  that  concern  the  single  issue  of  whether
                  documents  submitted  in  support   of   the   application
                  contained a mere typographical error. Having resolved that
                  single issue in the Appellant's favour [27] the  Appellant
                  was arguably entitled either to have his  appeal  allowed,
                  or if the Judge had real concerns that the  Appellant  had
                  deceived the Respondent in 2011, to have the appeal listed
                  for an oral  hearing  at  which  he  might  be  given  the
                  opportunity to address those concerns.



Error of law


    10. The Judge specifically finds the sponsor had not moved  the  centre
        of her life to Tenerife and that the appellant and sponsor had  not
        significantly integrated into Tenerife.
    11. A key concept within regulation 9 is the  "centre  of  life"  test.
        There does not appear, however, to be any  reference  to  Case  Law
        where such a phrase arises; although its origin appears  to  be  in
        domestic jurisprudence of  Rosa  v  Secretary  of  State  the  Home
        Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14 which refers to non-binding  guidance
        issued by the European Commission on the  Directive  which  at  [4]
        provides:
                  There is no abuse  where  EU  citizens  and  their  family
                  members obtain a right of residence under Community law in
                  a  Member  State  other  than  that  of  the  EU  citizens
                  nationality as  they  are  benefiting  from  an  advantage
                  inherent in the exercise of the  right  of  free  movement
                  protected by the Treaty,  regardless  of  the  purpose  of
                  their move to that State. By the same token, Community law
                  protects  EU  citizens  who  return  home   after   having
                  exercised their free movement rights.


                  ....


                  When  necessary,  Member  States  may  define  a  set   of
                  indicative criteria to assess  whether  residence  in  the
                  host Member State  was  genuine  and  effective.  National
                  authorities  may  in  particular  take  into  account  the
                  following factors....


    12. The facts before the Judge showed the EEA  national,  the  sponsor,
        travelled to Spain and took  employment.  The  right  of  residence
        necessary to enable the sponsor to  undertake  such  employment  is
        that she exercised. The intention of the sponsor is  not  relevant,
        and in any event there is no indication in this appeal of  evidence
        before the Judge to support an argument that the sponsor's  actions
        amounted to an abuse of rights. The doctrine of abuse of rights can
        apply only where it is shown by the respondent that  there  was  no
        genuine exercise of treaty rights to free movement and where  there
        was an  intention  to  use  an  artificial  construct  arrangement,
        neither  of  which  was  arguably  established  before  the  Judge.
        Regulation  9(4)(a)  must  be  interpreted  as  it  being  for  the
        respondent to establish there had been abuse of  rights  which  was
        not arguably made out on the evidence: see ZA  (Reg  9.  EEA  Regs;
        abuse of rights) Afghanistan [2019] UKUT 00281 (IAC).
    13. It  appears  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  the  Judge,
        especially in light  of  the  finding  in  the  appellant's  favour
        regarding the single issue on which  the  appeal  arose,  that  the
        Judge erred in proceeding to reconsider the merits of other aspects
        of the case without adequate notice to either party, in a case that
        was determined on the papers, and particularly without  giving  the
        appellant the opportunity to address any  concerns  the  Judge  may
        have had. It appears the Judge may also have erred in  arriving  at
        negative conclusions that the sponsor had not moved the  centre  of
        her life to Tenerife and had not significantly integrated where  it
        is not made out these are formal requirements of the Directive.  It
        is noted in the grant of permission to  appeal  the  appellant  was
        granted admission to the UK on the basis he  is  the  spouse  of  a
        British citizen who had been exercising treaty rights by working in
        Spain, indicating the matters referred to in the decision were  not
        a concern to the respondent at that time.
    14. The reasons for refusal letter dated the 27 February  2018  asserts
        the appellant had not provided sufficient evidence to  confirm  the
        sponsor was a worker in Spain from 2004 and 2011 as  the  decision-
        maker was unable to accept a letter  submitted  by  the  EZE  Group
        dated 11 September 2017 was  genuine  as  the  information  therein
        contradicted the other evidence provided which stated the appellant
        was living in the UK from December 2011.  No weight was attached to
        this letter and it  found  the  appellant  had  not  satisfied  the
        decision maker the sponsor was working  abroad  for  the  requisite
        period. The finding of the Judge at [27] was that on the basis of a
        letter dated 2018 from the EZE Group the letter of 29  August  2012
        was factually accurate and that the sponsor worked for that company
        from January 2011 to December 2011 and that the later letter of  11
        September 2017, relied upon  by  the  decision-maker,  contained  a
        clerical error in that the date of 2012 was  incorrect.  The  Judge
        had also a letter from Lowal Group dated 18  July  2017  confirming
        the sponsor had been employed with their company since 27  February
        2012 in the UK.
    15. The decision-maker raises no specific challenge to  the  claim  the
        sponsor was employed from  2004  to  July  2011  and  the  specific
        finding of the Judge establishes employment from 28 March  2004  to
        December 2011. As the only  basis  on  which  the  application  was
        refused has been shown to have been  resolved  in  the  appellant's
        favour it is arguable the Judge has erred in law in dismissing  the
        appeal for the reasons stated.
    16. We find it was unfair to raise  new  issues,  an  error  to  do  so
        without  giving  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  respond,  and
        moreover an error to apply the centre of life test in that way that
        the First-tier Tribunal has.
    17. We set aside the decision of the Judge and substitute a decision to
        allow the appeal under the Regulations.


Decision

    18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside
        the decision of the original Judge.   We  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.

   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


We make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 September 2019












