
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/03329/2018
     EA/03331/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral determination given following hearing|On 8 July 2019                   |
|On 18 June 2019                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                 Lulzime [C]
                                    [RM]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P V Thoree, Solicitor, Thoree & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Immediately following a hearing on 16 April 2019 I found that there had
    been an error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    also gave directions.  I gave detailed  reasons  for  so  finding.   Of
    necessity much of what appeared within that decision will  be  repeated
    below.

 2. The appellants are mother and son who now appeal against a decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge L K Gibbs, who in a decision  promulgated  in
    23 November 2018, following a hearing before her at Hatton Cross on  12
    November 2018 refused their  renewed  applications  for  EEA  residence
    cards as family members of the first appellant's husband, Mr  [S],  who
    is an EEA national who was said to be exercising treaty rights in  this
    country.

 3. In my error of law decision I summarised the history  of  this  appeal.
    The first appellant is a national of Albania who was born in  May  1980
    and the second appellant is her older son who  is  also  a  citizen  of
    Albania.  He was born in September 2005.  The first  appellant  arrived
    in the UK in July 2012 and applied for a residence card on 24 May  2013
    as a spouse of Mr [S], who is  a  national  of  Latvia,  whom  she  had
    married on 22 March 2013.  The couple have a son together,  Jason,  who
    is accepted as the biological son of Mr [S], but  the  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 26 January 2014, essentially on  the  basis
    of inconsistencies in the marriage interviews which were conducted with
    Mr [S] and the appellant by the respondent.

 4. The first appellant appealed against this decision  together  with  her
    son, the second appellant, but the decision was  upheld  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Keefe on the basis of  the  material  which  was  then
    before her in evidence.

 5. By the time of this decision Jason had been born but  the  judge  still
    did not accept for the reasons which she gave  that  the  marriage  had
    been a genuine marriage from its inception as  was  required.   She  in
    particular had regard to  some  inconsistencies  which  were  contained
    within the answers given by the parties in their  interviews  with  the
    respondent but when considering these inconsistencies also  had  regard
    to the lack of sufficient evidence  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  to
    counter this evidence.  As I noted within  my  error  of  law  decision
    Judge O'Keefe's decision was within the range of  reasonable  decisions
    open to her at that time.  For the purposes of this decision I add that
    what was particularly apparent at the time of the  hearing  before  her
    was how ill-prepared the appellants' case was at that time.

 6. Subsequently, however,  matters  moved  on  in  that  the  couple  have
    continued to live together; the first  appellant  continued  to  reside
    together with Mr [S], in the same household,  together  with  both  her
    sons, that is her older son, the second appellant and also Jason who is
    the son of  Mr  [S]  and  the  first  appellant.   In  2015  Jason  was
    registered as a British citizen, it being accepted  by  the  respondent
    (the  Passport  Office  coming   under   the   respondent's   area   of
    responsibility) that Jason was indeed the biological son of Mr  [S]  as
    claimed.

 7. As time went by the appellants decided it was appropriate to make a new
    application for a residence card on the basis  that  the  evidence  now
    available, which included evidence that  they  had  continued  to  live
    together with Mr [S] as a family and also  evidence  from  Mr  Khan,  a
    social worker, was sufficiently strong and different from the  evidence
    which had been before  Judge  O'Keefe  that  although  Judge  O'Keefe's
    decision would be the starting  point  before  any  decisionmaker,  the
    evidence now available was sufficient to demonstrate to  the  necessary
    standard of proof, which is the balance of  probabilities,  that  Judge
    O'Keefe had (largely because the evidence now available was not  before
    her) reached a decision which was as a matter of fact incorrect.

 8. I recorded in my previous decision one other factor  which  makes  this
    case rather unusual, which is that on 24 June 2015 the appellants  were
    granted limited leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8.  That leave expired on  21  December
    2017, but the appellants  have  subsequently  been  granted  a  further
    period of two and a half years limited leave  and  absent  any  factors
    such as criminal offending or the like, it would be anticipated that in
    due course, once a further two periods of leave have been granted,  the
    appellants will be eligible to apply for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    under current Rules.

 9. Leaving this aside however, on 22 December 2017  the  appellants  again
    applied for residence cards on  the  basis  of  the  first  appellant's
    marriage to Mr [S], an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK,
    the basis of her application being, as already noted  above,  that  the
    evidence now available was sufficiently strong that even  though  Judge
    O'Keefe's decision would be the starting  point  for  a  decisionmaker,
    nonetheless on the  basis  of  the  material  now  available,  she  had
    established  that  the  marriage  was  not  in  fact  a   marriage   of
    convenience.  The respondent refused this application as  well  and  it
    was the appeal against this decision which was dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Gibbs.   The  appellants  have  appealed  against  that
    decision, permission  having  been  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McGeachy on 26 March 2019.

10. In my error of law decision I found  that  Judge  Gibbs'  decision  had
    contained a material error such that it would be set aside.  It is  not
    necessary to repeat the reasons I gave in that decision in detail.   It
    is sufficient if I note that the judge relied on what she  regarded  as
    the absence of evidence of cohabitation whereas in fact there had  been
    such evidence before her.  In particular I noted that there had been  a
    letter from  the  first  appellant's  doctor  addressed  to  the  first
    appellant at the same address as that which the family was  claimed  to
    have been living at and this was the same address as shown on a P60 for
    Mr [S] showing that he was recorded living at that address.  There  are
    further documents in the bundle to the same effect and I refer to these
    within my earlier decision.

11. Further within the respondent's own bundle there was  a  document  from
    the  TV  Licensing  Authority  addressed  to  the  first  appellant  in
    September 2017 at that address and also there were utility bills  which
    in her decision Judge Gibbs had said were lacking,  although  they  had
    not been.  One of these bills is a Southern Electric bill addressed  to
    both the first appellant and Mr [S] covering a period from August  2017
    to November 2017 and also an electricity bill of  similar  date.   This
    evidence was in the judgment of  this  Tribunal  material  because  the
    judge ultimately deciding this matter  would  need  to  reconsider  the
    apparent discrepancies in the interview in the light  of  the  evidence
    that the parties had continued (if they were originally  cohabiting  as
    they claim) to cohabit;  certainly there is evidence that  for  several
    years now they have been cohabiting.  That might have  been  sufficient
    to cause a judge to depart from the findings which had previously  been
    made by Judge O'Keefe, before whom such material had not  been  placed.
    For that reason I  set  aside  Judge  Gibbs'  decision  but  because  I
    considered this appeal had been going on far too long  and  the  matter
    should be resolved finally one or the other  it  was  retained  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  I noted in this decision that because  the  appellants
    are now here with leave and in due course might be expected  to  obtain
    indefinite leave to remain in the usual way this appeal might not be as
    vital to the appellants as it would otherwise have been  (because  they
    have the right to remain in any way) but nonetheless they are  entitled
    to residence cards if the marriage was indeed a genuine  marriage  from
    its inception and they are entitled to a fair hearing on this issue.

12. Following that decision Mr Thoree  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  has
    prepared a detailed bundle which has been of great assistance  to  this
    Tribunal and I heard a limited amount of evidence this morning and also
    submissions.



The Hearing

13. The appellants relied on the witness statements previously  before  the
    Tribunal both from the first appellant and Mr [S], and also  the  other
    statements which had been before the court.  None of the witnesses were
    cross-examined apart from the appellant and Mr [S].  I  shall  not  set
    out below the record which I have made of this hearing, in which I  set
    out to the best of my ability everything said before me, but I have had
    regard when reaching my decision to all  the  evidence  given  and  the
    submissions as well as all the documents  contained  within  the  file,
    whether or not the same is specifically set out  below.   I  have  also
    given independent consideration to the  answers  which  were  contained
    within  the  interviews  which  as  already  noted  do   contain   some
    inconsistencies although on review and especially given what I find  to
    be the strength of the relationship between the appellant and Mr [S]  I
    consider are less significant than at first blush absent such  evidence
    might have appeared.

14. It is accepted on behalf of both the appellants and the respondent that
    the test for me is  whether  or  not  I  consider  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities the marriage was a genuine one from its inception.  If  I
    find on the balance of probabilities that it was, then  the  appellants
    are entitled to residence cards.  If on the other hand I  find  on  the
    balance of probabilities that it was not a genuine  marriage  from  its
    inception, then this appeal must be dismissed.

15. On behalf of the respondent Ms Cunha  did  not  seek  to  persuade  the
    Tribunal that the marriage between the first appellant and Mr  [S]  was
    not at any rate now a genuine and subsisting  marriage.   She  accepted
    having heard all the evidence that it was now a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship,  but  nonetheless  submitted  that  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities given that there had been some  disparities  between  the
    answers given by the first appellant and Mr [S]  in  interview  it  was
    more likely than not that at its inception the marriage  had  not  been
    intended to be a permanent one.  On behalf of the appellant  Mr  Thoree
    submitted that the evidence now was strong and that the Tribunal should
    make a finding on the balance of probabilities that the marriage at its
    inception was a genuine one.



Discussion

16. As I indicated would be likely when giving my decision as to  error  of
    law I cannot say I am certain one way or the other.  There must  in  my
    judgement be an  element  of  doubt  in  this  case.   However,  having
    considered all the evidence very carefully, I am satisfied that  it  is
    much more likely than not that the marriage was a genuine one from  its
    inception.   Having  analysed  the  interviews  given  by  the  parties
    although there are some discrepancies within them,  there  are  also  a
    number of answers which are consistent and it was also quite  clear  to
    me by reason of the replies given within  cross-examination  that  both
    the appellant and Mr [S] had some difficulty in understanding precisely
    what they were asked and they  then  had  some  difficulty  remembering
    things which is by no means unusual.

17. Referring to the most  recent  refusal  letter  in  which  the  present
    application was refused the respondent had noted first that  the  first
    appellant and Mr [S] had spelt their address differently.   Given  that
    Mr [S]  is  from  Latvia  and  the  first  appellant  (who  needed  the
    assistance of an interpreter during  the  hearing,  although  she  does
    speak some English) is from Albania, it is not  perhaps  the  strongest
    point against them that the spelling  of  an  address  in  English  was
    different.  Much weight  is  also  given  within  this  letter  to  the
    supposed discrepancies within  their  respective  descriptions  of  the
    uniform worn by the first appellant's son to school, whether or not  Mr
    [S] ever picked the older son up from school, whether or not any  other
    children were living in the building they lived  in  and  whether  they
    could name  any  of  that  child's  friends.   Again,  looking  at  the
    respective answers given by the parties, in  light  of  the  fact  that
    there is strong evidence now that they have been living together  since
    the date of the marriage, I do  not  find  these  answers  sufficiently
    discrepant to raise doubts of sufficient significance in my mind as  to
    the genuineness of the relationship at its inception.  Similarly, I  do
    not consider that the answers with regard to how the parties  met,  the
    proposal, the wedding or what they do at Christmas were as different as
    the respondent maintained within the refusal letter.   I  also  do  not
    regard it as particularly significant that the  first  appellant  could
    not give a very detailed account of precisely what it is  that  Mr  [S]
    did in regard to his  employment.   These  are  matters  which  have  a
    greater weight in the absence of competing evidence;  certainly  before
    this Tribunal there was sufficient evidence  that  the  couple  were  a
    close and loving one who cared for each other as to make the relatively
    small discrepancies within the interviews  of  less  significance  than
    they might at first have appeared.

18. Accordingly, having regard to all the evidence I consider  that  it  is
    more likely than not that the relationship, which I accept now is  very
    likely to be a genuine one was a genuine  one  at  its  inception.   It
    follows that this appeal must be allowed and I will so find.



Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs, dismissing  the
appellants' appeal, and substitute the following decision:

This appeal is allowed, under the 2016 EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 30 June 2019
