
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: EA/03932/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2018                             |On 29 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                      ZORAWARSINGH INDERJITSINGH KAKKAD
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. In this case it is the appellant who appeals with the permission  of
       the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal dismissing the appellant's appeal for want of jurisdiction.


    2. The appellant had applied for a residence card as acknowledgment  of
       his right of residence  as  the  'extended  family  member'  of  his
       partner, Ms Anete Zute, a  Latvian  national  ("the  sponsor").  The
       respondent was not satisfied the appellant and Ms  Zute  were  in  a
       'durable relationship' or that  Ms  Zute  was  still  employed.  The
       appellant appealed under Regulation 26 of the Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations")  on  the
       ground he met the requirements for the grant of a residence card.


    3. In a short decision, promulgated on 19  April  2017,  Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Cameron dismissed the appeal, applying  the  law
       as it was then understood to be in  Sala  (EFMs:  right  of  appeal)
       [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).  That case held as follows:


         "There is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of the
         Secretary of State not to grant a Residence Card to a person
         claiming to be an Extended Family Member."


    4. By the time the application for permission to appeal was considered,
       the Court of Appeal had overturned the decision in Sala,  which  was
       wrongly decided (see Muhammad Yasir Khan v SSHD &  Anr  [2017]  EWCA
       Civ 1755).


    5. In the circumstances, it is perfectly  clear  that  Judge  Cameron's
       decision was erroneous in law and must be set aside.


    6. The parties were notified through directions that, in the  event  an
       error of law was found, it was likely the Upper Tribunal would go on
       to re-make the decision itself. This appeared the appropriate course
       to take in this case.


    7. The appellant and the sponsor attended the hearing and were prepared
       to give  evidence.  However,  Ms  Isherwood  indicated  she  had  no
       questions for them so it was  not  necessary  to  call  them.  Their
       witness statements could stand as their unchallenged evidence.


    8. The burden  of  proof  is  on  the  appellant  with  regard  to  any
       assertions of fact which he makes. The  standard  of  proof  is  the
       civil standard  of  a  balance  of  probabilities.  I  may  consider
       evidence about any matter which I think relevant to the substance of
       the decision, including evidence which  concerns  a  matter  arising
       after the date of decision.


    9. Directive 2004/38/EC  regulates  the  rights  of  free  movement  of
       European Union citizens and their family members. For  the  purposes
       of this appeal its provisions were transposed into domestic  law  by
       the EEA Regulations. The EEA Regulations read as follows:


             "8.- "Extended family member"
             (1) In these Regulations  "extended  family  member"  means  a
             person who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under
             regulation  7(1)(a),  (b)  or  (c)  and  who   satisfies   the
             conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
             ...


             (5) A person satisfied the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is the partner of an EEA national (other than  a  civil
             partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is  in  a
             durable relationship with the EEA national.






             17. Issue of residence card
             ...
             (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence  card  to  an
             extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3)  who
             is not an EEA national on application if-
                 (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to  the  extended
                 family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with
                 a permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and
                 (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of
                 State appropriate to issue the residence card.


             (5)  Where the Secretary of State receives an application
             under paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive
             examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant and
             if he refuses shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless
             this is contrary to the interests of national security."


   10. This appeal turns on the issues of whether  the  appellant  and  the
       sponsor are in a 'durable relationship' and whether the  sponsor  is
       exercising her Treaty rights in the UK. In contrast to the  position
       of family members, there is no right to a residence card in the case
       of an extended family member (see,  for  example,  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
       meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC)). The respondent may  issue
       one.


   11. On  both  counts,  Ms  Isherwood  helpfully  accepted  the  evidence
       supported the appellant's appeal.


   12. The  phrase  'durable  relationship'  is  not  defined  in  the  EEA
       Regulations or the Citizens Directive.  The Immigration Rules impose
       a requirement on  in-country  applicants  for  leave  to  remain  as
       partners to show they have been living together  in  a  relationship
       akin to marriage which has subsisted for  two  years  or  more  (see
       Appendix FM). No more onerous  conditions  may  be  imposed  on  the
       extended family members of EEA nationals.


   13. The evidence provided by the appellant in this case now  includes  a
       birth certificate showing Ms Zute  gave  birth  to  a  child  on  30
       January 2017. On the birth  certificate  it  is  recorded  that  the
       appellant is the father of the child and that he and Ms  Zute  lived
       together at [                                ]. That is still  their
       address and I have seen a copy of their tenancy agreement. In  their
       statements, the couple state they have lived together since February
       2013 and this evidence was not challenged at the hearing.  I  accept
       they have known each other since  then,  although  it  appears  they
       previously said they had lived together since September  2015.  That
       length of cohabitation plus the fact of the child means that I  find
       as fact the appellant and Ms Zute are in a durable relationship.


   14. As far as the sponsor's employment is concerned, the respondent  was
       concerned  that  she  appeared  to  have   left   her   job   at   [
        ] the day before enquiries were made and there was no  evidence  of
       further employment. However, I note that the  respondent  issued  Ms
       Zute a permanent residence  card  on  20  November  2017,  which  Ms
       Isherwood acknowledged showed that she had established she had  been
       exercising her  Treaty  rights  for  five  years.  That  information
       appears to have been derived from an  information  request  to  HMRC
       showing her earnings, tax and NI contributions since 2010.

   15. I note the sponsor remains  in  employment  and  she  has  submitted
       recent pay slips. She states in her statement that she works  as  an
       assistant manager at a pizza restaurant in [                 ].  Her
       evidence on this point is also  unchallenged.  I  find  Ms  Zute  is
       exercising her rights under the Treaty through this employment.

   16. It follows the appellant satisfies the  requirements  of  Regulation
       8(5). It is a matter for the Secretary of State whether to  issue  a
       residence card under Regulation 17(4).




NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

     The following decision is substituted:

         The appeal is allowed to the extent the appellant has established
         he meets the requirements of Regulation 8(5) of the EEA
         Regulations.

         No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 9 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom



