
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03626/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2018                     |On 12 January 2018                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                            Hedayatallah Keramati
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Benitez, counsel instructed by Kilic & Kilic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ian
    Howard, promulgated on 30 August 2017. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 20 October 2017.



Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. On 23 September 2015, the appellant applied for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as the extended
    family member of an EEA national. That application  was  refused  on  8
    March 2016.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. This appeal was considered on the papers and dismissed  by  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal,  after  directions  were  sent   to   the   appellant's
    representative seeking representations regarding the decision  in  Sala
    (EFM's: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

The grounds of appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought, namely that  Sala
    had been overturned.

The hearing

 6. Mr Clarke advised me that the appeal was unopposed and he  agreed  with
    Ms Benitez that  the  matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing.

Decision on error of law

 7. This appeal concerns an application for a residence card which was made
    under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.  In
    view of the judgment in Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that there is a want of jurisdiction in such  cases
    following Sala (EFM's: Right of Appeal) [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC),  is
    simply incorrect.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  at
Taylor House, with a time estimate of 2 hours by  any  judge  except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
