
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/03606/2017
                                                               EA/03608/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2019                  |On 16 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               FREDERICK BRAND
                                ALETTA BRAND
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Peer of Peer & Co. Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of South Africa.  They  were  granted  EEA
    permits on 13 April 2011 as family members of  their  daughter  in  law
    ("the sponsor"), who is a Polish national  in  the  United  Kingdom  by
    virtue of her rights under  the  Citizens  Directive,  2004/38/EC.   As
    family members in the ascending line of  the  spouse,  the  appellants'
    entitlement to reside in the United Kingdom was on the basis that  they
    were dependent upon the sponsor.  Within a very  short  time  of  their
    arrival the appellants both obtained employment at a  supermarket,  and
    they have continued in employment.  They  derive  sufficient  resources
    from their employment for their own needs and have  variously  occupied
    their own housing and lived with the sponsor.


 2. Their residence permits expired in October 2011  and  they  applied  to
    extend them.  Their unchallenged evidence is  that  they  informed  the
    Secretary of State that they were working.  They were granted Residence
    Cards valid for five years, expiring on 20 December  2016.   After  the
    fifth  anniversary  of  their  arrival,  the  appellants  applied   for
    documents recognising that they had a  permanent  right  of  residence.
    That right would depend on their having resided for five years  in  the
    United  Kingdom  with  the  sponsor  as  her  family  members.    Their
    applications were refused on the ground that they were  neither  living
    with the sponsor nor were financially dependent on her: they  were  not
    her "family members".


 3. The appellants appealed against that decision.  Judge V Jones dismissed
    their appeals, holding on the authority of PM [2011] UKUT 89  that  the
    appellants were to be regarded as  residing  'with'  the  sponsor,  but
    concluding that the level of their income  meant  that  they  were  not
    dependant on the sponsor.  The appellants  appeal  with  permission  to
    this Tribunal.


 4. The governing legislation is in the Directive itself,  transposed  into
    United  Kingdom  law  by  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016.  In the Directive, by art 2(2)(d), 'family member' is
    defined to include 'the dependent direct  relatives  in  the  ascending
    line' of a Union citizen or the spouse of a Union citizen.  Article  16
    provides, so far as relevant to this appeal, as follows:

         "16: General Rule for Union citizens and their family members
         1. Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period
            of five years in the host Member State shall have the right of
            permanent residence there.  ...
         2.     Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family members who are not
            nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with the
            Union citizen in the host Member State for a continuous period
            of five years."

 5. Article 23 is as follows:

         "Irrespective of nationality, the family members of a Union citizen
         who have the right of residence or the right of permanent residence
         in a Member State shall be entitled to take up employment or self-
         employment there."

 6. In the EEA Regulations, the relevant part of the definition of  'family
    member' is reproduced in reg 7(1)(c), and the  relevant  provisions  of
    art 16(2) in reg 15(1)(b).  We use the word 'reproduced' because  there
    is absolutely no difference in the effect, actual, literal or intended,
    between the provisions of the Regulations and those of  the  Directive,
    although there are differences in nomenclature.  The substance  of  art
    23 is not enacted in the Regulations.  It does not need to be,  because
    there is in United Kingdom law no general restriction on access to  the
    employment market save where individually imposed  as  a  condition  of
    entry.  In the United Kingdom,  art  23  is,  therefore,  part  of  the
    general law.


 7. No issue now arises with regard to whether the appellants' residence in
    the United Kingdom has been 'with' the sponsor.  It is clear  from  PM,
    as the judge appreciated, that the requirement is to  be  in  the  same
    Member State, not in the same house.  The grounds of appeal, drafted by
    Mr Nazir Ahmed, and a skeleton argument prepared by him and adopted  by
    Mr Peer before us, rely on two strands of argument.  The first is  that
    because  the  appellants  had  been  issued  with  family  permits  and
    subsequently residence cards, and are not said to have acted in any way
    contrary to any conditions attached to the issue  of  those  documents,
    they are now to be regarded as having resided  legally  in  the  United
    Kingdom for five years and that as the quality of, and  authority  for,
    their residence is the Cards issued to them  as  family  members,  they
    have resided as family members.  The second  is  that  the  appellants,
    despite their earnings, remain dependent  on  the  sponsor  within  the
    meaning of the Directive.


 8. EU rights are derived from law and facts, not  from  EU  documentation.
    The documentation has value and effect  only  insofar  as  it  reflects
    rights derived from the Directive (or the Regulations) save insofar  as
    specifically provided otherwise.  An example of such a provision is reg
    7(3), but it is to be noted that  in  the  circumstances  to  which  it
    applies, the person who has been issued  with  the  document  'must  be
    treated as' a family  member,  not  'is'  a  family  member.   No  such
    exceptions apply in the present case. It follows from the general  rule
    that the appellants cannot derive  status  as  family  members  from  a
    document describing them as family members.  In order to be entitled to
    the right conferred by art 16(2) and reg 15(1)(b), the appellants  must
    be family members; and to be family members they must fall  within  art
    2(2)(d) and reg 7(1)(c).


 9. But Mr Peer argues that art 23 shows that that is  not  right.   Family
    members  are  permitted  to  work,  and  by  working  they  lose  their
    dependence, at any rate if the dependence is financial dependence.   It
    follows, according to this argument, that  the  Directive  envisages  a
    person's being a family member despite having ceased to  be  dependent.
    That,  the  argument  continues,  must  be  because  the  question   of
    dependence is to be settled once and for all at some earlier stage  and
    is not affected by subsequent cessation of dependence.   Otherwise  the
    Directive would render itself internally inconsistent by including  art
    23.


10. In our judgment there is no inherent contradiction,  particularly  when
    it is recalled that art 23 applies to  all  family  members,  not  only
    those whose status as family members  requires  dependence.   A  person
    may, while working, continue to be dependent in a non-financial  sense;
    or, while working, may continue to be dependent in a financial sense if
    the income is lower; or may be a family member  of  the  sort  (spouse,
    registered partner, child under 21) whose status as a family member  is
    not defined by dependence.  This point removes all force from Mr Peer's
    argument that art 23 has the effect that income from work  is  in  some
    way to be disregarded in  assessing  status  as  family  members.   The
    position is that family members may work: there is no suggestion that a
    person who is not a 'family member' can derive a  right  to  work  from
    this article, or that a person who works can derive status as a 'family
    member'  from  this  article  without  meeting  all  the   definitional
    requirements of a family member.  Article 23 simply shows that a  right
    to work can be seen alongside a notion of being a family member and, in
    an appropriate case, alongside a  notion  of  dependence.     Reyes  C-
    423/12 (which neither party cited  to  us)  points  out  that  when  an
    assessment is being made of dependence  at  the  point  of  entry,  the
    possibility of employment in the Member State to which entry is  sought
    cannot be relevant in the case of a person who is presently  dependent,
    because that would be to nullify the  effect  of  art  23  for  such  a
    person; but that is not the  case  here:  we  are  concerned  not  with
    prospects before arrival, but actualities many years after arrival.


11. Mr Peer further argued that because art 23 gives the right to  work  it
    cannot also have the effect of removing the status  of  family  member.
    That may be so, but there is no basis on which it could be said that it
    does remove the status.  A family member may cease to be dependent  (if
    the asserted dependence is purely financial) by sufficient income  from
    working, by a legacy, by successful investments in the  United  Kingdom
    or overseas, or in a host of other ways; if  the  dependence  has  some
    other content it might cease by marriage, or a family dispute;  in  the
    case of a child under 21  the  status  as  'family  member'  ceases  on
    reaching the age of 21 unless at that point  the  child  is  dependent.
    The mere fact that these things, including employment, can happen  does
    not mean that the requirement of dependence, when it  applies,  has  no
    effect.  A person who, whether working or not, is dependent, may  be  a
    "family member" within art 2(2)(d); a person, whether working  or  not,
    who is not dependent, cannot be a family member within art 2(2)(d).


12. It follows that there is nothing in Mr Peer's argument that in some way
    the fact that the Secretary of State knew in 2011 that  the  appellants
    were working means that it was also known or suspected that  they  were
    not at that time dependent.  As working and  dependence  can  co-exist,
    the knowledge of the existence of the  one  does  not  imply  the  non-
    existence of the other.  For the reasons we have given,  this  argument
    does not assist anyway, because  the  knowledge  of  the  Secretary  of
    State,  like  the  issue  of  the  previous  Card,  is  irrelevant   to
    entitlement at the time of the decision under appeal.


13. Underlying the submissions made under this head is an implication  that
    the pattern of the Directive and of the  rights  under  it  prevents  a
    status being lost by change of circumstances.   In  both  the  skeleton
    argument and his oral submissions Mr  Peer  referred  on  a  number  of
    occasions to status at the time of entry, and status at a former  time,
    and to provisions inhibiting the withdrawal or deprivation of a  status
    acquired under the Directive.  None of  this  is  to  the  point.   The
    appellants were entitled to the residence Cards  they  sought  only  if
    they were at that time family members. If the  Directive  had  intended
    that once a person had entered as, had established as, had demonstrated
    status as, or had been recognised as, a family member, then status as a
    family member continued as long as the family  relationship  continued,
    it could have said so.  Not only does the Directive not say  that:  the
    provisions in relation to children show that nothing of  the  sort  was
    intended.  As Mr Mills pointed out, Jia C-1/05, on which the appellants
    rely, does not purport to deal with the situation after  the  point  of
    entry, and does not suggest that status continues to be governed by the
    factual matrix at the time of entry.  Of the other authorities cited by
    the appellants, Okafor [2011] EWCA Civ 499 concerns retained rights  of
    residence, where, specifically under the Directive, a status is treated
    as though it continued when in fact it does  not,  Ziolkowski  C-424/10
    does not cover the situation of  individuals  who  are  not  themselves
    Union citizens, and Derin C-325/05 relates to a Turkish  national,  who
    for reasons connected with the Ankara agreement, fell to be treated  in
    the same way as a Union citizen.  Metock  C-127/08  and  Eind  C-291/05
    remind  us  that  the  provisions  of  the  Directive  should  not   be
    interpreted restrictively, but do not very much  help  at  the  initial
    stage of analysing what those provisions are.


14. Mr Mills in his submissions treated Alarape C-529/11 together with  the
    retained rights cases, but it is a case whose facts are  in  some  ways
    rather similar to the question posed in the present case.  The question
    there concerned the parents of a child who had  a  right  to  be  in  a
    Member State to pursue education and who while  he  was  under  21  was
    clearly entitled to have his parents  with  him.   If  he  remained  in
    education after reaching the age of 21, did  his  parents  continue  to
    have the derived right to be in the Member State with him?  The  answer
    given by the Court at [28]-[31] is that it depends  on  the  extent  to
    which the person continues to need the presence and care of the  parent
    or parents in order to be able to pursue and  complete  his  education.
    That is a matter to be determined on the facts by the  national  court.
    There is no suggestion that the parents' right, once  acquired,  is  to
    continue if the facts  change.   In  our  view,  the  same  applies  to
    dependence under art 2(1)(d), and nothing in the authorities  tends  to
    the contrary.


15. Having cleared the board, as it were, the  legal  position  is  in  our
    judgment that taken by the Secretary  of  State.   The  appellants  are
    entitled to succeed if (but only if) they are "family  members",  which
    for present purposes means if they are dependent  on  the  sponsor.  We
    need to consider whether Judge Jones erred in assessing on the evidence
    that they were not. The grounds, the skeleton argument, and  Mr  Peer's
    submissions do not assist very much on this point.  The grounds  assert
    that the judge erred in failing  to  provide  any  proper  or  adequate
    reasoning for the  conclusion  that  the  appellants  "were  no  longer
    dependent" on the sponsor, but there is no elaboration  of  that.   The
    written skeleton does not take the point, and Mr Peer' oral submissions
    went no further than his submission that dependence is not  limited  to
    financial dependence, which, as we have  indicated,  the  Secretary  of
    State does not dispute.


16. Jia sets out the basic nature of dependence at at [43],  although  that
    decision related to the predecessor of Directive 2004/38/EC:

         "Article 1(1)(d) of Directive 73/248 is to be interpreted to the
         effect that "dependent on them" means that members of the family of
         a Community national established in another Member State ... need
         the material support of that Community national or his or her
         spouse in order to meet their essential needs in the country of
         origin of those family members or the State from which they have
         come at the time when they apply to join the Community national.
         Article 6(b) of that directive must be interpreted as meaning that
         the proof needed for material support may be adduced by any
         appropriate means, while a mere undertaking by the Community
         national or his or her spouse to support the family members
         concerned need not be regarded as establishing the existence of the
         family members' situation of real dependence."

17. Other authorities, particularly Reyes, have investigated  the  position
    where the dependence, normally evidenced by the payment of  remittances
    to a relative while that relative is not in the Member State concerned,
    includes a concept of necessity; and Reyes itself rules that it is  not
    necessary for the recipient  of  such  remittances  to  establish  that
    obtaining  work  would  be  impossible.   No  authority  to  which  our
    attention has been drawn has suggested that a person can be regarded as
    a dependent without some external indicia of reliance.


18. Given the Secretary of State's concession that the notion of dependence
    is  wider  than  purely  financial  dependence   (although   presumably
    constrained by the Jia notion of "material support") we are content  to
    consider any available evidence of the appellants'  dependence  on  the
    sponsor both now and at any  previous  period  when  (in  order  to  be
    regarded as having resided in the United Kingdom as  "family  members")
    they would need to have been dependent on her. We were referred  to  no
    such evidence.  There does not appear to be any evidence of remittances
    or other material assistance  before  the  appellants  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom: the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal implies the
    opposite, giving as a reason that the appellants cannot live  in  South
    Africa that they gave up "everything" in South Africa  when  they  were
    granted entry clearance (sic) to the United Kingdom.  That is stated in
    the appellants' joint witness statement and is confirmed in  the  joint
    witness statement of the  sponsor  and  her  husband.   The  appellants
    assert that if they were in  South  Africa  now  they  could  not  work
    because of their age.  That is  surprising  and  unsubstantiated:  they
    are, respectively, 59 and 57 years old.  There is no  evidence  of  any
    material dependence in the  Jia  sense  at  the  time  of  the  present
    decisions.  There is no evidence that the appellants have lived in  the
    United Kingdom as dependent family members  of  the  sponsor  for  five
    years or indeed for any period of time.


19. It follows that the appellants cannot show that they  are  entitled  to
    the permanent right of residence.  Judge Jones  was  correct  to  reach
    that view on the evidence.  There was no error of law.  We dismiss  the
    appellants' appeals.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 8 June 2020
