
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03057/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined on the papers at:                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Field House                                   |                              |
|On 24 February 2020                           |On 6 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                             Annie mwenge shimbi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Proceedings

   1.  This  is  an  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   decision
      dismissing the appellant's appeal challenging the SSHD's  decision  to
      refuse her an EEA Residence Card.



   2. The appeal originally came before on 22 October 2019. On that occasion
      Ms Aboni (acting on behalf of the SSHD) sought an adjournment  on  the
      basis that the Court of Appeal were to imminently hear an appeal in SZ
      (Afghanistan) C9/2019/0659 which, she asserted, would be determinative
      of the relevant law to be applied in the instant case. It was  further
      accepted that  on  the  basis  of  the  legal  position  as  currently
      identified in ZA (Reg 9. EEA Regs; abuse of rights) Afghanistan [2019]
      UKUT 281 (IAC)), the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  should  be  set
      aside, and the appellant's appeal should be allowed.


   3. Although it seemed to me to be appropriate for the Tribunal to proceed
      on the basis of the law as currently understood, Mr  Hodgetts  (acting
      on behalf of  the  appellant)  did  not  seek  to  resist  the  SSHD's
      adjournment  application.  In  all  the  circumstances,   and   having
      considered the overriding objective, I acceded to the  application  to
      adjourn the proceedings to await the Court of Appeal's decision in SZ.




   4. As it turned out, by way of an  Order  of  the  9  December  2019  the
      proceedings  in  SZ  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  were  compromised.  I
      subsequently directed that absent agreement between the  parties,  the
      matter should be re-listed for hearing.


   5. The SSHD has now agreed to issue the appellant with an  EEA  Residence
      Card. As a consequence, Ms Aboni invites the Tribunal (in a letter  of
      12 February 2020) to treat "the  case  as  withdrawn".   Although  not
      explicit in the aforementioned letter, given that Ms Aboni  represents
      the SSHD I take this to mean that she invites the  Tribunal  to  treat
      the SSHD's case as withdrawn.


   6. Whether or not the SSHD's case is treated as withdrawn, the conclusion
      in this case is inevitable if the ratio of ZA is applied.  As  alluded
      to above, applying the law as it is currently understood (set  out  in
      ZA) it is plain that the FtT erred in its approach to the legal issues
      in the case and that on a proper approach the appellant's appeal  must
      be allowed. This, presumably, is why the SSHD has now agreed to  issue
      the appellant with an EEA Residence Card.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given above, the decision of the FtT is set aside

Upon remaking the decision in the appeal, I allow the appeal  on  the  basis
that the SSHD's decision leads to a breach of the Community Treaties.

Fee Award

Insofar as it is necessary for me to do so, I make a full fee award  to  the
appellant


Signed

Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor                Date 24 February 2020
