
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03750/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th May 2021                      |On 17th May 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               REFAIL HAJDARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, instructed by Queens Court Law
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Albania.  He claims to have arrived in
      the UK in December 2015.  On 29th March 2019 he married Ancuta-
      Kasandra Dinca and on 8th April 2019 he applied for a Residence Card
      as a family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the
      UK in accordance with the Immigration (European Economic Area)
      Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").  The appellant and Ms Dinca
      were interviewed on 1st July 2019.  The application was refused by the
      respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 19th July 2019.
      The respondent identified a number of inconsistencies in the answers
      given by the appellant and Ms Dinca during the interview, in
      particular, concerning their first meeting, Ms Dinca's travel to
      Romania just before the interview, the circumstances surrounding the
      appellant's entry to the UK, the marriage proposal, the addresses at
      which they lived, their wedding day, and their employment. The
      respondent concluded the marriage is one of convenience for the sole
      purpose of the appellant obtaining a right of residence in the UK.


   2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Obhi for reasons set out in a decision promulgated
      on 5th November 2019.  The appellant identifies nine separate grounds
      of appeal that are set out in the appellant's grounds of appeal dated
      17th November 2019.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Kelly on 17th March 2020.  He said:


         ".. It is arguable that the Tribunal failed to have regard to
         evidence capable of supporting the innocent explanation provided by
         the appellant for apparent anomalies in interviews conducted by the
         respondent with the appellant and his wife, respectively, and thus
         unfairly drew adverse conclusions concerning whether the marriage
         was one of convenience (the sole issue in the appeal). It is also
         arguable that the Tribunal misdirected itself in relation to the
         legal burden and standard of proof in relation thereto. The other
         grounds of appeal are also arguable and potentially material to the
         outcome of the appeal...."


   3. The hearing of the appeal before me on 4th May 2021 took the form of a
      remote hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The
      appellant joined the hearing remotely and was accompanied by his
      partner Ms Dinca.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was
      addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I would
      have been if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I am
      satisfied: that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as
      there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is justified
      as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the
      interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective
      to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need to take
      precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was
      satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with
      fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of
      the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated
      costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was
      satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


   4. At the conclusion of the hearing I informed the parties that I am
      satisfied that the decision of Judge Obhi is vitiated by a material
      error of law and must be set aside. I informed the parties that my
      reasons would follow in writing. This I now do.


   5. At the hearing of the appeal before me, Mr Georget confirmed that
      although set out as nine separate grounds of appeal, there are
      essentially three criticisms made. First (Grounds 1, 2 and 3), there
      was material evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the Judge
      failed to have regard to and failed to make any findings upon.  Second
      (Grounds 5, 6, 7 and 8), the Judge made irrational findings or
      findings that were contrary to the evidence before the Tribunal.
      Third (Grounds 4 and 9), the Judge failed to apply the correct legal
      test as set out in Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54.


   6. Mr Georget submits that at paragraph [22] of her decision Judge Obhi
      notes the appellant had filed "substantial evidence" comprising of
      statements from the appellant's friends and family designed to support
      his claim that he is in a genuine relationship with Ms Dinca.  At
      paragraph [38] of her decision Judge Obhi considered the appellant's
      explanation regarding the answers given by the appellant and Ms Dinca
      as to who Ms Dinca was living with when they first met.  Judge Obhi
      did not find it to be a credible explanation.  Judge Obhi noted Ms
      Dinca had not mentioned 'Jeni' during the interview at all.  She said
      that the appellant must have got the name from somewhere, and if it
      came from his wife, then it is likely that she would also have
      mentioned that name at the interview, even if just to say that she had
      shared the flat with Jeni previously.  Mr Georget submits Judge Obhi
      failed to have any regard to the letters that were before the Tribunal
      from 'Jeni' and 'Dana', which corroborate the evidence of appellant
      and his partner regarding the living arrangements at the time when the
      appellant met Ms Dinca.


   7. Mr Georget submits that at paragraphs [16] and [17] of her decision,
      Judge Obhi refers to the evidence of Roxana Dinca and Ndriqim Sadiki.
      Both of these witnesses were called to give evidence before the First-
      tier Tribunal.  Mr Sidiki's evidence was not challenged.  At paragraph
      [44], Judge Obhi refers to the evidence but does not say whether their
      evidence is accepted or rejected. The implication appears to be that
      the evidence has been rejected but the Judge does not give reasons for
      rejecting their evidence.  There was also other evidence before the
      Tribunal that is material to the sole issue in the appeal but is not
      referred to at all in the decision.  There was a letter from Ms
      Dinca's mother, a letter from the appellant's sister and a letter from
      his mother, all attesting to the genuine nature of the relationship
      between the appellant and Ms Dinca that Judge Obhi failed to have
      regard to.  Mr Georget accepts that all the letters that were before
      the Tribunal did not have to be considered individually, but the Judge
      was required to engage with the evidence that was particularly
      relevant to her decision and the findings made.  There were also a
      number of photographs before the Tribunal taken over a period of time,
      including photographs of the appellant with Ms Dinca and her daughter
      when she visited the UK.  There was also other evidence of the couple
      living together at the same address including a tenancy agreement, and
      utility bills.  That evidence is also not referred to by the Judge.


   8. In reply, Ms Petterson candidly and in my judgement quite properly,
      acknowledges that there was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
      regarding the appellant's relationship with Ms Dinca that Judge Obhi
      does not refer to in her decision.


   9. Having carefully considered the submissions made before me I have
      reached the conclusion that I am satisfied that the appellant has
      established that Judge Obhi failed to have regard to, and failed to
      make any findings upon relevant evidence, and that the first of the
      criticisms made by the appellant is made out.  I quite accept that a
      Judge is not required to recite in a decision all the evidence that
      was before the Tribunal and engage in a line-by-line analysis of the
      evidence.  It would be entirely impractical to do so.  It is now well
      established that although there is a legal duty to give a brief
      explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal
      is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as
      a whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the
      judge.  The evidence of Roxana Dinca and Ndriqim, taken together with
      the evidence of other family members was at least capable of
      corroborating the account given by the appellant and Ms. Dinca that
      this was not a marriage of convenience.  Judge Obhi does not make any
      finding as to the credibility of the two witnesses that were called to
      give evidence and does not refer to the other evidence that was before
      the Tribunal from close family members, and in the form of photographs
      and documents.  The focus of Judge Obhi was clearly upon the interview
      record, and the discrepancies between the answers given by the
      appellant and Ms Dinca, but in reaching her decision she failed to
      consider the extent to which the other evidence that was before the
      Tribunal was capable of corroborating the account given by the
      appellant and Ms. Dinca regarding their relationship.  It would have
      been open to Judge Obhi to reject the evidence, or to attach little
      weight to evidence that was not capable of being tested in cross-
      examination but the difficulty here is that Judge Obhi does not refer
      to much of the evidence at all.  She does not say whether she accepts
      or rejects the evidence of the witnesses that were called to give
      evidence, and insofar as it can be inferred that their evidence was
      rejected, Judge Obhi fails to give adequate reasons for doing so.


  10. Insofar as the burden and standard of proof is concerned, Mr Georget
      submits that at paragraph [6] of her decision, Judge Obhi, directed
      herself that this is an immigration decision and the burden of proof
      is on the appellant, and that the standard of proof required is the
      balance of probabilities.  He refers to the decision of the Supreme
      Court in Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54, in which the Supreme Court
      confirmed the burden of proof rests upon the SSHD when proposing
      removal for abuse of the right of residence by attempting to enter
      into a marriage of convenience.  At paragraphs [29] and [34] Lady
      Hale, with whom Lord Neuberger, Lord Kerr, Lord Clarke and Lord Reed
      agreed, said:


         "29.     For this purpose, "marriage of convenience" is a term of
         art. Although it is defined in the Directive and the 2009
         Communication as a marriage the sole purpose of which is to gain
         rights of entry to and residence in the European Union, the 2014
         Handbook suggests a more flexible approach, in which this must be
         the predominant purpose. It is not enough that the marriage may
         bring incidental immigration and other benefits if this is not its
         predominant purpose. Furthermore, except in cases of deceit by the
         non-EU national, this must be the purpose of them both . Clearly, a
         non-EU national may be guilty of abuse when the EU national is not,
         because she believes that it is a genuine relationship.


         ...


         34.  ...In seeking to establish its case, the respondent will no
         doubt concentrate on the interviews, the discrepancies between the
         appellants' accounts, and the gaps in Ms Sadovska's knowledge of Mr
         Malik's family, together with the sentence in their statement of 28
         March that their thoughts of living together and marriage had not
         yet "manifested into action" (which on 28 March was strictly true
         in that they were not yet living together or married but they had
         given notice of intention to marry). But in considering those
         discrepancies, the circumstances in which the interviews took
         place, and the statement was made must be borne fully in mind.
         Furthermore, there were many matters on which their accounts were
         consistent. It turns out, for example, that Ms Sadovska's mother
         does indeed live in Lithuania, as Mr Malik said in explaining why
         she was not there. There is also a considerable body of evidence
         which supports their claim to have been in a genuine relationship,
         dating back some time before they gave notice of intention to
         marry. Should the tribunal conclude that Mr Malik was delighted to
         find an EU national with whom he could form a relationship and who
         was willing to marry him, that does not necessarily mean that their
         marriage was a "marriage of convenience", still less that Ms
         Sadovska was abusing her rights in entering into it. Their legal
         and their factual cases must be considered separately."


  11. Mr Georget submits that although a Judge is entitled to take into
      account the inconsistencies in answers given during the course of an
      interview, the interview must be read as a whole.  Here, Judge Obhi
      failed to have any regard to the fact that the lengthy interviews were
      conducted the day after Ms Dinca had returned to the UK from Romania,
      and were conducted in English, with the inherent risk of some
      linguistic misunderstanding because English is not the first language
      of the appellant or Ms Dinca.  Mr Georget submits that at paragraph
      [44], Judge Obhi concludes that she was satisfied that there are
      reasonable grounds for the respondent to believe that this was a
      marriage of convenience and the explanations given by the couple do
      not address the concerns. She found, at [45], that this was a marriage
      of convenience, but failed to consider whether, on the evidence, the
      sole or predominant purpose for contracting the marriage was to gain
      an immigration advantage.  The Judge did not consider whether the
      predominant purpose of the marriage was for the appellant to gain
      rights of residence in the European Union.


  12. In reply, Ms Petterson accepted that Judge Obhi refers to the burden
      of proof as being upon the appellant, and in the end accepted that the
      failure to engage with the evidence that was before the Tribunal and
      the failure properly direct herself to the relevant burden of proof is
      sufficient to establish the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
      vitiated by an error of law.  It was uncontroversial that the
      appellant and Ms Dinca married on 29th March 2019.  It was therefore
      for the respondent to justify any refusal of residence.


  13. In my judgment, those two errors of approach in the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal are sufficient to establish that the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material error of law and
      must be set aside.  In the circumstances I need not address the
      remaining criticism.


  14. As to disposal, I am persuaded by the parties that the appeal should
      be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo with no
      findings preserved.  I have decided that it is appropriate to remit
      this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered
      paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th
      September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and
      extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


  15. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  16. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Obhi promulgated
      on 5th November 2019 is set aside.


  17. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.


      V. Mandalia


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia                   5th May 2021

