
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03124/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th April 2018                            |On 20th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                     Mr Chukwunonso Chukwukadibia Nwaiwu
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chukwunonso Chukwukadibia Nwaiwu in person
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed against the decision
    of the Respondent to refuse to grant him  permanent  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  His former spouse was named as a Portuguese  national.
    His appeal to First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  was  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 10th August 2017.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged and it was said that the  judge  had
    misdirected himself in a number of paragraphs of the decision and  that
    the Sponsor  was  only  required  to  provide  evidence  that  she  was
    exercising her treaty rights of residence from the date of the marriage
    and not prior to the marriage.  The Appellant had  provided  sufficient
    evidence.

 3. It was stated that a  number  of  the  assertions  of  the  judge  were
    insufficiently reasoned and therefore flawed.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the appeal came before me  on
    the above date.

 5. Mr Nwaiwu appeared in person, explaining that his solicitor had been on
    holiday.  He said he did not wish to ask for an adjournment.   Contrary
    to what was said by the judge he was a truthful witness and  he  relied
    on his Grounds of Application.

 6. For the Home Office Ms Ahmed said that the Appellant could not meet the
    requirements of Regulation 10.  The judge  had  set  out  the  position
    clearly in paragraphs 16, 17 and 18.  There was no error in law.  Given
    the judge's findings he could not have come to a different  conclusion.
    This was not a case  where  the  Tribunal  should  interfere  with  the
    reasoning, given what was said in VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 552 as
    the judge had given more than adequate reasons.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. The crucial findings of the judge are set out in paragraphs 16  and  18
    of the decision and in particular in paragraph 18 the judge noted  that
    the Appellant was "an extremely unreliable witness".  The judge went on
    to explain that he had given changeable and discrepant evidence, all as
    detailed in that paragraph.  Ultimately the  judge  concluded  that  he
    found the Appellant to be "other than a witness  of  truth"  and  found
    that his evidence was damaging to the credibility of the appeal.

 9. The judge gave clear  and  concise  reasons  why  he  was  making  that
    finding.  He had already found, for reasons stated,  that  the  Sponsor
    was not exercising treaty rights at the date of divorce (paragraph 16).

10. The grounds argue with the decision of the judge but, in my  view,  are
    argumentative only and go no further than that.  The core finding  that
    the judge made was that the Appellant was not a  reliable  or  credible
    witness and he gave full reasons for such a finding;  the  reasons  for
    that finding have not been impugned.  Standing that, this appeal had no
    prospect of success.

11. In any event there is no error of law in  the  judge's  decision  which
    must stand.











Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity order is made.






Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date   19th April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date   19th April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald








