
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03566/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2019                      |On 10 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                 Mr ali raza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H. Price, Counsel, instructed by Elaahi & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Elvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ali Raza, is a citizen of Pakistan, born 2 May 1991.  He
    appeals against a decision of Tribunal Judge  Devittie  promulgated  29
    January 2019 dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent
    dated 23 April 2018 to refuse his application for a residence  card  as
    the family member of an EEA national.

Factual background

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in February 2012 as a student,
    with leave that was later extended until 23 April 2015. He submitted an
    application for further leave on human  rights  grounds  but  that  was
    refused in disputed circumstances relating to whether  the  immigration
    surcharge had been paid. The appellant  did  not  pursue  that  matter,
    instead submitting an application for a residence card  as  the  family
    member of an EEA national on 16 November  2017.  That  application  was
    refused, and it is that refusal decision which the  appellant  appealed
    against to the First-tier Tribunal, and which is under consideration in
    these proceedings.

 3. The central issue in this case is whether the appellant was a party  to
    a marriage of convenience. In August 2016, the  appellant  met  Florina
    Alexandra Bitu, a Romanian citizen born 7 April 1997  ("the  sponsor").
    They married in a civil ceremony on 21 November 2017, having undertaken
    an Islamic ceremony in August 2017.  The sponsor and the appellant were
    interviewed separately on 7 February 2018.  The  respondent  considered
    there to be a  significant  number  of  discrepancies  in  the  answers
    provided by the sponsor and the appellant, such that their marriage was
    demonstrated to be one of convenience. The respondent  also  considered
    that there was insufficient evidence concerning whether the sponsor was
    a "qualified person" for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations.

 4. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  gave
    evidence. The appellant called four witnesses to give evidence  on  his
    behalf, Liaqat Ali, Elisha Watkins-Williams, Wajid Ali and  Zafar  Ali.
    The witnesses were present to adopt their witness statements  but  were
    not  cross-examined  by  the  respondent.  At  [5],  the  judge   below
    summarised the contents of  these  witness  statements:  "[t]hey  state
    their close relationships to the parties and that  they  have  personal
    knowledge of the genuineness of their marriage relationship".

 5. The judge found that many of the  inconsistencies  highlighted  by  the
    respondent in the marriage interview fell away. He noted at  [14]  that
    counsel for the appellant had "rightly" highlighted that  there  was  a
    "remarkable degree  of  consistency"  across  the  interviews  of  both
    parties. Each were asked around 200 questions, and their  answers  were
    largely consistent. In the same paragraph, the judge  noted  that,  "on
    the evidence as a whole the conclusion must be that  there  is  a  high
    degree of consistency in the responses of  the  parties..."  The  judge
    accepted that they were cohabiting.  However, at [16], the judge  noted
    that the parties' consistency was only one factor to be considered.

 6. The judge examined some  of  the  inconsistencies  highlighted  by  the
    respondent. At [18(1)(b)], the judge found that  no  adverse  inference
    could properly be drawn from the answers the  parties  gave  concerning
    the appellant's employment. Elsewhere, the judge found that the answers
    the couple had given concerning the sponsor's  work  schedule  did  not
    call for an adverse inference. In relation to the respondent's concerns
    that each party spoke only broken English, the judge  found  that  they
    spoke sufficient basic English and were able  to  communicate  on  that
    basis, such that the appellant should be given the benefit of the doubt
    on the point.  The respondent's concerns that the appellant and sponsor
    were unable  to  describe  the  home  they  lived  in  in  sufficiently
    consistent terms fell away; their answers did  not  reveal  a  "serious
    discrepancy" on that issue.

 7. There are some factors which the judge did hold against the  appellant.
    At [18(2)(b)], the judge found that the  sponsor's  lack  of  knowledge
    concerning the appellant's financial means,  and  his  proposed  future
    employment, was a factor which suggested the marriage could  have  been
    one of convenience.

 8. At [18(5)(b)], the judge noted that the appellant had given a different
    answer at interview concerning his immigration status.  He  noted  that
    the appellant said that did not tell the sponsor about the  immigration
    problems he was experiencing.  By contrast, the sponsor  said  that  he
    told her on their first date.  This  conflict,  considered  the  judge,
    undermined the credibility of the appellant's case.

 9. The judge considered the sponsor's answers in her interview  concerning
    her Islamic marriage to the appellant to reveal a lack of  interest  in
    the marriage and her husband's religious beliefs. The judge  considered
    that that revealed a lack of  interest  in  the  marriage  certificate,
    which in turn suggested the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.   See
    [18(6)(b)].

10. At [19], the judge said that he  had  indicated  a  number  of  "highly
    significant discrepancies that go to the  very  core  of  the  question
    whether their marriage is a sham". The judge then  underlined  what  he
    considered to be the very strong incentive the appellant had to enter a
    marriage of convenience. He considered the haste with which the parties
    married after having met  to  undermine  further  the  claim  that  the
    marriage was not one of convenience.

11. In light of the highly significant inconsistencies, said the judge, the
    evidence  of  the   appellant   and   sponsor   had   been   undermined
    significantly. The judge found the marriage to be one of convenience.

12. The judge did not consider whether the sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
    rights.

Permission to appeal

13. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  a  Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge  erred  by  failing  to  make  any
    findings in respect of  the  four  witnesses  whose  evidence  was  not
    challenged by the respondent. In addition, although weight was a matter
    for the judge, it was arguable that the judge had not given  sufficient
    reasons for attaching so much weight to the claimed inconsistencies and
    discrepancies in the interviews of the appellant and the sponsor, given
    the finding reached by the judge that the remainder of the evidence was
    consistent.





Submissions

14.  Mrs Price submitted that the judge's reasons for dismissing the appeal
    were "puzzling". She highlighted the "remarkable consistency"  accepted
    by the judge across the answers  provided  by  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor. She submitted that no clear reasons were given in the decision
    for dismissing the appeal.  The sponsor's medical notes were before the
    judge; they state that the appellant attended medical appointments with
    the sponsor for an ongoing  medical  condition.   One  of  the  entries
    described the appellant as having interpreted for the sponsor.  Another
    simply described him as having accompanied  her.   Although  the  judge
    noted at [20] that he took this into account, Mrs Price submitted  that
    the conclusions reached by the judge were at  odds  with  his  findings
    concerning the remainder of the evidence.

15. Mrs Price also highlighted the fact that the judge made no findings  in
    relation to the four witnesses referred to in paragraph 4, above. These
    were friends of the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  some  of  whom  had
    attended their wedding, one of whom shared a flat with them at the time
    of the  hearing.   Each  of  the  witnesses,  whose  evidence  was  not
    challenged by the respondent, spoke in warm and  detailed  terms  about
    the genuineness of the relationship enjoyed by the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor. The judge's failure to make  findings  in  relation  to  these
    witnesses suggested that  he  had  overlooked  this  arguably  material
    evidence.  As  such,  the  judge's  reasoning  in   relation   to   the
    significance  of  the  claimed  inconsistencies  across  the   marriage
    interview was arguably perverse or irrational.

16. The presenting officer relied upon the respondent's rule  24  response.
    It states that the judge knew what the appropriate legal test  was  and
    reached findings with that in mind. The  judge  had  assessed  all  the
    evidence and his finding was not  irrational.  The  presenting  officer
    highlighted the inconsistencies which the judge below found to be fatal
    to the validity of the marriage. This included the discrepancies in the
    parties' knowledge concerning their financial arrangements, the lack of
    knowledge of the sponsor concerning the Islamic  marriage  certificate.
    The judge had correctly directed himself concerning the burden of proof
    and could not  be  criticised  on  the  basis  that  his  decision  was
    irrational. Weight is a matter for the judge and  not  something  which
    this Tribunal should interfere with.  It  was  not  necessary  for  the
    judge expressly to refer to the other witnesses; he had  clearly  taken
    into account all relevant evidence, and reached rational findings as  a
    result. The judge noted  that  the  appellant's  own  brother  had  not
    attended the hearing to support her case, even though he had provided a
    witness statement. That was a matter which the judge below was entitled
    to take into account.

Legal framework

17. Where the respondent alleges that a marriage is one of convenience, the
    burden rests on him to demonstrate that the marriage  falls  into  that
    category (see Papajorgi (EEA spouse  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC),  Agho  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 at [13] and  Sadovska  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 54  at,  for  example,  [28].
    The  burden  upon  the  respondent  is   not   discharged   merely   by
    demonstrating there to be a reasonable suspicion that the  marriage  is
    not  genuine  (that  is,  was  contracted  for  the  sole  purpose   of
    circumventing the domestic immigration control regime) but, if he  does
    establish the presence of such a reasonable  suspicion,  the  appellant
    will be expected to respond to the allegation.  In those circumstances,
    the evidential pendulum will swing  to  the  appellant.   However,  the
    basic rule is this: "he who asserts must prove": see Sadovska  at  [28]
    per Lady Hale PSC.

Discussion

18. We accept the submissions of Mrs Price that the judge's failure to have
    regard to the four witnesses called by the  appellant  but  not  cross-
    examined by the respondent amounted to a  failure  to  have  regard  to
    material evidence. It is not necessary to recite the details  of  their
    witness statements in any depth at this stage, other  than  to  observe
    that each witness speaks in relatively detailed terms  about  the  life
    the appellant and the sponsor enjoy together as a married  couple,  and
    describes  the  activities  they  undertake  together  and  with  their
    friends.

19. Whilst, in principle, there is  superficial  force  to  the  presenting
    officer's submissions that the issue of weight  is  a  matter  for  the
    judge, that principle is of little assistance where weight is  assessed
    without reference to material evidence. Weight would be a matter solely
    for the judge below had he clearly had regard to all relevant  material
    evidence. The judge noted at [5] that each  of  the  four  unchallenged
    witnesses had "personal knowledge of the genuineness of [the  appellant
    and sponsor's] marriage relationship" but  made  no  reference  to  the
    impact of those four witnesses to the issue of weight and  his  overall
    analysis  of  the  case.  These  were  witnesses  whose  evidence   was
    potentially significant and, especially given the absence of  challenge
    to their evidence by the respondent, would need  to  be  discussed  and
    analysed in some detail before  reaching  the  conclusion  arrived  at.
    This the judge failed to do.

20. When these concerns are placed in the context of  the  judge's  overall
    assessment of the weight he ascribed to the evidence of the sponsor and
    the appellant, the judge's findings about the  "remarkable"  degree  of
    consistency between the appellant  and  the  sponsor's  answers  during
    their interviews acquire a greater significance. The judge's conclusion
    that the three inconsistencies were such as fundamentally to  undermine
    the appellant's innocent explanation was inconsistent with his analysis
    of the "remarkable consistency", when taken alongside the  evidence  of
    the supporting witnesses.  We accept that the judge did  highlight  the
    absence of the sponsor's brother at the hearing; the reason provided by
    the appellant was that he was out of the country. However,  there  were
    four supporting witnesses at the hearing. They were not cross-examined,
    and the judge did not have any questions for any of them himself.

21. We consider that the Judge failed to have regard to  material  evidence
    and accordingly failed give adequate  reasons  for  his  findings.   We
    consider these errors to be material  and  accordingly  set  aside  the
    Judge's findings that the marriage was one of convenience.

22.  As  we  indicated  at  the  hearing,  we  consider  that  the  claimed
    inconsistencies, although in  isolation  capable  of  being  viewed  as
    significant, are less so when viewed alongside  the  remainder  of  the
    evidence as a whole. We bear in mind the  findings  of  fact  from  the
    first-tier Tribunal that there was a "remarkable" degree of consistency
    across the evidence as a whole. We also recall the evidence of the four
    unchallenged witnesses, summarised by the judge  as  demonstrating  the
    genuineness of the relationship between the appellant and the  sponsor.
    We also recall the judge's finding that the appellant and  the  sponsor
    are cohabiting, and the medical notes of the  sponsor,  which  revealed
    that the appellant had attended  medical  appointments  with  her.  The
    overall picture that emerges is one of a genuine relationship.

23. We accept that the sponsor's apparent  lack  of  knowledge  during  her
    interview concerning the appellant's immigration status is a matter for
    some concern. Similarly, it is also of some concern that she  displayed
    only vague and uncertain  knowledge  concerning  the  Islamic  marriage
    ceremony, and the appellant's  finances.  However,  these  are  factors
    which must be viewed in the context of  the  remaining  evidence  as  a
    whole.

24. We do not consider the sponsor's  knowledge  of  the  Islamic  marriage
    certificate to be capable of being a determinative issue. She does  not
    profess to adhere to the Islamic faith.  The  legal  marriage  was  the
    civil ceremony.  It is clear from the sponsor's witness statement,  and
    that of the appellant, that the Islamic  ceremonial  aspects  of  their
    marriage were at the instigation of the appellant, and pursuant to  his
    religious beliefs. At [7] of her statement, the sponsor writes that she
    is from a Christian background. At [24], she writes that she has little
    interest  in  the  appellant's  Islamic  faith.  During  her   marriage
    interview, she wrote, she was confused when asked  about  her  marriage
    certificates, given she had the civil  marriage  certificate  from  the
    registry office, in addition to the Islamic certificate. In  our  view,
    this is  an  innocent  explanation  to  this  aspect  of  the  concerns
    manifested by the respondent.   In light  of  the  remaining  evidence,
    taken in the round, the sponsor's  lack  of  knowledge  concerning  the
    Islamic certificate is not a matter which carry significant weight.  It
    is not a factor which is capable of undermining the  remainder  of  the
    "innocent explanation" provided by the appellant and the sponsor to the
    allegations raised by the respondent.

25. The remaining significant inconsistency identified  by  the  respondent
    relates to the answers provided by the appellant and sponsor concerning
    the appellant's immigration status and the sponsor's lack of  knowledge
    concerning the appellant's financial affairs. We accept that there some
    are inconsistencies and knowledge gaps, respectively.

26. In his interview, the appellant said that he had not told  the  sponsor
    that he was living in the United Kingdom unlawfully. By  contrast,  the
    sponsor said that he told her on her on their first date. The  question
    for us is whether this inconsistency, taken against the  background  of
    the "remarkable" levels of consistency  across  the  remainder  of  the
    interviews, alongside the findings of the judge  below,  and  the  four
    unchallenged witnesses, amounts to a  sufficient  basis  to  call  into
    question all factors which point in favour of the case advanced by  the
    appellant. We do not consider that it does.

27. At questions 154 and 155 of his interview, the appellant said  that  he
    had not used the term "illegal" in relation to his residence, but  that
    he had told the sponsor that he did not have a visa. It is  clear  from
    his answer to question 155 that the appellant did not view remaining in
    the United Kingdom without a visa is residing in the UK  illegally.  He
    appears to have been pressed on the matter by the interviewing officer.
    However, the issue for our consideration is not the terms in which  the
    appellant described the status of his residence in  this  country,  but
    whether the answers he gave were consistent with those provided by  the
    sponsor. He did confirm in his interview that he told  the  sponsor  he
    did not have a visa. That is entirely  consistent  with  the  sponsor's
    recollection of the  early  stages  of  their  relationship,  when  she
    recalls being told by the appellant that he did not have  a  visa.  The
    fact that the interviewing officer sought to press the  appellant  into
    using the term "illegal" in relation to his residence status is, in our
    view, irrelevant. For present purposes, what matters is the  fact  that
    the appellant said that he informed the sponsor at an  early  stage  in
    their relationship that he did not have a visa, and  that  matches  the
    account provided by the sponsor.

28. That leaves the sponsor's lack of knowledge of the appellant's  earning
    power. The judge below at [18(2)(b)] was concerned that the absence  of
    financial knowledge on the part of the sponsor fundamentally undermines
    the validity of their relationship. In our view,  taken  alongside  the
    remaining evidence  in  the  case,  it  is  important  to  recall  that
    relationships take many forms. Spouses have very different  degrees  of
    knowledge of each other's financial situation. We do not consider  that
    the sponsors relative lack of knowledge on this issue fundamentally  to
    undermine the remaining evidence which, as we have demonstrated,  tends
    to demonstrate that the sponsor and appellant  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.

29. Accordingly, in light of the above analysis, we find that the appellant
    has provided the necessary "innocent  explanation"  in  answer  to  the
    allegations advanced by the respondent. It follows, therefore, that the
    evidential burden has shifted back to the respondent. The remainder  of
    the case advanced by the respondent is not sufficient to  overcome  the
    innocent explanation proffered by the appellant,  even  accounting  for
    the weaknesses outlined in the previous paragraph.

30.  We  find  that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  are  in  a  genuine
    relationship of marriage.  They  are  cohabiting.  They  provided  four
    witnesses before the judge below, all of whom were unchallenged by  the
    respondent, speaking to the validity of their relationship.  We  accept
    that the appellant did have a significant  incentive  to  marry  an  EU
    citizen in order to secure a right to reside. However, looking back  to
    the intentions of the appellant  and  the  sponsor  at  the  time  they
    entered into their marriage through the lens of the  quality  of  their
    relationship at the moment, we do not  find  that  the  respondent  has
    demonstrated that  the  sole,  as  in  predominant,  purpose  of  their
    relationship was in order to secure an immigration  advantage  for  the
    appellant.  Many features of their relationship are as one would expect
    to find in a genuine and subsisting  relationship,  in  particular  the
    appellant accompanying  the  sponsor  to  medical  appointments,  their
    cohabitation, the remarkable consistency across the answers  that  each
    provided in their marriage interview,  and  the  support  of  the  four
    witnesses, one of whom  shares  a  flat  with  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.

31. In light of these findings, it follows  that  the  respondent  has  not
    discharged the burden of proof he faces in order  to  demonstrate  that
    the marriage is one of convenience. That being so,  the  appellant  and
    sponsor are not in a marriage of convenience. The appellant, therefore,
    falls into the definition of "spouse" contained in regulation  2(1)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.

32. That is not the end of the matter.  In order  for  this  appeal  to  be
    allowed, the appellant would have to have demonstrated that the sponsor
    was exercising Treaty rights at the material time.  The absence of such
    evidence was one of  the  reasons  given  by  the  refusal  letter  for
    rejecting the application.  The exercise of Treaty rights  was  not  an
    issue covered by Judge Devitte, and whether that amounted to a material
    error of law was not addressed in the grounds of appeal or  before  us.
    It follows, therefore, that the appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that
    Judge Devitte erred in that aspect of his analysis and we have not been
    invited to find that this was  a  material  error  of  law.   As  such,
    although we are satisfied that the marriage between the  appellant  and
    sponsor was not one of convenience, this appeal is dismissed.

33. The appellant  will  be  able  to  make  a  fresh  application  to  the
    respondent exhibiting a copy of this decision to address  any  concerns
    the respondent may previously have had concerning whether the  marriage
    was one of convenience.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed        Stephen H Smith                         Date 5 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


