
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: EA/03751/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st June 2017                             |On 25th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                           Chijioke Philip Okpala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tampari, Chancery CS Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  5th  July  1983.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 21st January 2016
    refusing his application for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
    right to reside in the United Kingdom.  He was granted a residence card
    as the spouse of [M]  Wienhusen,  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom in 2010 and he is  now  seeking  permanent
    residence on the basis of retained rights following  his  divorce  from
    his EEA spouse.  His appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Fox on 19th  July  2016.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  and  a
    decision promulgated on 26th July 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Keane on 9th May 2017.  The
    permission states that the judge made a material  misdirection  of  law
    when incorporating, as a requirement for permanent residence, that  the
    appellant should have been party to an active relationship with his EEA
    national spouse, at the same address, for a period of at least  a  year
    prior to the divorce  (paragraph  15).   This  is  not  required  under
    Regulation 10, (5) and (6) of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006.
    The permission goes on to state that the judge did not give any or  any
    adequate reasons for failing to accord weight to many of the  documents
    submitted by the Appellant, which are listed  at  paragraph  5  of  the
    grounds.  It states that when these are taken together  they  may  have
    established that the Appellant and his EEA national spouse lived at the
    same address.  The judge refers to the documentary evidence as  "merely
    suggestive" (paragraph 7).  The judge was  also  seeking  corroboration
    but the decision does not make it clear what the nature and  extent  of
    the corroborative evidence that he required sight of was.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states that it is  not  clear
    from the grounds whether the payslips from 2009, of the Appellant's ex-
    spouse, covered the entire period up  until  the  divorce.   The  judge
    found there was insufficient documentation  to  suggest  that  she  was
    exercising treaty rights for the requisite period and there was limited
    information to explain what the actual  circumstances  were  and  these
    matters would have been fatal to the  appellant's  claim  even  if  the
    error at paragraph 15 had not been made.

The Hearing

 4. Both parties accepted that the judge's finding at paragraph 15  of  the
    decision is an error of law but the Respondent submitted  that  it  may
    well not be a material error of law.  The couple do not require to have
    been staying with each other for one year but they both require to have
    been in the United Kingdom for  one  year  during  the  period  of  the
    marriage.

 5. The Appellant's representative submitted that  he  is  relying  on  the
    permission granted and I was referred to paragraphs 15  to  18  of  the
    decision.  The representative submitted that the judge does not  engage
    with the documents before him, in particular relating to  the  economic
    activity  of  the  appellant's  ex-partner.   I  was  referred  to  the
    Appellant's  original  bundle  and   the   Appellant's   representative
    submitted that there is sufficient evidence in the form of payslips and
    P60s to show that  the  Appellant's  ex-spouse  was  exercising  treaty
    rights up until the date of the divorce.  He submitted that  the  judge
    did not take all the evidence before him into account when he made  his
    decision.  I was referred to  the  P60s  showing  an  increase  in  the
    appellant's ex-spouse's income each year up to 2013.

 6. He submitted that at paragraph 18 the judge again  did  not  take  into
    account all the documents before him relating to the  Appellant's  work
    after the date of the divorce.

 7. With regard to the Appellant having been found not to  be  working  for
    Pinnacle Sure Contracting Limited the representative submitted that the
    Appellant worked for agencies  who  subcontracted  him  out.   He  left
    Pinnacle and has provided payslips for his new employer up to 2016.

 8. With regard to the spelling of the Sponsor's name which is stated to be
    Wienhusen, on her payslips and the divorce decree name her as  Weehusen
    and he submitted that this was accepted  by  the  Respondent  when  the
    original residence card was granted to  the  Appellant.   He  submitted
    that because of this the Appellant did not address this.

 9. He submitted that the Appellant's ex-wife refused to produce  her  HMRC
    documents for this hearing because she is no longer in  a  relationship
    with the Appellant.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 19  of  the  judge's
    decision the judge refers  to  the  point  about  the  Appellant's  ex-
    spouse's name.  He then goes on to refer  to  her  employment,  stating
    that he is not satisfied that she was  a  qualified  person  exercising
    treaty rights during the relevant period of marriage up to her divorce.
     He submitted  that  because  of  this  finding  the  judge  found  the
    Appellant does not  qualify  for  permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and he was entitled to come to this conclusion.  The Presenting
    Officer submitted that the judge has to  look  at  everything  required
    under the Regulations and it was open to the judge to  comment  on  the
    misspelling of the  Appellant's  ex-wife's  name.   He  submitted  that
    although the Appellant states that there is sufficient  evidence  about
    his Sponsor, the judge has not gone into any detail about the  91  page
    Appellant's bundle submitted for the  First-tier  hearing.  There  were
    only three payslips for the Appellant's ex-wife  from  30th  June  2013
    until 30th September 2013 so the P60s had to be relied on.   The  judge
    then referred to the  Appellant's  payslips  which  show  that  he  was
    employed from 15th December 2015 onwards.  There are also P60s for  the
    Appellant.  He submitted that the judge was entitled  to  his  findings
    based on what was before him.

11. I was asked to find that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.

12. There was a 91 page bundle submitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the
    appeal hearing.  It contains employment details for the Appellant's ex-
    spouse and also for the Appellant.   There  are  also  bank  statements
    reflecting salaries and wages  for the Appellant.  Additional  evidence
    has also been provided about the Appellant and his wife cohabiting.

13. I have noted that this  appeal  was  dealt  with  on  the  papers.   As
    previously stated there is an error of law in the judge's  decision  in
    that he refers to the Appellant having to live with his spouse for  one
    year prior to the divorce.  This does not form part of the Regulations.
     I have to decide if this is a material error.

14. At paragraph 9  the  judge  states  that  he  has  considered  all  the
    documents attached to the appeal and it is clear that he  is  referring
    to the 91 page bundle as he refers to the Appellant's witness statement
    which is the first document in this bundle.

15. The judge states that he is not satisfied that the Appellant resided in
    the United Kingdom during the relevant  period.   At  paragraph  17  he
    states that he doubts whether the marriage was genuine and  subsisting.
     The judge also states that he is not satisfied that the Appellant  has
    been exercising treaty rights since the date of the divorce.

16. The judge has  not  specified  in  any  detail  what  documents  he  is
    satisfied with and what documents he is not  satisfied  with.   He  has
    merely made general comments relating to the Sponsor's periods of  work
    and the Appellant's periods of work.  There is considerable evidence in
    the 91 page bundle and it  is  not  clear  from  the  judge's  decision
    exactly what he considered.

17. The judge refers to the spelling of the Sponsor's name at paragraph 19.
     He refers to it being strange that a residence permit was  granted  in
    spite of the discrepancy in her name.  This is something that has to be
    considered.  Although the name is similar it is not  the  same  and  it
    appears on his ex-wife's payslips and  on  the  decree  absolute.   The
    marriage certificate should have been supplied  so  that  this  can  be
    dealt with properly.  The judge was entitled to refer to this.

18. I find that there are material errors of law in the  judge's  decision.
    Because of the lack of detail relating to the payslips, P60s  and  bank
    statements in the decision it is not clear what  the  judge  has  taken
    into account.  There is also the error of law  referred  to  about  the
    parties having to stay with each other for one year before the date  of
    divorce.  This is not contained within the Regulations.   I  find  that
    more should have been made of the misspelling of the sponsor's name  on
    various documents.  Further evidence is required about this to enable a
    clear decision to be made.

19. There are material  errors  of  law  in  the  decision  of  Judge  Fox,
    promulgated on 19th July 2016.

20. This appeal must be set aside and remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for hearing, but not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox.

21. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 21/07/2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
