
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  EA/03332/2015
     EA/03333/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 February 2018                           |On 27 March 2018             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                          MRS SHAHINOOR KHAN SHANTA
                               MR AHMAD TASFIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, Counsel for PGA Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born on 31 December 1989  and
    30 October 1983.  They appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 23 November 2015 refusing to issue each of them a residence  card
    under the  Immigration  European  Economic  Area  Regulations  2006  as
    extended family members of an EEA national exercising Treaty Rights  in
    the United Kingdom.  Their appeals were heard by Judge  of  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal Callow on 25 April 2017.  The appeals were dismissed  for
    want of jurisdiction in a decision promulgated on 8 May 2017.

 2. An application for permission to  appeal  was  lodged.  Permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Ford on 14  November  2017.
    The Permission states that the Court of Appeal in Khan [2017] AWCA  Civ
    1755 has overturned the case of Sala  [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC).  Khan
    states that there should be  a  right  of  appeal  to  extended  family
    members of an EEA national exercising Treaty Rights in the UK.  It  was
    because of the decision in Sala that the  appeal  was  dismissed.   The
    Permission states that it is arguable that the claims should  not  have
    been dismissed.


 3. There is a Rule 24 response by the respondent dated 24  December  2017.
    This states that while the Court of Appeal in the said case of Khan has
    overturned Sala, permission has been sought to appeal  to  the  Supreme
    Court and the Court of Appeal have imposed a stay on the effect of  the
    Judgement, pending the outcome of that application.  The same point  is
    also being considered separately by the Supreme Court in  SM  (Algeria)
    which was heard  at  the  end  of  November  2017  and  the  respondent
    therefore contends that Sala still  remains  good  law.   The  response
    states that the respondent is seeking that the appeals be adjourned and
    not listed until the outcome of the above application and permission to
    appeal is decided or the Supreme Court's decision in SM is promulgated.


 4. The response goes on to state that it is trite law that the  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge has no jurisdiction to consider the Article 8 element of
    the appellant's appeal.  Reference  is  made  to  Amirteymour  -v-  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353.

The Hearing

 5. Counsel for the appellants submitted that as the case of Sala has  been
    overturned these claims should be remitted to the First-Tier  Tribunal.
    He submitted that they should not be adjourned to  await  decisions  in
    the said cases of Khan and SM.

 6. The Presenting Officer relied on the Rule 24  response  and  sought  an
    adjournment until the said cases of Khan and SM have been decided.


 7. The Tribunal policy in these cases is that an adjournment should not be
    granted for these reasons and that failed claims based on the said case
    of Sala should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for a  re-hearing
    on all issues.  That is what I am directing as the decision  dismissing
    the appeals for want of jurisdiction, can no longer stand.

Notice of Decision

 8. I direct that the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.
    None of its findings are to stand other than as a record  of  what  was
    said  on  that  occasion.   It  is  appropriate  in  terms  of  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit  the
    claims to the First-Tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.


 9. The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider  these  cases
    are not to include Judge Callow.


10. Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed                                  Date 23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
