
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
EA/03110/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20thMarch 2018                  |        On 9th May 2018            |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                        mr EMMANUEL TOLULOPE IHIDERD
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Atim Oji, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Owens sitting at Hatton Cross on  25th  July  2017.
    She had dismissed the Appellant's appeal on the  basis  of  a  lack  of
    jurisdiction.  In particular the Judge had in mind and had referred  to
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in Sala (EFMs: right  of  appeal)  [2016]
    UKUT 00411 (IAC).  In granting  permission  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kelly said as follows:

         "The Appellant  seeks  permission  to  appeal  in  time  against  a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Owens  promulgated  on  16th
         August 2017 to dismiss the appeal against  the  revocation  of  his
         permit to enter as the extended family member of  an  EEA  national
         exercising community treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  There is
         little merit in the ground but the facts of  the  Appellant's  case
         are distinguishable from those in Sala.  However  given  that  Sala
         was held to have been wrongly decided in Khan [2017] EWCA Civ  1755
         permission to appeal is granted."

2.    At today's hearing I heard  brief  submissions  from  Ms  Oji  who  in
    effect said when one reads the Court of Appeal's decision in Khan it is
    clear that there is a material error of law.

3.    Mr Melvin in his response said that he queried how one could see  this
    appeal ever succeeding, but on the  other  hand  in  terms  of  justice
    because there had been no hearing of the Appellant's  submissions  then
    it may well be that it is appropriate, if I thought it to be,  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for there to be such a
    hearing.

4.    In my judgment that is indeed the appropriate course. There has to  be
    a hearing of the Appellant's appeal at the First-tier  Tribunal.  There
    has been no proper hearing and so  it  is  appropriate  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to send the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
    hearing.  At that hearing, the Appellant will get  the  opportunity  to
    put forward his case and for it to be heard.  The only direction I give
    is that the appeal be heard by a judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Owens.  All of the other directions shall come  from  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

The matter shall be re-heard at the First-Tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed: A Mahmood                                  Date: 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

