
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/03256/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13th March 2018                       |On 15th March 2018                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                         CHRISTIAN CHUKWUNYERE SIMON
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Yerokon of A & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

     1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1978. He applied  for
        a residence card on the basis that  he  has  a  retained  right  of
        residence as the former spouse of an EEA national who had exercised
        Treaty rights in the UK. This was refused on 3rd  March  2016.  His
        appeal against the decision was dismissed under the EEA Regulations
        by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brewer in a determination  promulgated
        on the 30th May 2017.

     2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable
        that the First-tier judge had erred in law in the assessment of the
        period of time applied to qualify the appellant  in  terms  of  the
        exercise of Treaty rights by the appellant's former spouse.

     3. The matter came before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law and Remaking

     4. It is argued in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  in  summary,  that  the
        appellant had argued that he was entitled to succeed on  the  basis
        of a retained rights of residence under  Regulation  10(5)  of  the
        Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, henceforth the EEA Regulations,
        as is reflected in paragraph 25 of the decision. It is argued  that
        in respect of Regulation 10(5) of  the  EEA  Regulations  that  the
        appellant has shown he did cease to be the family member of an  EEA
        national through  divorce;  and  that  this  family  member  was  a
        qualified person at the date of divorce. There was no need for that
        family member to have been a qualified person for five years  prior
        to  the  termination  of  the  marriage.  However,  the  First-tier
        Tribunal errs by finding  this  to  be  a  necessary  condition  at
        paragraph 24 of the decision. This is contrary to case law as  well
        as what is said  on  the  face  of  Regulation  10(5)  of  the  EEA
        Regulations.  Evidence  in  the  bundle  clearly  shows  that   the
        appellant's wife was a qualified person at the date of divorce, and
        the First-tier Tribunal errs at paragraph 27 of  the  decision  for
        failure to have reference to this material evidence.

     5. Mr Duffy accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  as
        argued above. With respect to  the  remaking  of  the  decision  he
        accepted that the parties had lived in the UK for  entire  duration
        of their marriage.

Conclusions - Error of Law

     6. The First-tier Tribunal clearly understood that  Regulation  10  of
        the EEA Regulations was relevant and sets  this  provision  out  in
        full at paragraph 16 of the decision. The skeleton argument of  the
        appellant clearly argued before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
        appellant first qualified for a retained right of  residence  under
        Regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations, see paragraph  7  of  that
        document. There is a finding at paragraph 27 of the decision  which
        clearly errs in law in that it is said that the applicant's  spouse
        was not a qualified person for this purpose  without  any  relevant
        reasoning.

Conclusions - Remaking

     7. The relevant requirements of Regulation 10(5) are  as  follows:  In
        accordance with Regulation 10(5) (a) that the appellant  ceased  to
        be a family member of a qualified EEA  national  at  the  point  of
        divorce.  In  accordance  with  Regulation  10(5)(b)  that  he  was
        residing in the UK in accordance with the EEA  Regulations  at  the
        date of termination of the marriage.  Further  in  accordance  with
        Regulation 10(5)(d) of the EEA Regulations that the marriage lasted
        more than three years and that the parties resided in the UK for at
        least one year whilst married.

     8. The decree  absolute  records  that  the  appellant  and  Rudangela
        Gregoria Nicandra Romano were married on 26th April 2009 in  London
        and divorced on 28th March 2013. Clearly the marriage  lasted  more
        than three years. There is evidence that the appellant was  working
        for Surrey and Sussex NHS Trust in April 2013 in the  form  of  his
        P60, and thus that he was  residing  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
        Regulations at the time of the divorce.  It  is  accepted  that  Ms
        Romano is a Romanian national. There is evidence, in  the  form  of
        payslips for March and April 2013 and a letter  from  her  employer
        confirming that Ms Romano was  working  with  Heathfield  Solutions
        Limited at the time of divorce.

     9. The only issue that remains to be determined  is  under  Regulation
        10(5)(d), namely whether the parties resided in the UK for a period
        of at least one year whilst married.  It is accepted  by  Mr  Duffy
        that this is the case, and I find that this position  accords  with
        the totality of the evidence before me.

    10. As such I find that the appellant has shown that he meets  all  the
        requirements of Regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations and thus is
        entitled to a retained right of residence.

   Decision:

     1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
        making of an error on a point of law.

     2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

     3. I re-make the decision in the appeal  by  allowing  under  the  EEA
        Regulations.

Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  13th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



Fee Award   Note: this is not part of the determination.

   In the light of my decision to re-make the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
   allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award.  I  have  had
   regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in Immigration
   Appeals. I have decided to make a whole fee award because it was accepted
   by Mr Duffy that the appeal was determined in the appellant's  favour  on
   the  basis  of  the  evidence  provided  to  the  respondent   with   the
   application.

Signed: Fiona Lindsley                                   Date: 13th March
2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
