
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03002/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on          |
|On 22 January 2019                   |On 11 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                            Alfred Olukayode Oye
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Stephen Vokes, Counsel instructed by Owens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on 18 August  2018  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's  refusal  to  grant  him  a   permanent   residence   card
    recognising a retained  right  of  residence  following  divorce  under
    Regulation  10(5)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016.

 2. The appellant was formerly  married  to  an  Austrian  citizen  who  is
    therefore an EEA national and who was exercising Treaty rights  for  at
    least part of the time required to satisfy the provisions of Regulation
    10(5).

 3. The parties' marriage was entered into on 9 May 2009 and so the parties
    would have been married for five years on 9  May  2014.   That  is  the
    period for which the applicant needs to show that  his  wife  exercised
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 4. The parties' marriage irretrievably broke down on 4 April 2015, due  to
    the wife's infidelity.   Following  an  argument,  the  wife  took  her
    possessions  and  moved  out  of  the  matrimonial  home,  leaving   no
    forwarding address.  Subsequently it is said she refused  to  take  the
    appellant's calls to the extent that she is  in  fact  unaware  of  the
    divorce proceedings and some sort of alternative service must have been
    approved by the divorce court.  The solicitors undertaking the  divorce
    are not  Owens  Solicitors  who  represented  the  appellant  in  these
    proceedings.

 5. The Baigazieva date for the end of the marriage was 6  May  2015,  when
    the divorce petition was presented by the appellant.   Decree  absolute
    was pronounced on 13 November 2015.

Evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant's case is that the sponsor was  made  redundant  on  some
    date in 2014 which the applicant  could  not  precisely  remember,  but
    before the summer, but that she may have worked as a hairdresser for  a
    time thereafter.  In order to show that the applicant had five years of
    residence in the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations, the
    date of her redundancy would have had to have been no  earlier  than  9
    May 2014 but the appellant was unable to give clear  evidence  to  that
    effect or provide any corroborative documentary evidence.

 7. The appellant told the First-tier Judge, at [12] that "he did not  know
    if his solicitors had approached the [hairdressing] salon  or  HMRC  to
    confirm that [his former wife] had been working".  No representative of
    the solicitors attended at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and  no
    evidence has been submitted which improves that position.

 8. At [21] the judge recorded the evidential position before him:

         "In this case there is no suggestion that the  appellant  tried  to
         contact the sponsor, her employers or HMRC.   I  am  not  therefore
         persuaded that the respondent has failed to implement [his] policy.
          The burden of proof remains on the appellant and it has  not  been
         discharged".

 9. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal both  under  the  Regulations
    and under the Immigration Rules related to Article 8 ECHR.

10. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.



Permission to appeal

11. Permission to appeal  was  granted,  principally  in  reliance  on  the
    respondent's published policy Free Movement Rights:  Retained right  of
    residence (updated 7 February 2017), the appellant contending that the
    First-tier Judge erred in concluding that there  was  no  onus  on  the
    respondent to undertake  his  own  investigations  with  the  sponsor's
    former employers or HMRC to help the appellant establishment whether on
    6 May 2015, the sponsor  was  working  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Judge
    Simpson noted that the appellant had made no application to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a direction that the respondent make such  inquiries.



12. When granting permission, Judge Simpson observed that it  was  not  the
    appellant's case that he had made any attempt to contact  the  sponsor,
    her employers, or HMRC, but she considered that it was arguable that he
    was prevented from doing so by the General Data Protection  Regulation,
    implemented in the United Kingdom on 25 May 2018.  She considered  that
    the respondent had arguably failed to apply his Guidance, and that such
    failure was arguably material.

13. Judge Simpson further considered that Judge Broe  erred  in  dismissing
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules, because  it  had  been  brought
    under the EEA Regulations and the Immigration Rules were therefore  not
    applicable.  That is quite right, and it means that paragraphs 22 to 28
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision are otiose and immaterial to  the
    outcome of an EEA Regulations appeal.  The Article 8 ECHR point was not
    relied upon in the Upper Tribunal hearing.

The respondent's policy

14. Mr Vokes  provided  me  with  a  copy  of  the  relevant  page  of  the
    respondent's policy, as follows:

         "No evidence of EEA sponsor
         In cases where there has  been  a  breakdown  in  the  relationship
         between the applicant and their EEA national  sponsor  it  may  not
         always be possible for them to get the documents that are needed to
         support their application  ...
         Another example would be where  the  applicant's  relationship  has
         ended under difficult circumstances but they have provided evidence
         to show that they have made every effort to  provide  the  required
         documents.  Such  as  attempting  to  make  contact  with  the  EEA
         national sponsor during divorce proceedings ...
         When dealing with these cases you must take  a  pragmatic  approach
         and:
         . consider each case on its merits
         . if you are  satisfied  the  applicant  cannot  get  the  evidence
         themselves, make enquiries on their behalf where possible,  getting
         agreement from your senior caseworker before doing so.

         Applications for Registration Certificates or Residence Cards
         Where it is agreed that  you  can  make  additional  enquiries  the
         applicant must give you as much detail as they can  about  the  EEA
         national sponsor.  If they cannot provide proof of the EEA national
         sponsor's identity, nationality or proof of relationship  then  you
         must check existing records on CID to see  if  their  identity  has
         been established in any previous applications.

         If they can give the name of the EEA national sponsor's employer or
         place of study or existing records on CID hold such details you may
         contact the employer or educational establishment to enquire if the
         EEA national sponsor is working or studying there.  You must decide
         whether to do so according to the facts of the individual case  and
         with the agreement of your senior caseworker ...
         If you  decide  not  to  get  information  directly  from  the  EEA
         national's  employer  or  educational  establishment,  for  example
         because of the exceptional circumstances of the case or because the
         EEA national is self-employed, then you must  make  enquiries  with
         her Majesty's Revenue and Customs  (HMRC)  to  try  to  gather  the
         necessary information."
                                                            [Emphasis added]
Analysis

15. Mr Vokes contended that the final paragraph quoted above  stands  alone
    and is not governed by the rest of the Guidance.  I disagree:  such  an
    interpretation would strain the language of the Guidance, and the final
    paragraph is plainly governed by what comes before, an  explanation  of
    the various circumstances in which an enquiry may be made.

16. A caseworker is only required to consider making enquiries of a  former
    employer or HMRC where:

         (a)  an appellant can show that they have  made  "every  effort  to
         provide the required documents",

         (b)  the caseworker is satisfied that the appellant cannot get  the
         evidence himself; and

         (c)   the  caseworker  has  obtained  the  agreement  of  a  senior
         caseworker to proceed to make such enquiries of the former employer
         and/or HMRC.

17. The appellant accepts that he has made no attempt to obtain evidence to
    show that the EEA sponsor was exercising Treaty rights at the  material
    times.  It may be that the former employers or HMRC would have  refused
    to provide such evidence, had the appellant sought it, but he  did  not
    try.  It may equally be  that  the  required  evidence  exists  in  the
    divorce proceedings, but no such evidence was not before the First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.

18. On the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied that the
    Judge did not err in law in  concluding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden upon him of showing that his wife was working  on
    6 May 2014, and that there was  no  onus  on  the  respondent  to  make
    inquiries of the sponsor's former employers or HMRC in the  absence  of
    evidence, or effort to obtain such evidence, by the appellant.

19. It follows that it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that the
    appellant had not shown that on the date of termination of the marriage
    his former wife was  still  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that he has no retained right of  residence  following  the
    termination of his marriage.

20. This appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

21. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     26 February 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
