
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: EA/03538/2018     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 July 2019                  | On 24 July 2019                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                         nurudeen gbenga adegboyega
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Parkin, instructed by Deton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Nigerian national who was born on 10 June 1978.   He
    appeals against a decision which  was  issued  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ian Howard on 29 November 2018, allowing  his  appeal  against  a
    decision which was made by the respondent on 3 May 2018.


 2.  It  is  immediately  apparent  from  the  paragraph  above  that   the
    circumstances of this case are rather unusual, in  that  the  appellant
    has appealed against a decision to allow his appeal.  I should  explain
    in a little more detail how that situation came about.

 3. The appellant was granted a Residence Card as the family member  of  an
    EEA national on 12 January 2011.  On or about  22  February  2018,  the
    appellant applied for a Permanent Residence Card.  He  stated  that  he
    had previously enjoyed a right to reside as the family member of an EEA
    national and that he had retained that right upon  the  termination  of
    the marriage on 14 June 2016.  It was submitted that the appellant  had
    thereafter acquired  a  right  to  reside  permanently  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  having  satisfied  the  requirements  of  either   regulation
    15(1)(b) or regulation 15(1)(f) of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2016.

 4. The respondent decided that application on 3 May 2018.   Unfortunately,
    there were two problems with the  decision.   Firstly,  the  respondent
    considered the application as one for a Residence Card, rather than one
    for a Permanent Residence Card.  Secondly, the respondent fell into the
    error considered in Barnett [2012] UKUT 142 (IAC); [2012]  Imm  AR  828
    and Rehman [2019] UKUT 195 (IAC), in that he required evidence  of  the
    appellant's ex-wife's nationality, despite having already  accepted  in
    the Residence Card decision that she was an EEA national.

 5. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before Judge Howard, sitting
    at Hatton Cross, on 20 November 2018.  The appellant was represented by
    counsel, the  respondent  by  an  experienced  Presenting  Officer  (Mr
    Williams).  The judge recorded in his decision  that  Mr  Williams  had
    seen the original of the appellant's ex-wife's identity card  and  that
    he 'did not seek to advance any  further  reasons  for  contesting  the
    appeal': [11].  The judge then allowed the  appeal,  finding  that  the
    appellant met 'the requirements of regulation 18(2)'.

 6. That part of the regulations relates to the  issuance  of  a  Residence
    Card, however, and not to the issuance of a Permanent  Residence  Card.
    Having noted the basis upon which the  appeal  had  been  allowed,  the
    respondent  duly  issued  a  Residence   Card.    The   appellant   was
    unsurprisingly dissatisfied with that outcome, and sought permission to
    appeal, contending that he should have received a  Permanent  Residence
    Card.

 7. Permission was refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  granted  on
    renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede who, having noted the history of
    the matter, queried whether a hearing in the Upper Tribunal was  really
    necessary.  She issued directions to the respondent in order to resolve
    that query.

 8. On 3 July 2019, the Upper Tribunal received a  characteristically  fair
    response to those directions from Mr Deller of the  Specialist  Appeals
    Team.  I need not rehearse the contents of that letter.  It suffices to
    state that he recognised the difficulty of  the  respondent's  position
    but noted that there had been no reasoned consideration, whether in the
    respondent's decision or that of Judge Howard, of whether the appellant
    had actually acquired a right to reside permanently in the UK.

 9. Before me, Ms Everett explained that  she  had  reviewed  the  evidence
    which had been before Judge Howard and  she  had  considered  the  file
    minute prepared by Mr Williams following the hearing.  It was clear  to
    her that Mr Williams' intention had been to advance no objection to the
    judge allowing the appeal on the basis that the appellant was  entitled
    to Permanent Residence.  Sadly, that had either not been understood  or
    not been recorded by Judge Howard.  The evidence  in  the  Home  Office
    file satisfied Ms Everett that the only proper  outcome  was  that  the
    appeal should have been allowed on that basis.

10. In the circumstances, I indicated that I did not  need  to  trouble  Mr
    Parkin and that the appeal would be  allowed.   I  was  satisfied  that
    Judge Howard had erred in law in failing  to  resolve  the  appellant's
    entitlement to Permanent Residence and that I was in a position,  as  a
    result of Ms Everett's concession, simply to remake the decision on the
    appeal by allowing it on that basis.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The decision  of  Judge  Howard  is  set  aside.   I
remake the decision on the appellant's appeal, and allow the appeal  on  the
basis that he is entitled to Permanent Residence.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                              12 September 2019

