
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/03313/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 22 November 2017                    |        On 4 December 2017          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                        mr fabio peter john fernandes
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  from  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chowdhury, promulgated on 16  February  of  2017.   As  is  immediately
    apparent on the face of the decision, the appellant did not appear  and
    was not represented.  The determination is very brief and comes to  the
    conclusion that there was no evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant was exercising treaty rights under  the  EEA  Regulations  of
    2006 notwithstanding assertions in the documentation that the appellant
    may have been working on a cash in hand basis.

2.   The  matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Farrelly  on  6
    September of  2017  when  permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   Judge
    Farrelly noted that the application was  somewhat  unfocused  but  gave
    particular regard to the assertion that the appellant had not  received
    notice of the hearing which had been  apparently  sent  to  a  previous
    address. An envelope was returned apparently marked 'return to  sender'
    or similar.

3.   So far as today's proceedings  are  concerned,  the  appellant  sent  a
    letter to the Upper Tribunal at Field House dated 7  November  of  2017
    which  had  various  enclosures  attached  to  it.   Regrettably   this
    documentation  was  not  also  sent  to  the  Secretary  of  State.  In
    substance, the appellant seeks to reargue the substantive merits of the
    matter.  He asks to be excused  from  his  attendance  here  today  and
    invites the Upper Tribunal to determine the appeal on the  papers.   He
    makes a number of observations about inaccuracies in the paperwork.  He
    says first that his name is wrongly spelt as "Fabio" whereas it  should
    in truth be "Savio" (something borne out by a  copy  identity  document
    annexed to his statement).  He also invites  the  court  to  amend  his
    correspondence address to read:
             [                       ],
             [                      ]
             [              ]
    for all future communications.

4.   Before getting into the substance of any alleged error of law,  on  the
    admittedly limited evidence which I have  seen,  there  is  a  distinct
    likelihood that the notice of the hearing of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    never in fact came to the appellant's attention.  That is evidenced  by
    the marking on the envelope in which it was sent out, and also  by  the
    unlikelihood that this  particular  appellant  would  have  voluntarily
    absented  himself  when  he  was  otherwise  fully   engaged   in   the
    proceedings.

5.   Mr Duffy for the Secretary of State is not in a position to  mount  any
    positive case as to the receipt or otherwise of the notice  of  hearing
    and very fairly says to  me  this  morning  that  if  the  Tribunal  is
    satisfied that notice was ineffective then the proper course is to  set
    the decision  aside  and  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Procedural fairness gives to any appellant the right to be heard and  a
    failure in the giving of notice of the hearing  clearly  breaches  that
    procedural  requirement,  albeit  that  no  blame   attaches   to   the
    administrative staff in the First-tier Tribunal or to the Secretary  of
    State.

6.   In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remit the matter to be heard afresh.

7.   I make one final observation. This is the type of the  case  where  the
    personal attendance of the appellant  is  crucial  in  order  that  the
    Tribunal can come to a view  on  the  issues  which  are  raised  which
    includes assessing credibility.  It would not be appropriate to dispose
    of this matter on the papers. I wish to communicate  to  the  appellant
    the need for him to attend in person when this matter  is  relisted  in
    the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  will  place  him  at   a   significant
    disadvantage if he simply proposes to rely on  documentation  and  have
    the matter dealt with administratively.

8.   The appellant is strongly advised to appear in person (whether  or  not
    he has legal representation) on the date when this matter is listed for
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

   1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
      set aside.
   2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
      by a judge other than by Judge Chowdhury.
   3) All future correspondence for the appellant should be addressed to:


             [                                  ]
             [                                ],
             [                                ]
             [                  ]
   4) The appellant is strongly advised to attend the hearing in the  First-
      tier Tribunal.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         4 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC




