
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/03927/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 September 2016                       |On 18 October 2016             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       jaime jorge manuel tello farias
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Mr Tello Farias, to whom I shall refer hereafter as the  appellant,  as
    he was before the First-tier Judge, appealed to the judge  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State (hereafter the respondent) of 14 May
    2015 refusing his application for a  residence  card  as  the  extended
    family member of an EEA national.  The judge allowed that  appeal,  and
    the Secretary of State appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   On the morning of the hearing I handed to the  parties  a  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Shemsi Sala, which was  on  the  point  of  being
    reported and was authorised for distribution to the parties, in which a
    panel of the Upper Tribunal consisting of the Vice President and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb concluded that a person who is refused a residence
    card  as  an  extended  family  member  under  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 does not have a right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations.

3.   I explained to Mr Tello Farias that I would be following this  decision
    and that as a consequence would be concluding that he did  not  have  a
    right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  I advised  him  to  obtain
    legal advice as to how to respond to this decision.

Notice of Decision

4.   In light of the decision in Sala, I conclude that there is no right  of
    appeal in this case, and as a  consequence  the  First-tier  Judge  was
    without jurisdiction.  For his decision is substituted a decision  that
    there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 18 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



