
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03699/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st April 2019                    |On 3rd April 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                RAKESH KUMAR
                       [Anonymity direction not made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Jafar, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greesley  promulgated  11.1.19,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  26.11.15,  to
    refuse his application made on 11.4.15 for an EEA Residence Card as the
    EFM partner in a durable relationship with an EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    15.2.19.

Error of Law

 3. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 4. The according of weight to evidence is a matter for the  judge.  It  is
    not an arguable error of law for a judge to give too little or too much
    weight to a relevant factor, unless the exercise is irrational. Nor  is
    it an error of law for a judge to fail to deal with every factual issue
    of argument. Disagreement  with  a  judge's  factual  conclusions,  the
    appraisal  of  the  evidence  or  assessment  of  credibility,  or  the
    evaluation of risk does not give rise to an error of law. Nor is it  an
    error of law for a judge not to  have  regard  to  evidence  of  events
    arising after the decision or for no account  to  have  been  taken  of
    evidence not put before the tribunal.  Irrationality  is  a  very  high
    threshold  and  a  conclusion  is  not  irrational  just  because  some
    alternative explanation  has  been  rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
    possible. Nor is it necessary to consider  every  possible  alternative
    inference consistent with truthfulness because a  judge  has  concluded
    that the story proffered is untrue. However, if a point of evidence  of
    significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that may be  a  failure
    to take into account a material consideration.

 5. The application made  in  2015  was  refused  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent expected to see evidence of a durable  relationship  over  a
    documented and sustained period of at least two years. The  claim  that
    the appellant and the sponsor met at work in April 2013  and  had  been
    living together since June 2013 was said  to  be  contradicted  by  the
    evidence referred to in the decision, suggesting that at  the  earliest
    the sponsor had been living at the appellant's address from April  2014
    and not before. It was asserted that  false  representations  had  been
    made to  obtain  a  NI  certificate.  The  evidence  was  found  to  be
    insufficient to establish a durable relationship.

 6. On appeal, Judge Greasley recognised that some aspects of the  evidence
    were consistent with the factual basis  of  claim  but  found  material
    inconsistencies in other aspects, leading to the conclusion  that  they
    were not in a durable relationship. Nor was the judge  able  to  accept
    that they were even cohabiting together,  given  the  number  of  other
    occupants at their current address. The false representation issue  was
    not pursued.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Cruthers considered it arguable
    that some of the reasoning  provided  between  [32]  and  [38]  of  the
    decision for rejecting the claim  of  a  durable  relationship  with  a
    Romanian national may be flawed. Judge Cruthers also  warned  that  the
    granting  of  permission  was  no  indication  that  the  appeal  would
    ultimately be successful, as it might be thought that at least some  of
    the reasons given are valid. Judge Cruthers  also  suggested  that  the
    issue of the sponsor's prior marriage may remain a live issue.

 8. Between [32] and [38] the judge gave reasons for  concluding  that  the
    appellant's partner had little knowledge of his life and employment  in
    India prior to the commencement of the  relationship;  They  also  gave
    inconsistent evidence as to their respective religions  and  attendance
    at places of worship; and they  gave  different  answers  to  questions
    about who was living at their property and to whom the rent  was  paid.
    The judge considered the material inconsistencies in important areas of
    their account damaged their credibility so that the claim of a  durable
    relationship could not be accepted.

 9. The grounds from [4] onwards criticise the judge's  reasoning  for  the
    conclusions mentioned above. For example, it is suggested that evidence
    as to who the rent was paid to was "not as inconsistent" as  the  judge
    found at [36]. In the light of Mr Jafar's submissions, I have carefully
    read the judge's summary of the evidence on  this  issue  at  [22]  and
    [28]. It is clear that the appellant and the sponsor gave  a  different
    account as to whom the rent was paid and whether the landlord was  male
    or female and  whether  they  lived  on  the  premises.  I  reject  the
    assertion that there was no inconsistency or that the finding was  made
    without evidence being called on the matter.  The  inconsistency  arose
    directly from the oral evidence of the appellant and the sponsor.  That
    one said that it was given to a third person of unnamed gender does not
    assist the appellant.

10. Paragraph [5]  of  the  grounds  criticises  the  judge's  findings  of
    inconsistency on the issue of attendance at the  respective  places  of
    worship of the appellant and the sponsor as set out at [32] and [33] of
    the decision. However,  the  sponsor's  and  the  appellant's  evidence
    differed as to how often and when they last visited the  Temple,  where
    the sponsor's church was based, and when she last visited there.  I  do
    not accept the  argument  that  there  is  no  material  difference  in
    geographical location between Harrow and Edgware, even  though,  as  Mr
    Jafar pointed out, the two towns or areas  neighbour  each  other.  The
    argument at [5] of the grounds that no or no  sufficient  reasons  were
    given is not sustainable and is no more than a  disagreement  with  the
    decision.

11. Similarly, I find that the judge gave cogent  reasons  for  finding  at
    [34]  that  the  sponsor  knew  little  of  the  appellant's  life  and
    employment in India. Again, the criticisms are mere disagreements  with
    the judge's reasoning. Those reasons were open to the judge and nothing
    in the grounds or Mr Jafar's submissions demonstrates  that  they  were
    perverse.

12. Finally, the grounds at [7]  criticise  the  finding  at  [36]  of  the
    decision relied on to undermine the claim of residing together  at  the
    same address. Reliance is made in the grounds on the "370 odd pages  of
    documentary evidence" in the appellant's bundle adduced in  support  of
    cohabitation. It is correct that the refusal decision stated  that  the
    earliest evidence of the sponsor living at  the  same  address  as  the
    appellant was a water bill dated 23.8.14. However,  the  claim  was  to
    have cohabited since June  2013,  which  was  undermined  and  in  turn
    undermined the credibility of the  claim.  It  is  not  entirely  clear
    whether continued cohabitation after that  date  was  accepted  by  the
    respondent, but I accept that the refusal decision  states:  "From  the
    contents of the documents, it is calculated they show  (the  sponsor's)
    residence at your address since April 2014." The fact remains that mere
    cohabitation whilst  capable  of  being  evidence  in  support  of  the
    appellants'  claim,  was  insufficient   to   demonstrate   a   durable
    relationship. Judge Greasley pointed  out  that  although  the  sponsor
    claimed there was a family with two children residing at the  property,
    she in fact stated that there were 10 occupants. As noted  above,  they
    differed between them as to whether the landlord was male or female  or
    was also resident at the property.

13. Even if, as claimed in the grounds, Judge Greasley was going  behind  a
    concession by the respondent, this one issue is insufficient to justify
    setting  the  rest  of  the  findings  aside.   Independently   of   an
    inconsistency as to who or  how  many  people  actually  lived  at  the
    property, the  fact  of  cohabitation  was  not  determinative  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor being in a durable relationship  rather  than
    merely cohabiting, along with a significant number of  others,  perhaps
    as many as 10, at a single address. In the circumstances, if  this  was
    an error of law, it was not material to the overall conclusion that the
    appellant had failed to demonstrate on  the  balance  of  probabilities
    that he and the sponsor were and had been in a durable relationship  as
    claimed.

14. In summary, I have concluded that the challenge to the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  is  little  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings which were open to the judge on the  evidence  and  for  which
    cogent reasons  have  been  provided.  It  was  for  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate a durable relationship and the judge has explained in clear
    terms why he failed.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

