
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: eA/03292/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On January 3, 2018                         |  On January 4, 2018           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MR BUBACARR DRAMMEH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Baddevithana (Solicitor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The respondent in these proceedings was the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  From hereon I have referred to the parties as they were
    in the First-tier Tribunal so  that,  for  example,  reference  to  the
    respondent is a reference to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.

 3. The appellant is a Gambian  national.   The  appellant  applied  for  a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national under Regulation 17  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) 2006. The  respondent  refused
    this application on November 27, 2015.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  December  4,  2015  under
    Regulation 26  of  the  2006  Regulations  and  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His appeal  came  before
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Callow  (hereinafter  called  "the
    Judge") on February 16 and March 27, 2017 and in a decision promulgated
    on April 26, 2017 the Judge allowed the appellant's appeal.

 5. The respondent appealed the decision on  May  9,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson
    on November 9, 2017. In giving permission, she found  it  arguable  the
    Judge may have erred  by  not  providing  reasons  for  concluding  the
    marriage was genuine and subsisting.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Tufan adopted the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission made
    in this case. In short, he submitted the  Judge  gave  no  reasons  for
    finding the marriage was genuine and subsisting and it was incumbent on
    the Judge to explain to the losing party why he or  she  had  lost.  By
    failing to give reasons the Judge had erred in law.

 8. Ms Baddevithana opposed the application and whilst she  accepted  there
    were some shortcomings in the decision and  no  specific  findings  she
    argued the Judge had set out evidence in [6] and [9]  of  his  decision
    and the finding ay [10] was open to him.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

 9. The appellant had applied for a residence card. There was evidence that
    he had entered the United Kingdom using false documents which  included
    evidence that he was previously married. The Judge initially  adjourned
    the hearing and resumed the case a  few  weeks  later  at  which  stage
    further evidence had been adduced.

10. The Judge analysed this evidence and concluded the  appellant  had  not
    previously married and therefore was free to marry the appellant.

11. However, being free to marry someone does not make the marriage genuine
    or subsisting and in making his finding at [10]  of  the  decision  the
    Judge was required to explain his conclusion. Simply, stating  that  on
    balance he was satisfied the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting  did
    not explain why he reached that conclusion.

12. I raised with the parties whether this case could  be  concluded  today
    but as evidence was required an interpreter was going to  be  necessary
    for the EEA national. I then clarified  whether  this  case  should  be
    dealt with in this jurisdiction or remitted back to the First-tier  for
    a fresh hearing. As there had been no findings at all and there was  an
    additional issue relating to the obtaining of the marriage  certificate
    I agreed to remit the matter back to the First-tier for a  de  novo  on
    these issues.

13. It seems the issue surrounding the  appellant's  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom and previous marriage has been considered by the Judge at  [10]
    of his decision and the respondent did not challenge that aspect of the
    decision. Accordingly, the finding that he had not been married  before
    should be the starting point for any future Tribunal.

14. The First-tier Tribunal will be concerned with Regulation 2 of the 2006
    Regulations albeit the EEA national would also have to demonstrate  she
    is currently exercising treaty rights.

    DECISION

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I  set  aside  the  decision.  I
    remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  Judge
    other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Callow.


Signed                              Date     03/01/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

