
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/03945/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 22nd May 2017                           |  On 20th September 2017       |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                              AIGULU BAIGAZIVA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr McGirr,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms Patyna, Counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
                       Associates Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Kyrgyzstan born  on  the  2nd  November
    1982. On the 24th November 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge S. Meah)
    allowed her appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ('the Regs'), finding that she had retained a right of
    residence as the former spouse of an EEA national.   The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department now has permission to appeal against that
    decision.


 2. The agreed facts are that Ms Baigaziva arrived in the UK in  June  2009
    with valid leave to enter as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant.  In
    October 2011 she was granted a residence  card  on  the  basis  of  her
    marriage to Ceslavas Levanovicous, a Lithuanian residing in the UK. The
    marriage ended, that is to say a decree absolute was  granted,  on  the
    6th May 2015.  On the 12th June 2015, she made  an  application  for  a
    residence permit as a family member with retained rights of residence.

 3. In response to Ms Baigaziva's application the Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department issued a decision letter dated 9th  December  2015.
    The application was rejected for only one reason.    Ms  Baigaziva  had
    failed to demonstrate that her ex-husband had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights at the date that her marriage  terminated,  the  6th  May  2015.
    Three payslips from 2014 had been submitted but this was not sufficient
    information for the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  to  be
    satisfied that he had continued to work up until the time  of  divorce.
    Ms Baigaziva requested that the matter be reviewed, and asked that  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  conduct  inter-departmental
    checks on her ex-husband's work record. This  the  Secretary  of  State
    did. A supplementary refusal letter was issued on the 5th May 2016. The
    Secretary of State had checked HMRC records and was satisfied  that  Mr
    Levanovicous had been working from the 8th September 2014  to  the  4th
    December 2014. There was no evidence that he had been  working  in  May
    2015 and so the decision to refuse was maintained.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal was asked to determine the matter on the papers
    before it. Ms Baigaziva submitted what evidence she had, and a skeleton
    argument.  Therein  her  representatives  placed  express  reliance  on
    Article 13(2) of the Directive 2004/38/EC[1] ('the Directive'), and  on
    the decision in Singh and Others v Minister for Justice and Equality C-
    218/14.  It was argued  that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department had been wrong to focus on the date of divorce: the relevant
    date was in fact the 4th December 2014, the date that Ms Baigaziva  had
    instituted divorce proceedings.  Since the HMRC records showed that her
    ex-husband had been working in the UK on that date,  it  followed  that
    her application should have been granted.

 5. This line of argument was  adopted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    determination holds, "in the light  of  Singh  and  Others",  that  the
    interpretation made by Ms Baigaziva's representatives was correct.  The
    relevant date for the purpose of calculating whether she  had  retained
    her rights of residence was the 4th December 2014,  the  day  that  she
    filed for divorce. The appeal was thereby allowed.





    The Secretary of State's Appeal

 6. The single ground of appeal is that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is flawed for legal misdirection. The Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department contends that the relevant  date  is  the  date  of
    dissolution of marriage not the date upon which divorce proceedings are
    instituted. The Secretary of State submits that the First-tier Tribunal
    has misunderstood the ratio decidendi of Singh and Others.


 7. Before me Mr McGirr  submitted  that  the  operative  domestic  law  is
    Regulation 10(5) of the 2006 Regs. Sub-paragraph (a)  thereof  contains
    three limbs. The applicant must have been a 'family member', her spouse
    must have been a 'qualified person' and those two conditions must  have
    been in existence upon the termination of marriage:

         10.-(1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained  the
         right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8), a  person  who
         satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         .....

         (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-




         (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person on the
         termination of the marriage or civil partnership of the qualified
         person;

         (b) he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
         Regulations at the date of the termination;

         (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

         (d) either-

         (i) prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the termination
         of the marriage or the civil partnership the marriage or civil
         partnership had lasted for at least three years and the parties to
         the marriage or civil partnership had resided in the United Kingdom
         for at least one year during its duration;

         .....


 8. An unambiguous requirement, as far as the  Regulations  are  concerned,
    was therefore whether Mr Levanovicius had been a 'qualified person'  at
    the date that the marriage was terminated.


 9. As for Singh, Mr McGirr argued that this decision simply could  not  be
    read in the manner suggested by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  That  case
    concerned a different factual matrix, and a different  legal  question.
    The matter before the CJEU had been  whether  a  non-EEA  spouse  could
    retain a right of residence in circumstances where their EEA spouse had
    left the member state where they had both lived,  and  then  filed  for
    divorce. The findings of the court, that rights were  not  retained  in
    those circumstances, did not assist Ms Baigaziva.



    The Response

10. Ms Patyna submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had not erred. It  had
    directly applied the terms of the Directive:

         Article 13


         Retention of the right of residence by family members in the event
         of divorce, annulment of marriage or termination of registered
         partnership:


         1. Without prejudice to the second subparagraph, divorce, annulment
         of the Union citizen's marriage or termination of his/her
         registered partnership, as referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2
         shall not affect the right of residence of his/her family members
         who are nationals of a Member State.


         Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
         concerned must meet the conditions laid down in points (a), (b),
         (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


         2. Without prejudice to the second subparagraph, divorce, annulment
         of marriage or termination of the registered partnership referred
         to in point 2(b) of Article 2 shall not entail loss of the right of
         residence of a Union citizen's family members who are not nationals
         of a Member State where:


         a) prior to initiation of the divorce or annulment proceedings or
            termination of the registered partnership referred to in point
            2(b) of Article 2, the marriage or registered partnership has
            lasted at least three years, including one year in the host
            Member State; or


            ...
11. This had been the Article under consideration in Singh. The  matter  in
    issue before the court in that case had been whether a  non-EEA  spouse
    could retain a right of residence where his divorce was preceded by his
    EEA wife leaving the member state in question. The court held  not,  on
    the basis that the EEA  spouse  having  already  left,  there  were  no
    Article 7(1) rights for the non-EEA spouse to retain, but  in  reaching
    that conclusion said the following:


         59     In accordance with Article 13(2)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38,
         divorce does not entail the loss of the right  of  residence  of  a
         Union citizen's family members who are not nationals  of  a  Member
         State 'where ... prior to initiation of the divorce ... proceedings
         ... the marriage ... has lasted at least three years, including one
         year in the host Member State'.
         60     That provision thus corresponds to the  purpose,  stated  in
         recital 15 in the preamble to the  directive,  of  providing  legal
         safeguards for family members in the event  of  the  death  of  the
         Union citizen, divorce, annulment of marriage or termination  of  a
         registered partnership, taking measures in that respect  to  ensure
         that in such circumstances family members already  residing  within
         the territory of the  host  Member  State  retain  their  right  of
         residence exclusively on a personal basis.
         61     The reference in that provision to, first, 'the host  Member
         State', which is defined in Article 2(3) of Directive 2004/38  only
         by reference to the exercise of the Union citizen's right  of  free
         movement and residence, and, secondly, 'initiation of  the  divorce
         ... proceedings' necessarily implies that the right of residence of
         the Union citizen's spouse who is a third-country national  can  be
         retained on the basis of Article 13(2)(a) of Directive 2004/38 only
         if the Member State in which that national  resides  is  the  'host
         Member State' within the  meaning  of  Article  2(3)  of  Directive
         2004/38 on the date of commencement of the divorce proceedings.
         62     That is not the case, however, if, before  the  commencement
         of those proceedings, the Union citizen leaves the Member State  in
         which his spouse resides for the purpose  of  settling  in  another
         Member State or a third country. In that  event  the  third-country
         national's derived right of residence  based  on  Article  7(2)  of
         Directive 2004/38 has come to an end  with  the  departure  of  the
         Union citizen and can therefore no longer be retained on the  basis
         of Article 13(2)(a) of that directive.
         63     It follows that, if on  the  date  of  commencement  of  the
         divorce proceedings the third-country national who is the spouse of
         a Union citizen enjoyed a  right  of  residence  on  the  basis  of
         Article 7(2) of Directive 2004/38, that right is retained,  on  the
         basis of Article  13(2)(a)  of  that  directive,  both  during  the
         divorce proceedings and after the decree of divorce, provided  that
         the conditions laid down in  the  second  subparagraph  of  Article
         13(2) of the directive are satisfied.
    (emphasis added)


12. Ms Patyna relies on the passage highlighted. She submits  that  nowhere
    in the judgement does the court suggest that final divorce would be the
    operative point at which rights would be retained. It proceeded at  all
    times on the basis that  the  operative  date  was  the  initiation  of
    proceedings, and this is consistent with the wording of  the  Directive
    itself. Ms Patyna further relied on the decision in  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v NA C115/15 in which the CJEU adopts the
    reasoning  in  Singh  insofar  as  it  uncritically   refers   to   the
    'institution  of  proceedings'  rather  than  formal   dissolution   of
    marriage.




    Discussion and Findings


13. There is much to commend the argument put by Ms Patyna.  In addition to
    the dicta in  Singh,   the  overall  purpose  of  Article  13  must  be
    considered. Recital 15 of the Preamble to the Directive reads:


    |(15)          |Family members should be legally safeguarded in the event  |
|              |of the death of the Union citizen, divorce, annulment of   |
|              |marriage or termination of a registered partnership. With  |
|              |due regard for family life and human dignity, and in       |
|              |certain conditions to guard against abuse, measures should |
|              |therefore be taken to ensure that in such circumstances    |
|              |family members already residing within the territory of the|
|              |host Member State retain their right of residence          |
|              |exclusively on a personal basis.                           |


    (emphasis added)


14. These aims are reflected in Articles 12-14 of the Directive. Article 12
    provides for the retained rights of residence for family members  where
    the EEA national dies; Article 13 is  concerned  with  their  situation
    where the marriage comes to an end.  The  Directive  does  not  provide
    these legal safeguards for all family members.  By Article 13  (2)  the
    class of family members who may benefit from the provisions is  limited
    to situations where there is a child involved, where the  marriage  has
    subsisted  for  a  prescribed  minimum  period,  or  where  there   are
    "particularly difficult circumstances".   The  ratio  of  limiting  the
    classes of  potential  beneficiaries  is  readily  understandable  from
    Recital 15: the point, as ever, is not to inhibit free movement and  to
    preserve human dignity, but with certain safeguards in place to prevent
    abuse.


15. Ms Patyna placed considerable emphasis on  the  positive  aims  of  the
    provision. She points out that Union citizens  could  easily  foil  the
    attempts of their estranged partners to safeguard  their  positions  by
    unilaterally ceasing to exercise treaty rights or by leaving  the  host
    country before the divorces were declared  absolute.  This  could  give
    rise to the potential for abuse and in those circumstances it  must  be
    preferable to focus on the date upon which proceedings were  instituted
    rather than finalised.

16. The 'purposive' argument found some favour in the  High  Court  of  the
    Republic of Ireland in the  case  of  Khalid  Lahyani  v  Minister  for
    Justice and Equality [2013] IEHC 176. There  the  court  was  asked  to
    consider whether the non-EEA citizen retained rights of residence  when
    he had neither a divorce nor an EEA spouse  exercising  treaty  rights,
    his wife having left the country.  Although on the facts the  case  was
    rejected, the Court held that the aims of the Directive were clear, and
    that  the  preservation  of  human  dignity   required   an   expansive
    interpretation:
         56.     The applicant does not claim to fall within the category of
         vulnerable spouses who are deserving of  protection  under  Article
         13(2) (c) but he points to that sub-paragraph as  an  indicator  of
         the flexible approach to be taken to the interpretation of  Article
         13(2) as a whole. The applicant's primary argument was that Article
         13(2) must be interpreted in a manner which permits a non-EU spouse
         to remain in the host State while  either  party  to  the  marriage
         petitions for divorce,  even  after  the  departure  of  the  Union
         citizen spouse, and that any interpretation which  fails  to  allow
         for this would render the legal protections to the  family  members
         of a migrant Union citizen  a  nonsense.  For  the  reasons  to  be
         outlined hereafter, the Court considers that  the  caselaw  of  the
         CJEU and especially the cases of Diatta and  Metock  (cited  above)
         provide strong support for this proposition. While Article 13  does
         not expressly mention such a possibility, Article 13(2) (c)  itself
         envisages the need for discretionary application of  the  retention
         of   the   right   of   residence   in   "particularly    difficult
         circumstances". It follows that the Court is not convinced that the
         divorce, annulment or termination which  triggers  the  vesting  of
         autonomous rights in the non-EU spouse  under  Article  13(2)  must
         take place solely during the period of joint  lawful  residence  in
         the host state.
         57.     It is not difficult  to  envisage  circumstances  where  an
         interpretation  which  confines  retained   rights   of   residence
         exclusively to spouses who have obtained divorces while  the  Union
         citizen is exercising treaty rights in  the  host  state  might  be
         unduly restrictive in light of the need to interpret the provisions
         of the Article 13 "with  due  regard  for  family  life  and  human
         dignity and in certain conditions to guard against abuse"  (recital
         15). An example of how a strict interpretation of Article 13  might
         breach the object of the Directive and render it ineffective  could
         be found where the non-EU spouse is  deserted  in  the  host  state
         without any warning that the marriage was in difficulty and  before
         the possibility of divorce arose. The object of the Directive is to
         facilitate the free movement of Union  citizens  and  their  family
         members and Articles 12 and 13 are clearly designed to provide  for
         compassionate  consequences  when  negative  but  predictable  life
         events such as matrimonial breakdown, death and divorce  occur.  As
         the wording of Article 13 clearly demonstrates that  a  spouse,  no
         matter what the nationality, retains a right to reside in the  host
         state in the event of divorce, it would be unfair to  exclude  from
         Article 13 those non-EU spouses who through no fault of  their  own
         have not had the opportunity to obtain a divorce or even to  obtain
         a final  decree  where,  for  instance,  divorce  proceedings  were
         initiated but the Union spouse left before the process was complete
         so as to frustrate or upset the plans of the non-EU national.
         58.     There must be multiple variations of family breakdown where
         the Union citizen might depart the host state leaving the non-Union
         spouse behind. It would render the protections afforded by  Article
         13 ineffective if host states  were  to  expel  a  deserted  non-EU
         spouse before the expiry of a reasonable period  during  which  the
         non-EU spouse could seek dissolution of the marriage with a view to
         claiming a personal right of residence under Article 13(2), subject
         to the Article 7 conditions which are applicable to divorced non-EU
         spouses. To revoke the lawful status of such non-EU spouses without
         affording an opportunity to seek a divorce would do a disservice to
         Article 13. If, to give another  example,  the  non-EU  spouse  had
         already commenced divorce proceedings which were being  pursued  at
         the time of departure of the Union citizen and  the  interpretation
         urged by the Minister were applied, the non-EU  spouse  would  face
         the choice of uprooting from the  host  country  in  which  he  was
         installed and, pending finalisation of the  divorce,  becoming  the
         unwelcome guest of the estranged EU spouse in whatever EU State she
         went to, or of returning to his own country. That choice would seem
         contrary to the spirit and object of Article 13 and again, it seems
         to  the  Court   it   would   be   an   unnecessarily   restrictive
         interpretation of that Article.
         59.     Another consideration which leads the Court to this view is
         that divorce may not always be an available option to  the  parties
         to a marriage which has irretrievably  broken  down  as  procedural
         requirements differ enormously from state to state within  the  EU.
         Divorce proceedings  in  Ireland  are  governed  by  constitutional
         provisions and are restrictive. There is  an  absolute  requirement
         that the parties must have been separated for a minimum of 4  years
         out of the previous five years before matrimonial proceedings for a
         decree of  divorce  can  be  commenced.  Even  judicial  separation
         requires a minimum  period  of  12  months  separation  before  the
         institution of proceedings and even so, a judicial  separation  may
         not be sufficient to trigger rights  under  Article  13.  In  other
         member states where agreement is reached on a division of  property
         and there are no children, a consent divorce can be obtained  in  a
         matter of months. That is not an option in this State. If Directive
         2004/38/EC is intended to apply uniformly across the Member  States
         without discrimination, then a spouse of a  migrant  Union  citizen
         should not be prejudiced in his / her right to benefit from Article
         13 by the choice of host state made by the Union  citizen  and  the
         domestic law relating to dissolution of marriage in that state.
         60.     It is therefore the view of this Court that Article 13 must
         be interpreted expansively  to  provide  for  the  occasions  where
         marriages and civil partnerships do not  work  out  and  where  the
         Union worker  simply  deserts  and  quits  the  host  state  before
         matrimonial  proceedings  are  contemplated.  Each  case  must   be
         determined by its own facts and a measure of discretion applied  to
         allow for the almost infinite variations in the  way  that  genuine
         relationships and marriages  disintegrate.  Having  expressed  that
         view, the Court is equally convinced that it cannot be the  general
         rule as postulated by the  husband  that  departure  of  the  Union
         citizen worker confers either an indefinite or permanent  right  of
         residence while the deserted non-EU  spouse  considers  his  /  her
         options and whether or not divorce is being contemplated. The  wide
         interpretation of Article 13 - with due regard  for  human  dignity
         and to prevent abuse - must be restricted to genuine marriages  and
         genuine irretrievable breakdown of relationships. As the Court  has
         already  noted,  if  the   relationship   has   not   broken   down
         irretrievably, the non-EU spouse is  expected  to  leave  the  host
         state and travel with the Union citizen.
17. The Court found no contradiction in the notion that an individual could
    still in law be a family member (ie legally married) whilst at the same
    time retaining rights as a former family member:

         65.     For the sake of completion, the Court is satisfied that  no
         difficulties arise with the interpretation of Article 13(2)  where,
         although separated and seeking a divorce, both spouses continue  to
         reside in the host state and where the Union citizen is  continuing
         to work or is self-sufficient. In accordance with the principle set
         down  in  Diatta  (cited  above),  the  non-EU  spouse  retains   a
         derivative right of residence at all times up to  the  finalisation
         of the couple's divorce, provided that the Union spouse is resident
         in the host state and exercising free  movement  rights.  Once  the
         divorce is finalised, working  or  self-sufficient  non-EU  spouses
         gain  a  personal  right  of   residence   under   Article   13(2),
         irrespective of whether the Union citizen continues to  reside  and
         exercise free movement rights in the host state, in  the  same  way
         that death and departure provisions apply to family members of  the
         EU worker previously living and working in the host state.  Article
         13 is a new departure in free movement rights which, when read with
         recital 15 to the Directive, is clearly intended to protect  non-EU
         spouses from being obliged to leave the host  state  because  their
         legal status in the host state has been altered by the  dissolution
         of their marriages. The Article is clear - divorce  obtained  while
         the Union citizen is exercising free movement rights  in  the  host
         state does not adversely affect the right of the non-EU  spouse  to
         reside in the host state, provided that the marriage has lasted for
         at least three years with at least one of those years in  the  host
         state before the divorce proceedings were  commenced  and  provided
         that the non-EU spouse is not a burden on the state. In the  period
         between commencing such  proceedings  and  the  final  decree,  the
         parties are still legally married even if living apart (see Diatta)
         and the non-EU  spouse  retains  his  /  her  derivative  right  of
         residence until the divorce is finalised, at which point he or  she
         gains a right of residence  under  Article  13  on  an  exclusively
         personal basis...

(emphasis added)


18. This is certainly an attractive argument. It  seems  manifestly  unfair
    that  the  non-EEA  spouse  who  files  for  divorce   in   acrimonious
    circumstances could be at the mercy of his or her EEA spouse, who could
    simply give up work before the divorce is finalised.  I am nevertheless
    satisfied that it is the approach advocated by the Secretary  of  State
    in this appeal which is the correct one.


19. First, there is the language of Article 13 of the Directive itself:
         2.   Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
         annulment of marriage or termination of the registered  partnership
         referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2 shall not entail loss of the
         right of residence of a Union citizen's family members who are  not
         nationals of a Member State where:
|(a)        |prior to initiation of the divorce or annulment proceedings or|
|           |termination of the registered partnership referred to in point|
|           |2(b) of Article 2, the marriage or registered partnership has |
|           |lasted at least three years, including one year in the host   |
|           |Member State; or                                              |


         |(b)         |by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred to  |
|            |in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the spouse or   |
|            |partner who is not a national of a Member State has custody of|
|            |the Union citizen's children; or                              |


         |(c)        |this is warranted by particularly difficult circumstances,    |
|           |such as having been a victim of domestic violence while the   |
|           |marriage or registered partnership was subsisting; or         |


         |(d)         |by agreement between the spouses or partners referred to in   |
|            |point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the spouse or      |
|            |partner who is not a national of a Member State has the right |
|            |of access to a minor child, provided that the court has ruled |
|            |that such access must be in the host Member State, and for as |
|            |long as is required.                                          |


    (emphasis added)


20. The opening sentence of Article 13 (2)(a)  (highlighted)  contains  the
    test that is transposed into Regulation 10 (5)(a): "he ceased to  be  a
    family member of a qualified person on the termination of the  marriage
    or civil partnership of the qualified person".   The  alternative  sub-
    clauses in Article 13(2)(a)-(d) do  not  import  an  alternative  test;
    rather they are all concerned with defining the class of persons who is
    permitted to benefit from retained rights of residence.


21. Second, it is arguable that there must  logically  come  a  point  when
    rights of residence that were once 'derived' become  'retained'.   From
    the date that she married in October 2011 until the date that  she  was
    finally divorced in December 2014 Ms Baigaziva was a family  member  of
    an EEA national: Diatta v Land  Berlin  C-267/83.     As  long  has  he
    remained in the same host  country  as  she,  in  accordance  with  the
    Directive, she would continue to be treated as such. It is difficult to
    understand why she would need the legal safeguard of Article  13(2)(a),
    if she still enjoyed the benefits of Article 7(1).

22. Interpreting the Article in this way would provide for legal certainty.
    The institution of proceedings is not a sufficiently clear  basis  upon
    which to confer a permanent right of residence: what  for  instance  if
    the couple are  reconciled?  The  non-EEA  spouse  who  has  secured  a
    declaration of retained rights  would  at  that  point  be  in  a  more
    advantageous position  than  if  his  or  her  marriage  had  persisted
    uninterrupted. The EEA spouse could give up work,  or  even  leave  the
    country, and notwithstanding that the couple were  still  married,  the
    partner would be unaffected.

23. In conclusion I find that Article 13(2)(a) is concerned  with  defining
    the kind of marriage which would attract protection, and nothing  else.
    In respect of the stated purpose of the 'retained rights' provisions it
    is of course the case that the truly vindictive  spouse  could  subvert
    his or her spouse's chance of remaining in  the  host  country  at  any
    time: see Singh and Ors  v Minister for Justice and  Equality  C-218/14
    where the EEA spouses concerned all left the Republic of Ireland before
    the divorces were even filed.


24. It follows that the Secretary of State must succeed in her appeal.  The
    burden of proof lay on Ms Baigaziva, who was unable to show, even  with
    the assistance of an Amos direction, that  her  former  husband  was  a
    qualified person at the date that their marriage ended.



      Decisions


25. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error
    of law and it is set aside.


26. I re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  as  follows:  "the  appeal  is
    dismissed".


27. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     15th
                                 August 2017










                           -----------------------
[1] DIRECTIVE 2004/38/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of
29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of the Union and their family
members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States
amending Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing Directives
64/221/E68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC,
90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC


