
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/03494/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 March 2018                          | On 3 April 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               Kadiatou Diallo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, D J Webb & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of Mrs Kadiatou Diallo.  The Appellant is a national
    of Guinea born on 14 September 1993.  On 3 May 2015 she married an  EEA
    Dutch national, Mr Mohamed Kabba Bah, in Sierra Leone.  An  application
    for entry clearance to the UK was subsequently sought but  was  refused
    on 18 August 2015 for the following reasons:-

         "In support of your application, you have  provided  your  marriage
         certificate and five wedding photos.

         In addition you have provided two money transfers,  but  these  are
         not proof of your relationship as claimed.  You  have  provided  no
         other documentary evidence of your  relationship  or  communication
         between you.  In view  of  your  failure  to  provide  satisfactory
         evidence, I am not satisfied that you are the family member  of  an
         EEA national in accordance with Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

         Furthermore, I am satisfied that you are party  to  a  marriage  of
         convenience and are therefore not  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
         national  in  accordance  with  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

 2. An appeal was lodged against this decision which was considered  by  an
    Entry Clearance Manager on 2 August 2016 and the decision  was  upheld.
    The appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Rodger  for
    hearing on 25 May 2017.  In a Decision and  Reasons  promulgated  on  1
    June 2017, the judge dismissed the appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations
    finding at [28]:-

         "28. Having considered all of the evidence both individually and in
             the round, I am satisfied that it is more  probable  than  not
             that this is a marriage of convenience  ..."

    Permission to appeal was sought in time on 23 June 2017. The grounds of
    appeal were drafted by the Appellant and essentially raised  issues  of
    fact.

 3. In a decision dated 2 January 2018 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge
    McCarthy granted permission to appeal in the following terms:-

         "4.  I am satisfied the grounds of application do not  identify  an
             arguable legal error.  The grounds merely seek to answer  some
             of the concerns raised  by  the  judge  in  the  decision  and
             reasons statement.  Permission to appeal can only  be  granted
             if there is an  arguable  legal  error  in  the  decision  and
             reasons statement.  A judge cannot be faulted for  failing  to
             consider evidence  or  argument  not  presented,  particularly
             where, as here, the Appellant was legally represented  at  the
             hearing.

         5.   However, I have concerns about Judge Rodger's approach to  the
             burden and standard  of  proof.   Her  summary  of  the  three
             leading cases, Papajorgi, Agho and Rosa is somewhat  confused,
             particularly since in Rosa (at [39])  it  is  clear  that  the
             burden of proof  lies  on  the  Respondent  throughout.   This
             undermines not only Judge Rodger's self-direction at [10]  and
             [11], but also her comment at [25] that the burden had shifted
             to the Appellant.

         6.   In addition, I have concerns that Judge Rodger (like  the  ECO
             who refused to issue an EEA family permit) focused on  whether
             the relationship was genuine and not whether the marriage  was
             one of convenience.  At the end of [24],  Judge  Rodger  makes
             her decision on the basis of 'reasonable suspicion of  a  non-
             genuine marriage'.  As the Court of Appeal identified in  Rosa
             at [41], this confusion can lead to legal error.

         7.   Although not raised  in  the  grounds  of  application,  these
             problems  are  so  obvious  that  they  cannot   be   ignored,
             particularly   where   the   Appellant   is   without    legal
             representation."

 4. There was no Rule 24 response lodged on behalf of the Respondent.

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me, I heard submissions from Mr Jesurum on behalf
    of the Appellant who sought, in addition to the jurisprudence cited  by
    Designated Judge McCarthy in the grant of permission to appeal, to also
    rely on the judgment of the Supreme Court in  Sadovska  and  another  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Scotland) [2017]  UKSC  54.
    He asserted in light of Sadovska and the judgment  of  Lady  Hale  with
    whom the remainder of the court agreed, that it  was  clear  from  [28]
    that the court were  endorsing  the  approach  in  Papajorgi  that  the
    Tribunal has to form its own  view  of  the  facts  from  the  evidence
    presented:-

         "One of the most basic rules of litigation is that he  who  asserts
         must prove.  It was not for  Ms  Sadovska  to  establish  that  the
         relationship was a  genuine  and  lasting  one.   It  was  for  the
         Respondent  to  establish  that  it  was  indeed  a   marriage   of
         convenience."

    The  Supreme  Court  went  on  to  note  at  [29]  that  "'marriage  of
    convenience' is a term of art" and at [31] that the First-tier Tribunal
    had erred in finding that the burden of proof is  upon  the  Appellant.
    The Court at [24] further had regard to the European Commission and the
    position set out therein at Recital 28 and in  the  Handbook  dated  26
    September 2014. This provides that  a  marriage  of  convenience  is  a
    marriage contracted for the sole purpose of enjoying the right of  free
    movement and residence under the Directive, that someone would not have
    otherwise and that sole purpose should be  interpreted  not  literally,
    but rather as meaning that the objective to obtain the right  of  entry
    and residence must be the predominant purpose of the abusive conduct.

 6. I gave Ms Ahmad the opportunity to consider the judgment  in  Sadovska,
    following which she accepted that the judge had erred materially in law
    in her application of the burden of proof in this particular appeal.

     Decision

 7. I accept Ms  Ahmad's  concession.  It  is  clear  that  despite  making
    reference in the decision to the judgments  of  Papajorgi  [2012]  UKUT
    0038 (IAC) at [10] and the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rosa
    [2016] EWCA Civ 14 at [11], the judge directed herself at [9] that  the
    onus is on the Appellant to prove that she met the requirements of  the
    EEA Regulations and found at [24]:-

         "Whilst I note that the reasons for refusal letter  wrongly  states
         that the wedding took place on 05/06/15 and the ECM letter  wrongly
         refers to Pakistan, I am satisfied that there was a sufficient lack
         of evidence provided by  the  Appellant  to  support  a  suspicion,
         belief or conclusion  on  the  part  of  the  Respondent  that  the
         marriage  is  one  of  convenience,  such  as  to  give  shift  the
         evidential burden to the Appellant to deal with this issue."



8.   I find that the judge was confused about the burden of proof and
whether or not this    would shift to the Appellant.  Mr Jesurum submitted
and I accept that the legal     burden is upon the Secretary of State to
prove that the marriage is one of convenience    and the question initially
is whether there is a prima facie case that the marriage is    one of
convenience.  If that is so, then the burden shifts to the Appellant.  In
this case,    in light of the reasons provided in the refusal of entry
clearance by the Entry     Clearance Officer, it is clear that no prima
facie case was disclosed so as to justify the    inference taken by the
Entry Clearance Officer that the marriage is one of   convenience.  Whilst
there was a lack of evidence in support of the application which   might
merit refusal of the application, the lack of evidence in itself does not
support a     consequent implication that the marriage is one of
convenience.  Consequently I find   that the judge further fell into error
at [24] in finding, despite errors in the decisions   of the ECO and the
ECM, that the lack of evidence by the Appellant supported the  conclusion
that the marriage is one of convenience, a finding which is legally
erroneous.

9.   It follows that  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rodger
cannot stand.  It is set   aside and the appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the
First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a    hearing de novo.  None  of  the
findings of fact shall stand and the appeal shall be  listed before a  judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date: 29 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
