
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
EA/03625/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21 September 2017                   |     On 20 October 2017             |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Hina Tabassum butt
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. G. Davison, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill, promulgated on 19 January 2017,  in
     which he allowed Mrs. Butt's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision to refuse to issue her with a derivative residence card as the
     primary carer of an EEA national child who was exercising Treaty rights
     as a self-sufficient person.


  2. For the purposes  of  this  decision  I  refer  to  Mrs.  Butt  as  the
     Appellant, and to the Secretary of State as the Respondent,  reflecting
     their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "I am satisfied there is an arguable error of law in  the  decision  in
    that the judge finds that the Appellant has permission to work and thus
    that the child is self-sufficient  despite  her  making  confusing  and
    contradictory findings in the decision."

  4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
     representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


  5. Mr. Jarvis relied on the grounds of appeal.  It was submitted that  the
     First-tier Tribunal had  materially  erred  in  its  finding  that  the
     Appellant had permission to work, that her child was financially  self-
     sufficient, and that the  criteria  of  Regulation  15A(2)(b)(ii)  were
     satisfied.


  6. With reference to paragraph 42 of  the  determination,  the  First-tier
     Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  when  findings   concerning   the
     Appellant's permission to work were based upon a fundamental assumption
     rather than the law.


  7. At paragraph 31 the judge stated, in agreement with  Mr.  Davison,  who
     also represented the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal that 3C leave
     was inappropriate and did not apply.  It was accepted by the judge that
     there was one issue before her, whether or not the work  undertaken  by
     the Appellant was lawful.  It was the Respondent's contention that only
     income derived from lawful earnings could  be  counted  when  assessing
     whether an applicant was self-sufficient.   Income  from  any  earnings
     when an applicant did not have permission to work could not be counted.
      It was acknowledged by Mr. Jarvis that the Respondent accepted that  a
     child, the sponsor, could be self-sufficient in reliance upon  earnings
     of his parent, the applicant, so long as the parent had  permission  to
     work.  In this case the Appellant  did  not  have  permission  to  work
     therefore her earnings could not  be  relied  on.   As  a  result,  the
     sponsor, the child, was not self-sufficient.


  8. The chronology of the case was not in dispute.  The Appellant had  been
     in the United Kingdom as a dependant of an EEA  national,  her  partner
     and the father of the sponsor, but he had then left and gone to Germany
     in August 2015.  Following his departure, the Appellant had  made  this
     application on the basis of a derivative right on account of her German
     national child.


  9. It was submitted by Mr. Jarvis that this scenario was not comparable to
     the case of Chen (Article 18 EC - Directive 90/364/EEC)  Case  C-200/02
     because the EEA national, the sponsor child, did not  have  leave.   He
     submitted that what was being considered in that case was  whether  the
     state could make the parents of a  self-sufficient  child  leave.   The
     child had a right to reside in Chen  without  having  to  rely  on  his
     parents for self-sufficiency.  Here, the child had no right  to  reside
     himself  as  he  was  not  self-sufficient  without  reliance  on   the
     Appellant.  His self-sufficiency was not from lawful earnings.


 10. In response, Mr. Davison submitted that the argument was circular.   If
     the Appellant had no derivative right to remain as a result of the fact
     that her child could not rely on her earnings, she would have to leave,
     and so would her child,  who  would  therefore  not  benefit  from  the
     Regulation which permitted him to remain when relying on a parent whose
     right derived from his presence.  He submitted that it was  not  giving
     effect to the right of a sponsor child if a mother could  not  rely  on
     her earnings in order to show that the child was self-sufficient.


 11. He submitted that, were the father in Germany paying child support, the
     child would be self-sufficient.   The  child  was  placed  in  a  worse
     position because his father was not paying some form of child  support.
     If the interpretation was as the Secretary of  State  submitted,  there
     was no effect given to the law and it was  very  unfair  as  the  child
     would have to leave.  He accepted that the judge had not addressed  the
     issue of whether the money could be taken into account.  However, since
     the EU partner had upped and left, if the Appellant was not allowed  to
     rely on her own income, the  child  would  have  to  leave  the  United
     Kingdom.  The Regulations were therefore not providing a right  of  any
     effect unless the Appellant's earnings could be used  for  the  child's
     self-sufficiency.  He submitted that the Appellant should be allowed to
     remain here to give effect to her child's rights to be here.


 12. I was referred to the case  of  Bee  and  another  (permanent/  derived
     rights of residence) [2013] UKUT 00083  by  Mr.  Davison,  although  he
     accepted that it did not assist as the Tribunal on  that  occasion  had
     not made a decision on whether or not the appellant could rely  on  her
     earnings when she did not have permission to work in order to show that
     the child was self-sufficient.  He referred me to paragraph 42.


 13. In response Mr. Jarvis submitted that the judge had decided this  under
     the 2006 Regulations as shown in paragraph 43.  There was no  direction
     made to suggest that Regulation 15(2A)  had  been  wrongly  transposed.
     The judge had considered that the Regulations  were  met  by  presuming
     that the  Appellant  was  residing  lawfully,  but  she  did  not  have
     permission to work either through leave to remain under the immigration
     rules or under EU law.   He  submitted  that  it  was  not  a  Zambrano
     scenario as the child was not being required to leave the EU.   He  was
     not self-sufficient in the United Kingdom so  should  leave  to  go  to
     Germany.  He was not required to leave the EU.   The  Regulations  were
     not non-compliant with the principles of EU law.  The judge had  simply
     got it wrong: the issue was whether the Appellant was able to  rely  on
     unlawful earnings and the answer to that was no.  The judge  had  erred
     in the approach, had failed to make clear findings, and had  failed  to
     make a finding about lawful earnings.








Error of law decision


 14. Having found that the Appellant had a  comprehensive  health  insurance
     policy  [28],  the  only  issue  before  the  judge  was  whether   the
     Appellant's child, her sponsor, was self-sufficient.  At [30] the judge
     addressed the issue of whether she was able to take  into  account  the
     Appellant's earnings.  At [31] she states that she agrees that 3C leave
     is not appropriate and finds that the Appellant  "cannot  say,  on  the
     basis of 3C leave, that she is working lawfully."


 15. At [32] with reference to the case of W (China) and  X  (China)  [2006]
     EWCA Civ 1494, she finds that income  from  illegal  employment  cannot
     create self-sufficiency for that child.


 16. At [38] the judge set out the  first  of  two  alternatives,  that  the
     Appellant had permission to work adopting the position set out  by  Mr.
     Davison.  At  [39]  she  set  out  the  second  alternative,  that  the
     Appellant did not have permission to work and so could not rely on  her
     illegal earnings.  At [40] the decision states:


     "I am prepared, in the circumstances, to say what Mr. Davison has urged
     upon me is the correct position, that the Appellant did have permission
     to work."


 17. No reasons are  given  for  the  accepting  the  proposition  that  the
     Appellant did have permission to work either at [38]  or  at  [40].   I
     accept Mr. Jarvis's submission that the  legal  scheme  is  clear  with
     regard to work, insofar as an individual in the United Kingdom  without
     leave or without EU rights is not entitled to work.  A  consequence  of
     this is that her earnings are illegal, as set out in  the  reasons  for
     refusal letter and repeated at [39].  The  judge  has  failed  to  give
     reasons for accepting the premise that the Appellant had permission  to
     work, especially given  that  she  had  previously  accepted  that  the
     Appellant did not have permission to work by virtue of  any  3C  leave.
     She also cited the case of W  (China)  which  found  that  income  from
     illegal employment could not create self-sufficiency, but despite doing
     so, has not explained how her earnings are lawful,  and  why  therefore
     her child is self-sufficient for the purposes of the Regulations.


 18. I find that the failure to give reasons and to  rely  on  a  "premise",
     which has adopted without giving reasons for  so  adopting  it,  is  an
     error of law.  At [42] the judge stated again that the  conclusion  was
     based on an "assumption", but has failed to give reasons for basing  it
     on this assumption.


19. In relation to the materiality of this  error,  that  is  the  question
    which the judge avoided answering by simply relying on the  proposition
    that the earnings  were  lawful  and  therefore  could  be  taken  into
    account.  Mr. Davison had accepted that 3C leave  was  not  appropriate
    and therefore that the Appellant did not have  permission  to  work  by
    virtue of any 3C leave  or  alternative  leave  under  the  immigration
    rules.  It was not submitted that she had any right to remain by virtue
    of her relationship with her German partner, who had  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr. Davison's submissions were that the Appellant's  earnings
    should be relied on because to do otherwise would not give effect to EU
    law.  I have carefully considered this.  However, neither in the First-
    tier Tribunal, nor before me was an argument made that the  Regulations
    did not effectively  transpose  EU  law.   The  argument  is  that  the
    Secretary of State  is  wrong  in  allowing  reliance  only  on  lawful
    earnings in this scenario.


20. I find that the Appellant's child, the sponsor, is not  self-sufficient
    except by virtue of relying on the Appellant's earnings.  However,  the
    Appellant has  no  leave  to  work,  and  her  earnings  are  therefore
    unlawful.  The case of Liu v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  1275  summarised  the
    conclusions of the Court of Appeal in W (China) as follows at [12]


    "The Court of Appeal held in W (China) that in the unusual case of  a
    minor EU citizen, unable  to  cope  for  himself  without  parental  or
    guardian  support,  those  Community  rules  led   to   the   following
    propositions:


       i) Applying [45] of Chen, the right of residence of a  minor  could
       only be effectively asserted with the  presence  and  support  of  a
       carer or guardian, and that, if the requirements of  the  Directives
       are fulfilled, creates a right for the parent  to  reside  with  the
       child, (see W (China) at [6]).


       ii) All of the minor EU citizen and his non-EU citizen  carers  have
       to fulfil the Directive requirements of (a) sickness insurance;  (b)
       sufficiency of means: W (China) at [8].


       iii) Those conditions are pre-conditions to  the  existence  of  the
       Art.18 right in any given case, and thus the right  does  not  exist
       until those conditions are fulfilled: (W (China) at [16]).


       iv) The pre-condition of sufficiency of means cannot be fulfilled by
       funds derived from employment  that  is  precarious  because  it  is
       unlawful: (W (China) at [14]).


       v) The member state is under no obligation to  adjust  its  domestic
       law in order to make available to the EU citizen resources that will
       enable him to fulfil the  pre-condition  to  the  existence  of  the
       Art.18 right: (W (China) at [16])."


 21. Liu also states at [20] and [21]


     "The third submission affects all of  the  appellants,  but  it  is  of
     particular relevance to the Mouloungui appeal:  which  because  of  the
     continual unlawfulness of the presence in  the  United  Kingdom  of  Mr
     Mouloungui would fail in any event if W (China) were applied  to  it.
     This submission was that the court should indeed look  to  the  future,
     during the period of long-term residence, and ask whether,  if  granted
     permission to remain on Art.18 grounds, the adult claiming  to  provide
     the resources would indeed be able to do so, by taking employment if so
     permitted. The past experience was relevant to that question. Wang  and
     Mr  and  Mrs  Ahmed  continue  in  their  present  employment;  and  Mr
     Mouloungui, although currently forbidden to work, had  a  "job  offer".
     Permission to remain must therefore be provided in order  to  enable  a
     parent to fulfil the resources requirement of the Directive,  and  thus
     make a reality of the child's right of residence as an EU citizen.


     This approach fails for the reasons that have already been set out.  By
     a combination of Art.18 read with the requirements of  the  Directives,
     the right to reside only exists once the requirements of the directives
     are fulfilled: see [12(iii)] above. The Member State therefore  is  not
     obliged to adjust its domestic law to create for  the  EU  citizen  the
     resources that he needs in order to create his right to reside: see sub-
     para.12(v) above. In the present  cases,  Mr  Mouloungui  as  a  failed
     asylum seeker; and Ms Wang and Mr and Mrs  Ahmed  as  overstayers;  are
     forbidden to work save for the quirk provided by their participation in
     these proceedings; and there is no reason at all  to  think  that  that
     position will change. But the  present  applications  demand  that  the
     United Kingdom creates for them a right  to  work  outside  the  normal
     rules in order to provide resources for the respective children."


22. I find that the judge correctly cited the case of W(China), found  that
    the Appellant did not have leave to work, but  then  decided  that  her
    income  could  be  counted  for  the  purposes  of  the  child's  self-
    sufficiency.  With reference to the cases of W (China), and Liu, I find
    that this is contrary to the case law and I find that the  judge  erred
    in coming to this conclusion.  I find that the child  cannot  be  self-
    sufficient in reliance on the Appellant's unlawful earnings.


Notice of Decision


23. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
    law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


24. I remake the decision, dismissing the Appellant's appeal.


25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 19 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
