
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/03322/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|hearing                                   |                                 |
|On 30 April 2019                          |On 7 May 2019                    |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                MENTOR BEQJA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 10 April 2019 I gave the following directions:-

         "1.      Having had  regard  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal, and the grounds of challenge upon  which  permission
             was granted, it is my preliminary view  that  the  appellant's
             former wife had exercised Treaty rights through employment  in
             the United Kingdom between  April  2005  and  into  tax  years
             2011/12.  It is also my preliminary view that, given that  the
             appellant was living in the United  Kingdom  from  16  January
             2006, he then automatically acquired permanent residence on 16
             January 2011 as his wife was clearly exercising Treaty  rights
             during that period.


         2. In the circumstances, it is my preliminary view that whether  or
             not he was working after that date ( or after the divorce)  or
             whether his wife was exercising  Treaty  Rights  at  the  time
             divorce proceedings were commenced or finalised is irrelevant,
              and so he has been entitled  to  a  document  confirming  his
             right of permanent residence since 16 January 2011.


         3. It is therefore my preliminary view that  the  decision  of  the
             First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set  aside  and   that   the
             appropriate course of action would  be  to  allow  the  appeal
             under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations.


         4. Unless within ten working days of the issue of these  directions
             there is any written  objection  to  this  course  of  action,
             supported by cogent argument, the Upper Tribunal will  proceed
             to determine the appeal without an oral hearing and will remit
             it to the First-tier Tribunal.


         5. In the absence of a timely response  by  a  party,  it  will  be
             presumed that it has no objection  to  the  course  of  action
             proposed."

 2. There has been  no  response  to  these  directions  by  either  party.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that neither party objects  to  the  matter
    being determined without a hearing and has nothing further to say. I am
    satisfied that that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law for the reasons  set  out  above,
    and must therefore be set aside.  In the  circumstances,  and  in  line
    with the directions set out I above, I am  satisfied  on  the  evidence
    provided that  the  appellant  has  acquired  the  permanent  right  of
    residence and is entitled to a document confirming  that.  I  therefore
    allow the appeal.

Summary of conclusions

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of law and I set it aside.


      2. I remake the appeal by allowing  it  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
         Regulations).



Signed                                             Date:  30 April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
