
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03558/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 April 2019                      |On 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                          MR Kenneth Uyimwen Okoro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Counsel, instructed by Nathan Aaron
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on  5  February  2019  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler which refused the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal dated 8 March 2016  of  a  residence  card  showing
    lawful residence as either a family member or an extended family member
    of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.  The respondent's decision
    was made under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (the EEA Regulations).

 2. The background to this matter is  that  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria, was born on 12 December 1996.  He lost  his  birth  father  in
    approximately 2011 and came to the UK, sponsored by his paternal uncle,
    Mr [PO]. Mr [PO] and his wife, Ms [IK], an  EEA  national,  obtained  a
    guardianship order for the appellant through  the  Nigerian  courts  in
    2011.  They obtained an adoption order for him on 18 February 2014.

 3. On 21 September 2015 the appellant applied for an  EEA  residence  card
    showing him to be the family member of his uncle and thereby  dependent
    on Ms [IK] in line with Regulation  7  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   The
    respondent refused that application in the decision dated 8 March 2016.
     The respondent did not accept that the appellant had shown that he was
    a lawfully adopted child of his uncle and Ms [IK].  Regulation 7 of the
    EEA Regulations was therefore not met. The respondent also did not find
    that it had been shown that the appellant had ever been a dependant  of
    or a member of the household of his uncle and Ms [IK] prior  to  coming
    to the UK  or  thereafter.   The  requirements  of  Regulation  8  were
    therefore not met.

 4. The First-Tier Tribunal found that Regulation 7 could not be met  where
    the guardianship order could not amount to adoption  and  the  adoption
    order could not meet the provisions of  the  Adoption  (Designation  of
    Overseas Adoptions) Order 1973 which provided that a Nigerian  adoption
    made after 3 January 2014 would not be regarded as an adoption  in  the
    UK.  That finding was not disputed before me.

 5. The First-Tier Tribunal went on to find that the evidence did not  show
    that the requirements of Regulation 7 were met.  At  paragraph  21  the
    judge  pointed  out  that  "the  issues  of  dependence  and  household
    membership were clearly in dispute".  That statement was correct as the
    respondent's refusal letter on page 2 of 4  stated  that  only  college
    letters addressed to the appellant at the same address as the  sponsors
    and letters from his college regarding his studies sent to the  sponsor
    had been provided. These documents were not found to be

         "sufficient evidence that you were dependent upon and, or  residing
         with your sponsor prior to entering the  United  Kingdom  and  that
         since you entered the United  Kingdom  you  have  continued  to  be
         dependent upon and, or residing with your sponsor."

 6.  The First-Tier Tribunal judge went on to place very little  weight  on
    the witness statements of Mr [PO] and Ms [IK] as they were  not  signed
    and neither attended to adopt  their  evidence  and  submit  to  cross-
    examination.  That finding was not challenged before me.

 7. Judge Pooler found in paragraphs 22 and 23 that:

         "22. There was no satisfactory supporting documentary evidence. The
         most recent evidence that the appellant lived at the address  given
         by his uncle  was  dated  March  2015.  There  was  no  documentary
         evidence of Western Union transfers. There was, by way  of  further
         example, no supporting documentary evidence of the claim  that  the
         appellant's uncle paid his school fees in  Nigeria.  There  was  no
         documentary evidence of financial support in the United Kingdom.

         23.  In Mr Ahmed's submission, it was clear that the appellant  was
         surviving on the basis of the financial support  of  his  aunt  and
         uncle. On the evidence,  however,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
         appellant has proved financial dependence either before he  entered
         the UK or subsequently. Similarly, I am not persuaded that  he  has
         proved membership of his EEA national sponsor's  household  in  the
         United Kingdom (there being no claim that he was a  member  of  his
         aunt's household in Nigeria."

 8. The provisions of Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations read as follows:

         "8.  (1) In these Regulations  "extended  family  member"  means  a
                  person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
                  regulation 7(1)(a), (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the
                  conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

             (2)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                  person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his
                  civil partner and-

                  (a)  the person is residing in an EEA State in  which  the
                      EEA national also resides and is dependent  upon  the
                      EEA national or is a member of his household;

                  (b)  the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a)
                      and is accompanying the EEA national  to  the  United
                      Kingdom or wishes to join him there; or

                  (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),
                      has joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and
                      continues to be dependent upon him or to be a  member
                      of his household.

             (3)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                  person is a relative of an EEA national or his  spouse  or
                  his civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly
                  requires the personal care of the EEA national his  spouse
                  or his civil partner.

             (4)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                  person is a relative of an EEA national and would meet the
                  requirements in the immigration rules  (other  than  those
                  relating to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to enter
                  or remain in the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of
                  the EEA national were the EEA national  a  person  present
                  and settled in the United Kingdom.

             (5)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                  person is the partner of an EEA  national  (other  than  a
                  civil partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he
                  is in a durable relationship with the EEA national.

             (6)  In these Regulations "relevant EEA  national"  means,  in
                  relation to an extended family member,  the  EEA  national
                  who is or whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of
                  the extended family member for the  purpose  of  paragraph
                  (2), (3) or (4) or the EEA national who is the partner  of
                  the extended family member for the  purpose  of  paragraph
                  (5)."

 9. The argument before me was that the First-Tier Tribunal's assessment of
    the evidence on financial dependency was irrational.  The  evidence  of
    the appellant before the Tribunal was  that  he  had  been  financially
    dependent on his uncle prior to coming to the  UK,  sending  money  and
    paying his school fees. After coming to the UK he lived as the child of
    the family, being supported by his uncle and Mrs [IK].  It  was  argued
    that the FTTJ assessed this evidence incorrectly as he did not asses it
    in the context of the guardianship and adoption orders  and  the  uncle
    sponsoring the visit visa. That context was  sufficient,  even  without
    weight being placed on the witness statements of Mr [PO] and Mrs  [IK],
    to lead to the appellant being found credible and the appeal allowed.

10.  I had some sympathy with the argument put forward for  the  appellant.
    It was suggested that it had not been well understood that  the  bundle
    of documentary materials provided with the original application to  the
    respondent should be updated for the appeal and so was not as  complete
    as it could have been. That may or may not be so but that matter cannot
    show material error in the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal if up to
    date or more comprehensive materials were not before the judge.  As  he
    noted at paragraph 21, the appellant was on  notice  from  the  refusal
    letter of the absence of documentary evidence on financial dependency.

11. It is not my conclusion that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    discloses a material error on a point of law.  He was clearly aware  of
    the guardianship and adoption orders being made. They  did  not  oblige
    the judge to accept the appellant's evidence on  previous  and  current
    financial  dependency.  He  was  entitled  to  look  for  corroborating
    evidence, did so, and found that the  documents  before  him  were  not
    sufficient to meet the requirements of  Regulation  8.  The  conclusion
    reached was not one that all judges would necessarily have reached  but
    it is one that was open to the  First-Tier  Tribunal  on  the  material
    provided and cannot be characterised as irrational or a  decision  that
    no reasonable decision maker could reach.

12. I am therefore satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to
    conclude that the provisions of Regulation 8  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    were not met.

13. For these reasons I do not find that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed a material error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed   [pic]                                   Date 9 April 20198
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
