
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03527/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22nd December 2017                     |On 28th December 2017            |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                          MAHMOOD AHMED ALI EL HAG

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene, instructed by Waterfields Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. On 17th November 2017, I granted the appellant permission to appeal in
      the following terms:


                      1.   Permission to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                      decision having been given by the Upper  Tribunal  on
                      27th October 2017 following the decision  in  Khan  v
                      SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755,  the  Upper   Tribunal
                      proposes
                      (a)  to find a material error of law in the  decision
                      of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal  for
                      want of jurisdiction;
                      (b)  remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
                      hearing.


                      2.   If either party objects to this course of action
                      they are directed to make written submissions  to  be
                      received by the Upper Tribunal within 14 days of  the
                      date of these directions being sent out.


                      3.   If no  written  submissions  are  received,  the
                      Tribunal's decision as set out in  (1)  above  stands
                      and the case will be remitted for hearing before  the
                      First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The respondent, in her Rule 24 response stated that she as considering
      her position and requested an oral hearing. Mr Deller informed me that
      an application for permission had been made to the Supreme  Court  but
      the outcome was awaited.


   3. The judgment of the Court of Appeal in Khan v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
      1755 represents the law and is binding on  the  UT.  Importantly,  the
      Court did not stay paragraph 1 of its Order, which was  to  allow  the
      appeal.


   4. For this reason, I allow the appeal and remit the appeal to the First-
      tier Tribunal for determination.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to remake.




                                    Date 22nd December 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
