
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03986/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th January 2018                    |On 8th January 2018                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                            iSSA OLUSEGUN oLADEJI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Oladeji in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on the 18th October 1977. He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Cameron) who, in a determination promulgated on the  19th  April
    2017 considered that there was  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to  refuse  to  grant  residence
    card as an extended family member of  an  EEA  national  based  on  the
    decision in Sala (EFM's: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

 2. No anonymity direction was made  by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  and  no
    application has been made on behalf of the appellant or any grounds put
    forward to support such an application.

 3. The history of the appellant is set out in a letter sent by his  former
    legal representatives dated 23 June 2015.  The  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom on the 22nd of July 2009 as a visitor  and  was  granted
    six months leave to enter to visit his uncle who was  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom. The appellant overstayed his leave. In or about 2013 he
    met his ex-spouse he was an EEA national and a marriage took  place  by
    proxy in Nigeria on 22 August 2013.  An  application  was  made  on  27
    January 2014 for a residence card based on that relationship which  was
    refused on the 17 March 2014.  The  letter  from  the  solicitor  makes
    reference  to  the  relationship  with  his  then  spouse   as   having
    deteriorated but that  the  appellant  lodged  an  appeal  through  his
    solicitors at that time. She subsequently left the United  Kingdom  and
    the appellant lodged a divorce petition.

 4. The appellant  met  an  Italian  national,  Miss  Bennis  and  began  a
    relationship with her. An application was made on 23 June  2015  for  a
    residence card as extended family member  of  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights.

 5. The application was refused in a decision made  on  the  25th  November
    2015. The notice of  decision  made  reference  to  the  basis  of  the
    application for a residence card  as  a  confirmation  of  a  right  of
    residence on the basis that he was an extended family member.

 6. Accompanying the notice of decision was a reasons  for  refusal  letter
    which expanded on the reasons given for the refusal of the  application
    and made reference to the documentary evidence that had  been  produced
    with the application. It stated  that  he  had  claimed  to  have  been
    residing with his partner since 25 March  2015  but  that  he  had  not
    provided sufficient documentation to suggest that he was in  a  durable
    relationship. The evidence stated that he had lived  with  his  sponsor
    since  March  2015   only  a  period  of  three  months  prior  to  the
    application being submitted and this was not considered long enough  to
    prove that  he  was  in  a  durable  and  subsisting  relationship.  In
    addition, he stated that he met  his  partner  in  March  2014  but  in
    January, he had made an application for a residence card as a spouse of
    EEA qualified person. That application was refused on 17 March 2014 and
    at the time he claimed to have met  his  current  partner,  he  had  an
    ongoing appeal against the refusal which was launched on 24 March 2014.
    The appeal was on 27 May 2015, a month before the new application. Thus
    it suggested that at the time he had met his current  partner,  he  was
    still married to his wife and actively pursuing an application  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national. The letter went on to make reference to  the
    dissolution of marriage certificate relating to his  previous  marriage
    but for the reasons given  in  the  refusal  letter  it  could  not  be
    verified.

 7. As to the current relationship, the refusal letter considered the claim
    that they had been  in  a  relationship  of  15  months  prior  to  the
    application but  that  this  could  not  be  accepted  without  further
    evidence. The decision made reference to the documentary evidence  that
    had been provided but was not considered to  be  independent  objective
    evidence of a durable subsisting relationship.  The  letter  also  made
    reference to other documentary evidence in the  form  of  bills  and  a
    tenancy agreement and a birth certificate relating to the child  on  27
    June 2015. Consequently for the reasons given in the letter and due  to
    the lack of evidence submitted, the respondent did not accept  that  he
    was in a durable relationship for the purposes of the EEA Regulations.

 8. Thus, it was not accepted that the appellant had demonstrated  that  he
    was an Extended Family Member (Regulation  8  (5)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006).

 9. The appellant appealed the decision on 22 December 2015 without a  fee.
    As a result of that the appeal  was  struck  out  on  4  February  2016
    because the fee had not been paid by 19 January 2016. A letter was then
    received on the 9th February 2016 making reference to a fee being  paid
    and requesting that the case be reinstated. That request  was  accepted
    by the Tribunal on 11 February 2016 and thus the appeal was to  proceed
    with a hearing date of 9 January 2017.

10. A notice of directions was sent to the appellant and his solicitors  on
    the 8th December 2016 drawing their attention  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Sala (EFM's: right of appeal) 2016] UKUT 00411  (IAC).  The
    directions went on to state, "in these circumstances, the  Tribunal  is
    minded to place this appeal before a Judge of the FTT with  a  view  to
    determine on the papers for  want  of  jurisdiction.  If  you  want  to
    provide reasons why the Tribunal should not  proceed  as  proposed  you
    must provide written notification  no  later  than  4pm  on  the  fifth
    working day after the date of these directions."

11. The hearing listed on the 7th January 2017 was adjourned.

12. It appears that on the 12th December 2016, the appellant requested that
    the Tribunal  should  admit  post-decision  evidence  relating  to  the
    marriage of the applicant and the birth of a child and further evidence
    relating to the exercise of Treaty Rights.

13. In accordance with the directions issued in December, the  appeal  came
    before the FTT Tribunal Judge Cameron on the 24th March  2017  and  was
    was determined upon the papers.

14. In a decision promulgated on the 19th of  April  2017  the  judge  made
    reference to the directions relating to the decision in Sala (as  cited
    above). At paragraph 4  it  made  reference  to  the  letter  dated  12
    December 2016 in which it was indicated  that  the  appellant  had  now
    married an EEA national and that they had a British national child born
    27 June 2015. In his findings of  fact  the  judge  observed  that  the
    appellant had applied for a residence card on the basis of being  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national and that there  had  been  no
    section 120 notice issued therefore human  rights  were  not  arguable.
    Furthermore, having taken into account the decision in Sala (as  cited)
    the judge found that in relation to extended family members they  would
    be no right of appeal against the refusal to issue a residence card. At
    paragraph 7  the  judge  made  reference  to  the  appellant's  changed
    circumstances in which it  was  stated  that  he  had  married  an  EEA
    national but that as it was not information before  the  respondent  at
    the time of the application or at the date of decision,  the  appellant
    would be in a position to make a further application on  the  basis  of
    this marriage and that the respondent would then consider the  position
    fully. The judge concluded that as  the  application  made  was  as  an
    extended family member it did not carry a  right  of  appeal  therefore
    there was no jurisdiction of the Tribunal to consider the appeal now.

15. Accordingly he found that the FTT did not have jurisdiction to hear the
    appeal. He therefore dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction.

16. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and on the 30th
    October 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen  granted  permission  to
    appeal. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  The  appellant
    appeared in person but was accompanied by Mr Slater, an employee of the
    solicitors who were on record as acting for the appellant. He  provided
    a letter as to his circumstances and the terms of  his  employment  and
    qualifications. He did not suggest that he was able to act as  a  legal
    representative to deal with the law and the  evidence.  He  wanted  the
    consent of the Tribunal to act as a McKenzie friend but that it  should
    not be taken that  the  solicitors  were  "off  the  record"  in  these
    proceedings. Thus the solicitors who have been acting for the appellant
    remain as acting solicitors but had not attended the hearing by sending
    someone entitled to act on his behalf but instead an employee of  their
    firm had attended as a McKenzie friend.  We did not think that in those
    circumstances he would be able to act as  a  McKenzie  friend  for  the
    purposes of any substantive hearing dealing with law and  evidence.  In
    any event the appellant would not be disadvantaged in understanding the
    nature of the proceedings, which was the primary concern referred to in
    the letter from Mr Slater, as we were content that he would be able  to
    assist the appellant in this aspect.

17. In our judgement we were satisfied that the decision of  Judge  Cameron
    was in error for two reasons. Firstly  the  decision  of  Sala  (EFM's:
    right of appeal) 2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) was a  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal which was reported on 19 August 2016. The  conclusion  reached
    by the Tribunal in that decision was that there was no right of  appeal
    before the Tribunal against the refusal to issue a residence permit  to
    an extended family member. However, whilst the judge did not  have  the
    advantage of the recent decision of Khan v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, it has established that  in  fact
    the Tribunal has jurisdiction. Thus it was unarguably wrong in  law  to
    have concluded that it did not have jurisdiction  to  hear  the  appeal
    given the judgment in that case. Secondly, the appellant  had  provided
    some evidence which related to the  alteration  to  his  circumstances,
    namely that he had married his EEA national partner and  had  become  a
    family member. The judge did  not  consider  that  issue  substantively
    because he erroneously considered that the appeal could only be decided
    on the evidence as at the date of the decision. In those circumstances,
    the decision of Sala did not apply  and  thus  the  Tribunal  did  have
    jurisdiction to consider substantively the appeal.

18. As a result of the decision made that there was a want of jurisdiction,
    the appellant has not been able to proceed in challenging the  decision
    of the Secretary  of  State  at  a  substantive  hearing  nor  has  the
    respondent been able to challenge the updated evidence or  engage  with
    any of the arguments the appellant would seek to advance.

19. Mr Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the  Rule  24
    response which did not oppose the application for permission to  appeal
    or the basis upon which there was an  error  of  law  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for all  issues
    and the evidence to be considered.

20.   Mr  Slater  made  reference  to  the  observation  recorded  in   the
    determination of Judge Cameron at paragraph 7 that "the appellant is in
    a position to make a further application on the basis of his marriage".
    The appellant confirmed that an application had been made on this basis
    in August 2017 and that subsequent to that both he and his partner  had
    been invited for an interview but that he  had  heard  nothing  further
    since then. Mr Melvin could not assist any further other  than  to  say
    that the marriage certificate had not been accepted. It does not appear
    that any application made by the appellant has been the subject of  any
    notice of immigration decision yet and therefore  remains  outstanding.
    If that application is successful there will be no requirement for  any
    further litigation but that is a matter for the respondent. There  does
    remain an appeal outstanding which requires  determination  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal where both parties will be able  to  present  their
    evidence.

21. Therefore in the circumstances, the  appellant  has  demonstrated  that
    there was a material error of law in the decision made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. It shall  be  set  aside  and  in  accordance  with  the
    agreement of the parties shall be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a hearing.

22. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make a fee award because he found
    that there was no jurisdiction. As we have remitted the  appeal  to  be
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal, it will be open to the  appellant  to
    make an application for a fee award at the conclusion of that hearing.


    Decision:


    The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing.


Signed [pic]
                                Date: 4/1/2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
