
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/03205/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 May 2019                                |On 12 June 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             Rana Azhar Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, Solicitor from Syeds Law Office
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
       of the Secretary of State to refuse him  a  residence  card  as  the
       extended family member of an European Economic Area national.

    2. The application was made on 7 March 2017  and  refused  on  25  July
       2017.  The respondent thought that the appellant's circumstances did
       not entitle him to appeal the decision.

    3. The appellant was not satisfied with that.  Although he had  already
       issued proceedings for judicial review he wrote  in  person  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal on 6 July 2018 asking if the First-tier Tribunal
       had jurisdiction to receive an appeal.   It  answered  that  in  the
       affirmative and the appeal was subsequently listed for hearing  when
       the First-tier Tribunal decided that it did not have jurisdiction.

    4. I do not see any  conflict  between  those  two  decisions.   It  is
       perfectly obvious when read properly that the first decision of  the
       Upper Tribunal relating to jurisdiction was that the  inquiry  about
       permission was in time.  The decision that  there  was  jurisdiction
       was not purporting to be a ruling that the decision to be challenged
       was within the scope  of  appealable  decisions.   In  the  decision
       promulgated on 24 October 2018, leading to a decision promulgated on
       30 October 2018, the First-tier Tribunal decided  it  did  not  have
       jurisdiction to determine the appeal because the Rules did not  make
       provision for such a decision.

    5. That decision reflected the law set out in the 2016 Regulations  and
       in the ordinary course of events would be  difficult  to  challenge.
       However we now have the benefit  of  a  decision  of  the  Court  of
       Justice of the European Union in SSHD v Banger (Citizenship  of  the
       European Union - Right of Union citizens to move and  reside  freely
       within the territory of the European Union - Judgment) [2018]  EUECJ
       C-89/17 (12 July 2018).  This makes clear that member states have an
       obligation to facilitate the residence of  extended  family  members
       and to provide  an  accessible  right  of  redress  to  challenge  a
       disappointing  decision.   For  practical  purposes  this  means  an
       appeal.  The Secretary of State has recognised that and has  amended
       the 2016 Procedure Rules so that they give a  right  of  appeal  for
       decisions made after a date in (I think) March  2019.   That  change
       does not create a right of appeal in a case such as this  where  the
       decision complained of was before the change in the Regulations.  In
       many such cases an appellant in the position of this appellant  will
       be content for a fresh decision which  the  Secretary  of  State  is
       likely to be willing to make.  Such a decision could be expected  to
       set out correctly the rights of appeal. Failure to do that may  mean
       that a purported decision  has  no  legal  effect  because,  by  not
       identifying rights of appeal, it did not comply  with  the  notices'
       Regulations.  However the Secretary of State has  an  obligation  to
       permit an appeal whether or not that is set out in the Rules and  it
       seems to me clear that an appellant can insist on an appeal  against
       a decision that he is entitled to appeal even  though  he  has  been
       told wrongly that there is no right of appeal.   That  is  precisely
       what this appellant  has  done.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was wrong and took no account of the decision of the  Court
       of Justice of the European Union in Banger.  There  is  jurisdiction
       to entertain an appeal and I find the First-tier Tribunal has  erred
       in law.

    6. Mr Hussain urged me to make a decision on the papers  if  I  reached
       this conclusion.  I understand why he wants  that.   This  case  has
       been going on a long  time.   If  it  is  a  meritorious  case  then
       appellants want certainty and finality.  They do not want more delay
       and expense.  However the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was
       not attended by the Secretary of State.  In the ordinary  course  of
       events I have almost no sympathy for  litigants  who  know  about  a
       hearing but choose not to attend but it is a little  different  when
       the only issue understood to arise was  one  of  jurisdiction.   The
       Secretary of State's resources are limited and  although  I  do  not
       commend the decision not to attend, in my judgment it would be wrong
       to say the Secretary of State did not oppose the  appellant's  case.
       He clearly did which is why he wrote the letter that he did.

    7. This case has to be heard again and in the circumstances it will  be
       quicker and easier to hear it  again  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       This is a still more attractive course because  there  has  been  no
       decision on the merits.  I find the First-tier  Tribunal  erred.   I
       set aside the decision there is no jurisdiction.  I order  the  case
       be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

    8. The appeal is allowed. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I  set
       aside its decision and I direct that the appeal be  heard  again  in
       the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 June 2019                   |



