
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/03172/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 14 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      O
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Oliviera- Agnew, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



 1. We have made an  anonymity  order  because  it  is  accepted  that  the
    respondent ('Mr O') is a vulnerable person and this decision refers  to
    sensitive medical evidence relating to him.

 2. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal ('FtT') sent on 4 January 2019 in which it allowed Mr O's
    appeal on EEA grounds, against a decision dated 5 April 2018,  refusing
    to issue him with a residence card as the former family  member  of  an
    EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the  UK  who  has  retained  a
    right of residence.

    Background

 3. Mr O is a Nigerian citizen.  He married Ms [W] ('the  sponsor')  on  20
    February 2010.  In 2010 he was issued with a residence card  valid  for
    five years as the spouse of an EEA national. On 14  November  2014,  he
    applied for a further residence card as a family  member  who  retained
    the right of residence pursuant to Regulation 10(5) of the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016 ('the  2016  Regulations').   He  was  asked  to
    attend a credibility interview on 30 April 2015.  His  application  was
    refused on 12 May 2015 and the SSHD also took a decision to revoke  the
    existing  residence  card.  An  appeal  against  those  decisions   was
    dismissed by FtT Judge Andrews on 21 November 2016.  An application for
    permission to appeal to the FtT was  refused  on  23  May  2017  and  a
    further application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    ('the UT') was refused on 4 July 2017.

 4. On 26 January 2018 Mr O submitted a fresh application on the basis that
    he had retained a right of residence.  The application was refused on 5
    April 2018.

 5. The SSHD refused this application because it was  considered  that  the
    marriage  was  one  of  convenience   because   there   were   numerous
    discrepancies in the credibility interview which took place on 30 April
    2015. The decision was  upheld  by  FtT  Judge  Andrews  on  subsequent
    appeal.

 6. In his grounds of appeal to the FtT, Mr O asserted that he entered into
    a genuine marriage. His marriage was not one  of  convenience.  He  was
    issued with a residence card in 2010 and he has  retained  a  right  of
    residence in accordance with Regulation 10(5) of the 2016 Regulations.

    FtT decision

 7. The FtT considered that there was new material  before  her  to  depart
    from the findings of FtT Judge Andrews,  in  particular  a  psychiatric
    report prepared by Dr Balu dated 29 November 2018.  This set out Mr O's
    memory difficulties.  Dr Balu recorded;

             'I attempted to do a Mini  Mental  State  Examination  and  he
             couldn't remember  the  date,  day  and  month.  He  was  very
             distressed that he couldn't answer my  questions  and  stopped
             communicating. He  was  staring  into  space  and  I  couldn't
             communicate with him any further. He almost became dissociated
             and mute and I had to stop my interview to give  him  time  to
             relax and bring him back into the room and try and engage with
             him'.

 8. Dr Balu further stated;

             "I am of the opinion that Mr O  suffers  from  high  level  of
             anxiety and severe depressive symptoms  as  evidenced  by  his
             restlessness, inability to engage in a conversation, withdrawn
             behaviour. It would be fair to conclude that he  suffers  from
             pseudo-dementia at this stage as a differential diagnosis.  He
             also presents with some symptoms of dissociative disorder  and
             I wondered if there is any underlying  previous  psychological
             trauma."

 9. Dr Balu concludes;

             "Mr O suffers with symptoms suggestive  of  Severe  Depressive
             Disorder  with  Pseudo-Dementia  type  presentation.  He   has
             difficulty with spatial orientation and registering and recall
             of information".

10. The FtT relied on the contents of the psychiatric report. The FtT found
    at [41]

             "The report raises a real possibility that the reason why  the
             appellant was not able to give  satisfactory  answers  to  the
             questions  at  the  credibility  interview  upon   which   the
             respondent founded in her refusal letters was because  of  the
             mental health problems from which he suffers and the resultant
             difficulties and disabilities identified by Dr Balu".

11. The FtT concluded that (i) the marriage was not one of convenience (ii)
    Mr O and the sponsor had been working at the relevant periods (iii)  Mr
    O retained the right of residence pursuant to Regulation 10(5)  of  the
    2016 Regulations. The appeal was allowed.

    Grounds of appeal

12. The SSHD's grounds of appeal are as follows:

 1) The material misdirection of law challenge

                  The  Tribunal  misdirected  itself  in  relation  to   the
                  application  of  Devaseelan  v  SSHD  [2002]  UKAIT  00702
                  because FtT Judge Andrews had already found in  2015  that
                  the marriage was one of convenience and the  FtT  was  not
                  entitled to  go  behind  those  findings  based  on  later
                  evidence. It is also asserted  that  the  FtT  contradicts
                  itself in relation to the burden of proof.

 2) The failure to give reasons

                  The FtT failed to give adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the
                  psychiatric  report  presented  in  2018  applied  to  the
                  appellant in 2015.

 3) Irrationality

                  The  Tribunal's  approach  to  the  medical   report   was
                  irrational and the Tribunal gave too much  weight  to  the
                  report.

    Permission to appeal

13. Permission to appeal was refused by FtT Judge Kelly on 29 January 2019.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by UT Judge  Chalkley  in  a  decision
    dated 13 March 2019 on all grounds.

    History of the appeal

15. The appeal was originally listed for hearing on 10 April 2019. On  that
    occasion the appeal was adjourned by UT Judge Plimmer  with  directions
    to Ms Isherwood to take further instructions. This because the SSHD was
    not represented before the FtT, when Dr Balu's  report  was  submitted.
    The SSHD was also given  an  opportunity  to  comment  on  whether  the
    psychiatric report constituted a 'new matter' in accordance with Mahmud
    (s85 NAA 2002 'new matters': Iran [2017] UKUT 488 (IAC).

16. In response Miss Isherwood provided a position statement in  which  she
    indicated that the SSHD would continue to pursue  the  challenge.  Miss
    Isherwood's position was that the psychiatric report  was  not  a  'new
    matter' pursuant to section 85 (6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended ('the 2002 Act'), but was  evidence  offered
    in support of the Mr O's assertion that his marriage  was  not  one  of
    convenience and to support his assertion that  the  inconsistencies  in
    his credibility interview were as a result of his poor memory. She also
    made it clear that in so far as the medical report was a  'new  matter'
    the SSHD would not object to it having been considered by the FtT.

17. In view of Mr O's vulnerability because of his mental health condition,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer also made an anonymity direction.

    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

18. At the hearing before us, Miss Isherwood clarified that she relied upon
    the three separate grounds of appeal which are set out at  paragraph  9
    above.

19. Both representatives made submissions which are set out in more  detail
    below in the discussion on the individual grounds.

20. We reserved our decision.

    Discussion

    Ground 1 - the material misdirection of law

21. The FtT based its starting point on the findings of FtT  Judge  Andrews
    in relation to Mr O's marriage at [12].  The  FtT  had  regard  to  the
    principles in Devaseelan (supra) which was quoted at  length  at  [23].
    The FtT rationally concluded that the existence of the new  psychiatric
    report contained facts which were beyond dispute  at  [42],  that  this
    evidence was not before FtT Judge Andrews and that there  was  a  'real
    possibility' that the new evidence threw light on the evidence provided
    by Mr O at his credibility interview.  The FtT rationally found that it
    was open to it to make new findings based on the evidence and  did  not
    misdirect itself in law.

22. The FtT applied the correct standard and burden of proof in relation to
    marriages of convenience at  [20]  and  [21],  referring  correctly  to
    Papajorgi (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 and Sadovska and Another v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54.   Miss  Isherwood
    submitted that there is a contradiction between [40] and [48],  however
    having read the decision as a whole we are satisfied that this  is  not
    the case. At [40] the FtT is setting out the position as it was  before
    FtT Judge Andrews. The FtT states that there can be no  departure  from
    FtT Judge Andrews' findings for the reason that the respondent did  not
    put forward  any  evidence  to  justify  calling  the  appellant  to  a
    credibility interview in the  first  place.  At  [48],  the  FtT  finds
    instead, that a departure from those findings is warranted  because  of
    the psychiatric report. The FtT comes to a rational conclusion that the
    evidence from  the  SSHD  was  insufficient  to  justify  a  reasonable
    suspicion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience  because  the
    appellant's inconsistent answers could be explained by his poor  mental
    health. In any event we are satisfied, considering the  decision  as  a
    whole, that the FtT rationally  found  having  considered  all  of  the
    evidence in the round before it that the respondent had not  discharged
    the legal burden of proof in respect of demonstrating that the marriage
    was one of convenience.

    Ground 2 - The failure to give reasons

23. Miss Isherwood submitted that the FtT gave inadequate reasons  for  why
    the report which was dated 29 November 2018 was able to shed  light  on
    Mr O's ability to answer questions in a credibility interview in  2015.
    We are satisfied that the FtT gave adequate reasons for accepting  that
    the psychiatric report could go some way to explaining Mr O's state  of
    mind in 2015. In particular the report confirmed that on examination Mr
    O had very serious, far reaching symptoms,  presented  as  'dissociated
    and mute' and had significant difficulties in processing retaining  and
    relaying back information.

24. The FtT not only took into  account  the  psychiatric  report  in  this
    respect but also gave detailed consideration to the answers that  Mr  O
    gave at his interview in 2015 in which he expressly stated that he  had
    problems with his  memory  and  had  difficulties  understanding  basic
    questions. The FtT additionally gave weight to  the  remainder  of  the
    evidence including Mr O's previous  evidence  that  he  had  difficulty
    remembering  things  in  the  interview  including  the  name  of   his
    solicitor. The inference drawn by the FtT that Mr O's  memory  problems
    were likely to have been in  place  for  some  time  was  rational  and
    adequately reasoned looking at the body of the decision as a whole.  We
    are satisfied with reference to UT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    1095 that the FtT's reasoning on this issue was 'tolerably clear'.

    Ground 3 -Irrationality

25. Miss  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  FtT  irrationally  accepted  the
    conclusions  of  the  psychiatric  report.   She  submitted  that   the
    psychiatrist did not take any history from  Mr  O  and  relied  on  the
    comments of a friend who accompanied Mr O. It is not recorded  what  Dr
    Balu was told by the friend. The psychiatrist did not  have  access  to
    any GP records because Mr O is not registered with a  GP.  Further  the
    psychiatrist recommended further  investigations  which  did  not  take
    place. We note in this respect that there was no detailed  critique  of
    the psychiatric report in the grounds of appeal  and  that  these  more
    detailed arguments were raised by Miss Isherwood for the first time  at
    the hearing.

26. Although Dr Balu did  not  have  access  to  medical  records,  we  are
    satisfied that the FtT took full account at  [25]  and  [26]  that  the
    report  was  prepared  by  an  experienced  and  qualified   consultant
    psychiatrist whose opinion was based on a consultation in which he used
    his expertise to examine the appellant and  observe  his  symptoms  for
    himself.  The  report  did  record  the  concerns  of  the  person  who
    accompanied the appellant to the examination. The results of the mental
    state examination were set out at length at [25].  In summary  the  FtT
    was entitled to accept the conclusions of Dr Balu and conclude that  Mr
    O had serious and significant symptoms notwithstanding the concerns  at
    [17]. It was rationally open to the FtT to give weight to the  findings
    of the report.

27. The FtT was also entitled  to  take  into  account  other  evidence  in
    relation to Mr O's memory  including  his  previous  evidence  that  he
    suffers from  memory  problems,  the  difficulties  he  had  explaining
    himself in the  credibility  interview  and  his  presentation  at  his
    appeal. Mr O was not able to give oral evidence at the FtT. At [30] the
    FtT recorded

         "However there was no indication from him  that  he  understood  or
         even heard me. He did not speak at all or  make  eye  contact.  His
         presentation  before  me  appeared  consistent   with   Dr   Balu's
         description of his presentation in his medical report".

28. The FtT fully considered the contents of the psychiatric report and was
    entitled to attach weight to it. The FtT's factual findings in  respect
    of the report in light of the contents of the  report  itself  and  the
    additional matters set out above do not reach  the  high  threshold  of
    perversity alleged.

    Conclusion

29. It follows that none of the SSHD's grounds of appeal are made  out  and
    his appeal is dismissed.

    Decision

30. The FtT decision does not contain an error of law and we do not set  it
    aside.


Signed      Date

UTJ Owens
Upper Tribunal Judge Owens   7 August 2019

