
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber   Appeal Number: EA/03108/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2018             |                                |
|                                |On 15th November 2018           |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mrs O P
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Ashfield Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a Russian Federation national, born on 10th  June  1982,
    was granted permission to appeal a determination of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge B A Morris, which dismissed the  appellant's  appeal,  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  against   a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 8th March 2017

 2. A short chronology of the immigration history showed that the appellant
    came to the United Kingdom in 2009 and forged a relationship with  MSJ,
    a British national.  The appellant obtained leave to remain  under  the
    immigration rules from 2010 to 2012.  She had a British  citizen  child
    born 19 December 2010. Her then partner, MSJ,  took  up  employment  in
    Amsterdam on 1st of December 2011. On 29th June 2011 the appellant  and
    MSJ married. The appellant moved to Amsterdam and between October  2011
    August 2014 the appellant obtained a Dutch residence  card  valid  from
    5th June 2012 to 4th June 2017. On 1st  September  2014  the  appellant
    returned to the UK and  in  September  2014  was  granted  a  five-year
    residence card due to expire on 27th November 2019 (under the  Surinder
    Singh Rule).  She separated from her husband in  2015.   She  submitted
    her application for a residence card in June 2016.  In her  application
    the appellant stated she had no contact with her husband  and  she  did
    not know where he lived, their relationship had broken down and she had
    experienced non-violent abuse during the course of the relationship.

 3. On 27th February 2018 she received a divorce petition from her  husband
    who appeared to live in Spain.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  application  dated  23
    June 2016 for an EEA residence card as the family member of  a  British
    citizen M S J  who  had  previously  exercised  treaty  rights  in  the
    Netherlands.  The Secretary of State stated that there was no  evidence
    that the appellant had terminated her relationship with her sponsor  in
    the form of  decree  absolute.   Her  application  was  considered  but
    refused under regulation 9 of the EEA regulations because she  had  not
    shown she was a direct family member  of  a  British  citizen  who  had
    exercised treaty rights om another EU member state.

 5. The decision letter specifically identified that a copy  of  the  birth
    certificate for OJ, the minor British Citizen son, had  been  produced,
    and, it was stated that  the  evidence  had  been  considered  but  the
    appellant not shown that her sponsor (MSJ)  was  a  'qualified  person'
    under the regulations.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  submitted  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the EEA regulations, the respondent
    had failed to give proper consideration to relevant matters, had failed
    to have regard to the appellant's unique circumstances, and  failed  to
    consider  the  human  rights  of  the  appellant.  In  particular   the
    appellant's particular circumstances, it was  submitted,  the  decision
    gave rise to  discrimination.  The  relationship  had  ended  owing  to
    domestic violence and it was clear  that  had  she  applied  under  the
    immigration rules, she would have been in a better  position  than  she
    now found  herself.  There  was  disparity  in  the  treatment  of  the
    appellant and this violated EU law principles of  equal  treatment  and
    proportionality as well as violating the fundamental rights of partners
    of EEA nationals who had been victims of domestic violence.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 11 that there  was  no
    evidence to show when the appellant's husband began residing  in  Spain
    no evidence to show that he resided in  Spain  as  a  worker,  a  self-
    employed person, self-sufficient person or student (Regulation 6 of the
    EEA Regulations). The appellant had not lived with Spain. The appellant
    stated in her witness statement that her husband had started employment
    in the UK on 9 August 2014 but there was no evidence as to how long  he
    was employed and no evidence as to any  further  employment  in  UK  or
    elsewhere.  His home address was now given as Spain (paragraph 10)  and
    it was from there that he had issued  divorce  proceedings.  The  judge
    found  only  that  the  appellant  had  not  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 9 or Regulation 14(2).

Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 8. The application for permission asserted that

    (i)   the judge erred in failing to refer the matter for a  preliminary
    ruling by the court of justice of the European Union under article  267
    of the Treaty on the functioning of the European Union

    (ii) the judge's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  procedure
    rules

    (iii)  the decision was not in  accordance  with  EEA  regulations  and
    directive

    (iv)   the judge failed to engage with  the  principle  of  equivalence
    point decision was not in the EU directive

    Permission was refused on the basis of ground (i) but granted because

    'it is arguable that the tribunal may have erred in not  engaging  with
    the issue raised by the appellant'.

The Hearing


 9. At the hearing, Mr Malik confirmed that he did not  draft  the  grounds
    but argued that the appellant  had  a  derivative  right  of  residence
    further to Regulation 16 and should  be  afforded  retained  rights  of
    residence under Article 10.  He did not pursue, sensibly  in  my  view,
    much of the detail of the grounds as drafted.

10. Mr Melvin agreed that none of the facts were contested and although not
    conceding the matter outright, agreed that it  appeared  the  appellant
    had a right of residence card on the facts, owing the existence of  the
    child.

Conclusions


11. As the First-tier Tribunal recorded, there was  no  evidence  that  the
    sponsor was exercising treaty rights in Spain  and  the  appellant  had
    never lived in Spain. The husband  was  clearly  no  longer  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK (further to Regulation 9 - the  Surinder  Singh
    principle) because he had left the United Kingdom. The  evidence  given
    was that he served the applicant with divorce  proceedings  from  Spain
    and lived there.  There was no firm evidence as to when her husband had
    left the UK and established himself abroad such that the appellant  can
    establish a retained right of residence under Regulation 10.  Under the
    Directive 2004/38/EC, Article 7(2) the applicant is a family member for
    as long as the EU national (in  this  case  the  British  citizen)  was
    exercising treaty rights in the host member state.

12. The  appellant's  application,  however,  had  clearly  identified  the
    British citizen child and the evidence demonstrated that the  appellant
    had sole and primary care for the child in the UK.

13. The judge failed to consider whether the decision was contrary  to  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016,  which  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  in  general  terms,  did
    argue.  It was contended also that the respondent had  arrived  at  the
    decision without due consideration of the facts.

14. It is evident that the judge failed to address Regulation 16. This sets
    out as follows:

    'Derivative right to reside


    16.-   (1)   A person has a  derivative  right  to  reside  during  any
         period in which the person-


             (a) is not an exempt person; and


             (b) satisfies each of the criteria in one or more of
             paragraphs (2) to (6).


         (2)      The criteria in this paragraph are that-


             (a) the person is the primary carer of an EEA national; and


             (b) the EEA national-


                  (i)  is under the age of 18;


                  (ii) resides in the United Kingdom as a self-sufficient
                  person; and


                  (iii)      would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom
                  if the person left the United Kingdom for an indefinite
                  period.


         (3)      The criteria in this paragraph are that-


             (a) any of the person's parents ("PP") is an EEA national who
             resides or has resided in the United Kingdom;


             (b) both the person and PP reside or have resided in the
             United Kingdom at the same time, and during such a period of
             residence, PP has been a worker in the United Kingdom; and


             (c) the person is in education in the United Kingdom.


         (4)      The criteria in this paragraph are that-


             (a) the person is the primary carer of a person satisfying the
             criteria in paragraph (3) ("PPP"); and


             (b) PPP would be unable to continue to be educated in the
             United Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for an
             indefinite period.


         (5)      The criteria in this paragraph are that-


             (a) the person is the primary carer of a British citizen
             ("BC");


             (b) BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and


             (c) BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or in
             another EEA State if the person left the United Kingdom for an
             indefinite period.


         (6)      The criteria in this paragraph are that-


             (a) he person is under the age of 18;


             (b) the person does not have leave to enter, or remain in, the
             United Kingdom under the 1971 Act;


             (c) the person's primary carer is entitled to a derivative
             right to reside in the United Kingdom under paragraph (2), (4)
             or (5); and


             (d) the primary carer would be prevented from residing in the
             United Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for an
             indefinite period.


         (7)      In this regulation-


             (a) "education" excludes nursery education but does not
             exclude education received before the compulsory school age
             where that education is equivalent to the education received
             at or after the compulsory school age;


             (b) "worker" does not include a jobseeker or a person treated
             as a worker under regulation 6(2);


             (c) an "exempt person" is a person-


                  (i)  who has a right to reside under another provision of
                  these Regulations;


                  (ii) who has the right of abode under section 2 of the
                  1971 Act(13);


                  (iii)      to whom section 8 of the 1971 Act(14), or an
                  order made under subsection (2) of that section(15),
                  applies; or


                  (iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom.


         (8)      A person is the "primary carer" of another  person  ("AP")
         if-


             (a) the person is a direct relative or a legal guardian of AP;
             and


             (b) either-


                  (i)  the person has primary responsibility for AP's care;
                  or


                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for AP's care with
                  one other person who is not an exempt person.


         (9)      In paragraph (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) or (5)(c), if the role of
         primary carer is shared with  another  person  in  accordance  with
         paragraph (8)(b)(ii), the words "the person"  are  to  be  read  as
         "both primary carers".


         (10)     Paragraph (9) does not apply if the person with whom  care
         responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to  reside  in
         the United Kingdom as a result of  this  regulation  prior  to  the
         other person's assumption of equal care responsibility.


         (11)     A person is not be regarded as having  responsibility  for
         another person's care for the purpose of paragraph (8) on the  sole
         basis of a financial contribution towards that person's care.


         (12)     A person does not have a derivative right to reside  where
         the Secretary of  State  or  an  immigration  officer  has  made  a
         decision under regulation 23(6)(b), 24(1), 25(1), 26(3)  or  31(1),
         unless that decision is  set  aside  or  otherwise  no  longer  has
         effect.


15. The applicant is not an exempt person as she has  no  right  to  reside
    under another provision under the EEA regulations.  I  have  found  she
    cannot comply with Regulation 10, specifically 10(5): She did not cease
    to be a family member of a  qualified  person  on  the  termination  of
    marriage under  Regulation  (5)  (a).  Specifically,  Regulation  10(5)
    refers to the termination of the marriage.  Baigazieva [2018] EWCA  Civ
    1088, however, confirms that this can be on the initiation  of  divorce
    proceedings, but this  does  not  assist  the  appellant.  Indeed,  the
    Directive under Article  7(1)  and  (2)  confirms  that  the  right  of
    residence is extended to family members  accompanying  or  joining  the
    Union citizen in  the  host  member  state.   Crucially  there  was  no
    evidence that MSJ was living in the United Kingdom at the date  of  the
    initiation of the divorce proceedings - rather  the  reverse  from  the
    divorce petition.

16. Nor can the appellant succeed under Regulation 10(3)  and  (4)  because
    under Regulation 2, 'general interpretation', 'an EU national' means  a
    national of an EEA State  who  is  not  also  a  British  citizen'  and
    Regulation 9 qualifies this only under certain provisions as follows:

    9.-    (1)    If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
         Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F") of a
         British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national.


         (2)      The conditions are that-


             (a) BC-


                  (i)  is residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-
                  employed person, self-sufficient person or a student, or
                  so resided immediately before returning to the United
                  Kingdom; or


                  (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence in an
                  EEA State;


             (b) F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and


             (c) F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.


    There was no evidence that MSJ was  residing  in  an  EEA  state  as  a
    worker, self-employed person or was  self-sufficient  or  had  acquired
    permanent residence in an EEA state. He had returned under the Surinder
    Singh principle but had subsequently left the United Kingdom.

17. Therefore, on the facts as presented, the applicant can  succeed  under
    Regulation 16 (4).  She is the primary carer of a British  Citizen  who
    would be unable to continue to reside in the UK  or  other  EEA  member
    state if the applicant was unable to remain in the United Kingdom.   As
    a Russian national she would have to  remove  her  child  to  her  home
    country which is outside the European Union.   None  of  the  elemental
    facts were in dispute.  I therefore set aside and remake  the  decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  allow  the  appeal  of  Mrs  P  under
    Regulation 16.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date 8th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

