
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/03543/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 12th February 2018                  |        On 5th March 2018            |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                 Naveed Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. At the outset of the proceedings before me, Ms Everett on behalf of the
    Respondent applied for an adjournment of this matter. This was  on  the
    basis that the proceedings be stayed pending a decision in the  Supreme
    Court wherein the Respondent was seeking to challenge the principle set
    out in Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.  I refused the application  as
    I considered that I was bound by the principle in Khan and therefore  I
    would proceed to make a decision on the instant matter. Ms Everett made
    no further submissions.

 2. The Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent,  made  on
    11th March 2016, to refuse his application for a residence card  as  an
    extended family member of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.  This  was
    on the basis that it was established by the reported decision  in  Sala
    (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) that the  Tribunal  had
    no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

 3. It has now been held that Sala was wrongly decided.  There is indeed  a
    right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against decisions  taken  by
    the Respondent refusing applications pursuant to the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 (see Khan above).

 4. The decision under challenge  in  the  present  proceedings  was  taken
    pursuant to the 2006 Regulations. Therefore it follows it was an  error
    of law for the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction.

 5. This means that the appeal has not yet started its process through  the
    First-tier Tribunal and therefore there remains outstanding  a  triable
    issue which needs to be resolved.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
    allowed therefore to the extent that the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined fully on its merits.

Decision

In dismissing the appeal for want of jurisdiction  the  First-tier  Tribunal
materially erred in law.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed  to  the  extent  that
this appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Saffer) to  be
determined on its merits.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     26 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
