
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03201/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 October 2017                            |On 23 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                    [N I]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Vidal of Counsel, instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction and background

1.   This is the appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss her appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  to
    issue  a  derivative  residence  card  under  paragraph  15A   of   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on  [  ]  1978.  Her
    immigration history was fully set out by the respondent in her  refusal
    letter dated 18 November 2015.  The appellant  has  one  child  by  her
    former husband or partner, [AN].  The child, [WN], was born in  the  UK
    on [ ] 2010.   [WN] is a British citizen  by  virtue  of  his  father's
    nationality.  The birth certificate was issued and listed [AN]  as  the
    father and the appellant as the mother.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The hearing came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  A.M.  Black
    (the Immigration Judge) on 25 January 2017. The Immigration Judge  gave
    her decision within five days of the hearing.  She set  out  fully  the
    requirements of the EEA Regulations and she indicated the parameters of
    the dispute between the parties, noting that it was accepted  that  the
    mother was the primary carer of [WN], who had been born in the  UK  and
    had lived here all his life.  However, it had not been accepted by  the
    respondent, and was  ultimately  found  to  be  the  incorrect  by  the
    Immigration Judge, that [WN]'s father, who had registered  the  child's
    birth, had severed all connections with the child.  The child  appeared
    to be an exempt person because he was British, and  the  appellant  had
    failed to demonstrate to the civil standard that  the  child  would  be
    unable to reside in the UK if she were required to leave.

4.   The Immigration Judge summarised  the  grounds  of  appeal,  indicating
    that although there had been contact between father and child after the
    child's birth that contact had ceased,  and  the  father  had  made  no
    further contribution to the child's upbringing nor, indeed, did he have
    any involvement with the child's day-to-day life.  The appellant  lived
    with his sister and her niece and nephew,  both  of  whom  had  special
    needs.  She took an active role in  their  upbringing  and  care.   The
    appellant satisfied the criteria for the EEA  Regulations  and  it  was
    unnecessary to pursue an Article 8 claim because there were no  removal
    directions.

5.   The appellant submitted a bundle of  documents  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The same bundle  of  documents  was  replicated  before  this
    Tribunal.  Unfortunately, there were some issues about the numbering of
    that bundle and it proved difficult to follow, but I have been assisted
    in that regard by Ms Vidal, who represents the appellant.

6.   The Immigration Judge  effectively  rejected  the  appellant's  account
    that the child's father wanted "nothing more to  do  with  the  child".
    She pointed out that the father had attended the child when he was born
    in hospital.  Although that was perhaps not the most  important  issue,
    it was an issue that the Immigration Judge focused  on.   In  addition,
    there had been irregular contact over the  years  between  the  child's
    father and the child which  appears  to  have  ceased  in  August  2015
    according to the appellant, when the father attended a New Year  family
    celebration.

7.   The Immigration Judge expressed concerns over  the  witnesses  she  had
    heard. She did not hear from the father, but  she  did  hear  from  the
    appellant and noted the evidence that had been given about  the  father
    coming to the hospital to see his son.  Her oral evidence that  he  was
    present at the time of the birth was obviously correct.  She  initially
    said that he was in the delivery room but later said he was outside the
    door.  By contrast, the appellant's sister told the Tribunal  that  she
    was in the waiting room at the hospital during the birth and  that  the
    father did not arrive until after the birth.

8.   The appellant was asked what kind of things the child  and  father  had
    done together when he visited, and she replied  he  did  not  take  the
    child out because he did not want to be seen around with the child  and
    there appeared to be an issue about the child being born in  the  first
    place in that it appears to have been the appellant's evidence that the
    father wanted the child to be aborted.

9.   The Immigration Judge found that the evidence did  not  sit  well  with
    the fact that the  child's  father  attended  the  registry  office  to
    register the birth using his own surname, which is relatively uncommon.
     The child was by the date of the hearing attending a  school  and  his
    name is in the public domain.  The child has a British passport,  which
    his father clearly applied for, and those were not the actions, in  the
    Immigration Judge's views, of a man who seeks to avoid his relationship
    with his son becoming known to his family.

10.  The appellant's sister told the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  child's
    father had attended a family  celebration  in  August  2015.   On  that
    occasion she had spoken to him about introducing the child to his  step
    family.  He had told her that this would never happen.   The  appellant
    and her sister claim they had not seen the  child's  father  since  the
    child's birth.  When asked whether the appellant's sister had told  the
    appellant about this conversation she said "no".  The Immigration Judge
    observed in paragraph 17 of the decision: "..., if she is believed,  as
    she told me, the conversation was the reason that he stayed  away  from
    the child, I would expect the appellant's sister mentioned  it  to  the
    appellant".

11.  The Immigration  Judge  was  therefore  not  at  all  happy  with  this
    evidence, finding that it was inconceivable that the appellant and  her
    sister had not discussed the potential reasons for the  child's  father
    stopping visits, irrespective of  the  nature  of  those  visits.   The
    child's sister's account of this conversation does not have a  ring  of
    truth about it, in the Immigration Judge's view.

12.  The claimed last contact, being in August 2015, was a month before  the
    application was signed by the appellant and it was anticipated that she
    would have been told by that time that the application  would  only  be
    successful if she could demonstrate the child would be unable to reside
    in the UK if she were required to leave pursuant to Regulation  15A(4A)
    (c) of the EEA Regulations.

13.  Taking the evidence in the round, the Immigration Judge found  that  it
    was likely that the reason for the claimed absence of  contact  between
    father and child was to promote the prospects of a  successful  outcome
    for the appellant. The Immigration Judge was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's father had the limited role in the child's  upbringing,  as
    had been claimed.  She rejected the appellant's  evidence,  finding  it
    incredible and unreliable.  She pointed out  that  she  was  unable  to
    accept that the appellant had demonstrated the child would be unable to
    reside in the UK if the first appellant were required to leave.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson gave permission  to  appeal  on  17
    August 2017 because he considered there to be some  arguable  merit  in
    the grounds which state that the First-Tier Tribunal failed  to  attach
    sufficient weight to the documents that had been produced  in  addition
    to the oral evidence, including those emanating from the church and the
    school which the child attended. Judge Robertson also  gave  permission
    to appeal on the other grounds including the ground which alleged  that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  consider   adequately   the
    appellant's sisters evidence.

15.  Oral  submissions  were  made  by  both  representatives  before  Upper
    Tribunal.  Ms Vidal referred me to those parts of the evidence that, in
    her submission, had not been fully considered by the Immigration Judge.
     It was pointed out by reference to page A89, in the second  bundle  of
    documents lodged, that there was a document from  [  ]  Primary  School
    which apparently confirmed that it was [NI], the  mother,  who  brought
    the child to school and collected him every  day  and  as  far  as  the
    school was aware she was the primary carer.

16.  Later in submissions, I was referred to a psychological  assessment  of
    the child, which suggested that the child had regular contact with  his
    father, but it has been  pointed  out  this  post-dates  the  decision.
    There is no application before the Tribunal for fresh  evidence  to  be
    adduced.

17.  I was also referred to informal documents from the local church,  which
    suggested that the mother was the person that the  church  had  contact
    with and as far as they were concerned she was  the  person  that  they
    regarded as "the (main) person in the child's life" (see  C1  and  C2).
    She attended regularly the [ ] Church on Hatton Road, which is situated
    in  [  ]  Middlesex.   During  the  four-year  period  of  her   active
    participation in the church as a regular attender she came with her son
    on Sundays and for major programmes.  She  was  primarily  responsible.
    There was no reference to the father in the documents at C  1  and  C2,
    which are both marked "To Whom  It  May  Concern".  The  documents  are
    essentially informal in character and do not have the status of witness
    statements. It will be necessary later to what weight should attach  to
    them.

18.  Unfortunately, there are two page A94s in both the bundles  which  have
    been produced. I was referred to A94 in the most recent bundle. The A94
    in question was a document registering the child at  the  [  ]  Primary
    School, listing the parent as being the appellant and  not  naming  the
    father. Indeed, there is no reference to the father.  I was invited  to
    conclude that the child was primarily cared for  by  the  mother.   The
    Immigration Judge had been remiss not consider this  evidence,  it  was
    argued.  The evidence was material to the outcome.   The  decision  was
    unsound, and I was invited to set it aside. I was invited to remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal, rather than re-make the decision  in
    the Upper Tribunal, as key evidence had been omitted and not  to  adopt
    the more usual  option  of  remaking  the  decision  within  the  Upper
    Tribunal in accordance with section 12 (2) (b) of the Tribunals, Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.

19.  The respondent, however, did  not  accept  any  of  these  submissions,
    pointing out  that  the  decision  was  a  sound  one,  reached  having
    carefully analysed the documentation produced, albeit that not all  the
    documents were referred to.  It was accepted by the respondent that the
    appellant was the primary carer for the child. However,  after  hearing
    all the evidence, the Immigration Judge had  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence, as she was entitled to. The Immigration Judge concluded  that
    the child's father continued to be a person  who  would  care  for  the
    child in the United Kingdom and therefore the child did not fall within
    the terms of the Regulations and specifically regulation 15 A (4A). The
    appellant was not able to rely on a derivative right of residence under
    15A of the EEA Regulations.

20.  Ms Vidal had a right of  reply  and  she  exercised  that  right.   She
    pointed out that this was a case of the  upmost  importance  for  those
    involved, a sentiment  with  which  I  entirely  agree.   The  evidence
    relating to the sister, she  said,  primarily  went  to  the  issue  of
    contact, the father was not a  figure  in  the  child's  life  and  she
    reiterated that the decision was not one that the Immigration Judge was
    entitled to come to based on the evidence. At the end of the hearing, I
    rose to consider my decision which I will later give.

Conclusion

21.  Unlike the FTT, the Upper Tribunal has not had the opportunity to  hear
    the witnesses give evidence, let alone make a balanced judgment  as  to
    the weight to be given to that evidence set against  the  documents  to
    which I have been taken. It it is incumbent upon the Upper Tribunal  to
    accord proper respect to the decision of the Tribunal below.

22.  Although it is regrettable that the Immigration Judge did not  consider
    all the documentation with as much care as she might have done,  having
    regard to the concession that the respondent made  that  the  appellant
    was the primary carer for the child, I find that this does  not  amount
    to a material error of law.  The documents which the Immigration  Judge
    overlooked appear tangential to the main issue: the extent to which the
    child would be unable to  reside  in  the  UK  if  the  appellant  were
    required to leave the UK  (see  regulation  15A(2)(b)).  The  documents
    produced go primarily to indicate who other people thought the  primary
    carer of the child was. Of course, there has been no evidence from  the
    child's father or indeed the child himself. The test is not whether  or
    not the appellant is  the  primary  carer.  That  is  accepted  by  the
    respondent.  It is the third  limb  of  the  test  that  is  in  issue:
    whether the child would be unable to remain in the UK if the  appellant
    were required to leave the UK.

23.  The Immigration Judge fully considered  that  issue  in  her  decision.
    She reached a decision that she was entitled to come to  based  on  the
    evidence, having appraised the material parts of that evidence.

24.  In addition, the Immigration Judge fully considered the welfare of  the
    child in reaching her decision. However, the need to put the welfare of
    the child of the heart of the  decision  was  essentially  incorporated
    within the 2006 Regulations. I consider  the  Immigration  Judge  fully
    considered  the  provisions  of  regulation  15A(2)(b)(iii),   in   her
    decision.

25.  Accordingly, the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  dismiss  the
    appeal against the respondent's refusal to issue a derivative residence
    card in her case.

26.  The Immigration Judge made an anonymity direction. There is  no  appeal
    against that decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal under the 2006 Regulations is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 7 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 7 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
