
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03517/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 August 2017                        |On 13 September 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                               ms iwona deptka
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented at the hearing
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant was neither in attendance nor represented at the  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal.  The Tribunal's file contains a  copy  of  a
    notice sent on 9 August 2017  to  both  the  appellant  and  her  legal
    representatives at the address provided for such service.  This  notice
    identifies the date, place and time of the hearing.

 2. Attempts were made by the clerk to the Tribunal,  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing, to contact the appellant and her  legal  representatives.  The
    representatives  indicated  that  they  were  not  instructed  for  the
    purposes of  the  instant  hearing.  Contact  was  not  made  with  the
    appellant.

 3. In all the circumstances of the case and absent any explanation for the
    failure of the appellant to attend, I concluded  that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the hearing of this appeal in  the
    appellant's absence.

First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 4. The appellant is a national of  Poland,  born  22  October  1985.   She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 8 March 2017 to remove her from  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The
    immigration decision itself incorporates the following text:

         "A decision has now been  taken  to  remove  you  from  the  United
         Kingdom in accordance with Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum
         Act 1999 (which applies by virtue of Regulations  23(6)(a)/23(6)(c)
         pursuant to Regulation 26(3) and 32(2) of the EEA Regulations)."

 5. A notice accompanying the removal decision headed "Notice to  a  person
    liable to removal the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2016" contains three tick boxes, each  of  which  specify  a  different
    legislative provision and reason for  the  decision  being  made  under
    Section 10 of the 1999 Act.  The first of the  tick  boxes  relates  to
    regulation 23(6)(a) of the 2016 EEA Regulations - this is  not  ticked.
    Neither is the third box ticked. The second of the boxes is ticked, and
    reads as follows:

         "By virtue of Regulation 23(6)(c) and 32(2) a person in respect  of
         whom removal directions may be given in accordance with Section  10
         of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as: a person  whose  removal
         is justified on the grounds of misuse  of  a  right  to  reside  in
         accordance with  Regulation  26(3)  of  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2016."

 6. The aforementioned  rubric  is  followed  by  a  box  headed  "Specific
    Statement of Reasons".  The  contents  of  the  box  specify  that  the
    appellant was engaged in conduct which "appears intended to  circumvent
    the requirement to be a qualified person", it  further  being  asserted
    therein that the appellant has been rough sleeping which is  "deemed  a
    misuse a right to reside" in the United Kingdom.

 7. The appeal in the First-tier Tribunal came before  FtT  Judge  Bartlett
    and, in a decision of 9 June 2017, was dismissed.   In  a  lengthy  and
    comprehensive decision Judge Bartlett concluded that the  Secretary  of
    State had  not  demonstrated  that  the  appellant  fell  foul  of  the
    requirements of regulation 23(6)(c) of the 2016 EEA Regulations in that
    it had not been demonstrated that she had misused a right to reside.

 8. As indicated above the First-tier Tribunal, nevertheless, dismissed the
    appeal, doing  so  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  fell  foul  of
    regulation 23(6)(a) because she had not demonstrated  that  she  was  a
    qualified person.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gillespie:

         "2.  There is arguable merit to the ground proposed:  namely,  that
             the decision to remove having based solely upon a  finding  by
             the respondent that the appellant had committed  a  misuse  of
             rights under Section 23(6)(c)  of  the  Regulations,  and  the
             learned judge having found this ground of removal not to  have
             been proven by the respondent, the learned judge erred in  law
             in nevertheless dismissing the  appeal  on  the  grounds,  not
             having been advanced by the respondent in deciding to  remove,
             that the appellant  had  no  right  to  remain  under  Section
             23(6)(a) of the Regulations."

Setting aside of the FtT's Decision

10. In the days leading up to the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    Secretary of State, by way of an email from  Miss  Isherwood  dated  23
    August 2017, sought to withdraw her case in accordance with rule 17  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  It was  recognised
    by the Secretary of State that the FtT had  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal for reasons which had not formed any part of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case.

11. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Miss Isherwood reiterated  the
    aforementioned stance accepting  that,  as  a  consequence,  the  Upper
    Tribunal should set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    thereafter remake the decision so as to allow the  appellant's  appeal.
    By  way  of  explanation  Miss  Isherwood  indicated  that  it  is  the
    respondent's position that it was procedurally unfair of the First-tier
    Tribunal find against the  appellant  on  a  point  not  taken  by  the
    Secretary of State. She further confirmed that the Secretary  of  State
    did not seek to pursue the regulation 23(6)(a) point before  the  Upper
    Tribunal  upon  re-making  of  the  decision  under  appeal,   although
    cautioned that such point may, if still appropriate, be  taken  against
    the appellant in the future.

12. Given this concession I need  say  no  more  than  I  concur  with  the
    Secretary of State's view.  It was plainly procedurally unfair  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal against the appellant on  a
    basis not pursued by  the  Secretary  of  State,  particularly  in  the
    absence of putting the appellant on notice that such a point was  going
    to be taken.  For that reason alone, the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside.

Re-making of Decision

13. The normal course in cases in which the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    has been set aside as a consequence  of  procedural  unfairness  is  to
    remit the appeal back to the First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  in  this
    case the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in  relation  to  the
    application of regulation 23(6)(b) i.e. misuse of rights, have not been
    the subject of challenge by the Secretary of State and the Secretary of
    State accepts that those findings  must  remain  standing.   Given  the
    continuing position of the Secretary of State not to pursue the  appeal
    on the basis of matters not originally in her mind when drawing up  the
    decision  under  challenge,  the  most  appropriate  course,  as   Miss
    Isherwood submitted, is for the appellant's appeal to be allowed and  I
    accordingly make that decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Upon remaking of the appeal by the Upper Tribunal,  the  appellant's  appeal
is allowed.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
