
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/03206/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 April 2018                           |  On 9 May 2018                   |
|                                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                               JUSTINA APPIAH
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel instructed by JF Law
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 14 September 1992. She is
    appealing against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana
    promulgated on 14 April 2017 to dismiss her appeal against the decision
    of the respondent dated 24 February 2016 to refuse her application
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulation 2006 ("the
    2006 Regulations") for a permanent residence card.



Relevant legislation

   2. In order to determine this appeal it is necessary to have careful
      regard to several parts of the 2006 Regulations. The relevant
      regulations are the following:

         Regulation 7(1)
          7.-(1) Subject to paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
         Regulations the following persons shall be treated  as  the  family
         members of another person-

         (a)his spouse or his civil partner;

         (b)direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who
         are-

         (i)under 21; or

         (ii)dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;





         Regulation 10(5)

         10.-(1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained the
         right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8), a person who
         satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         ......
          (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

         (a)he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person on the
         termination of the marriage or civil partnership of the qualified
         person;

         (b)he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
         Regulations at the date of the termination;

         (c)he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

         (d)either-

         (i)prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the termination
         of the marriage or the civil partnership the marriage or civil
         partnership had lasted for at least three years and the parties to
         the marriage or civil partnership had resided in the United Kingdom
         for at least one year during its duration;

         ......

          (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

         (a)is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA national, be
         a worker, a self-employed person or a self-sufficient person under
         regulation 6; or

         (b)is the family member of a person who falls within paragraph (a).





         Regulation 15(1)(b)
          15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to  reside
         in the United Kingdom permanently-

         ......

          (b)a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an EEA
         national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA
         national in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
         period of five years;




         Regulation 15(1)(f)
          15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to  reside
         in the United Kingdom permanently-

          ......

         (f)a person who-

         (i)has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and

         (ii)was, at the end of that period, a family member who has
         retained the right of residence.


   3. The 2006 Regulations transpose into domestic legislation the Citizens
      Directive (Directive 2004/38/EC "on the rights of citizen of the Union
      and their family members to move and reside freely within the
      territory of a member state") ("the Citizens Directive").  Although
      the Citizens Directive was not raised in the First-tier Tribunal or in
      submissions before me, given that the 2006 Regulations must be
      interpreted and applied consistently with the Citizens Directive
      unless that is impossible do so, I have had regard to the following
      provisions of the Citizens Directive, which are relevant to the issues
      in this appeal.


         Article 2: Definitions

         "Family member" means:


         (a) the spouse;


         (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a
         registered partnership, on the
         basis of the legislation of a Member State, if the legislation of
         the host Member State
         treats registered partnerships as equivalent to marriage and in
         accordance with the
         conditions laid down in the relevant legislation of the host Member
         State;


         (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are
         dependants and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point
         (b);

         Article 7: Right of residence for more than three months.


         All Union citizens shall have the right of residence on the
         territory of another Member State for
         a period of longer than three months if they:


         (a) are workers or self-employed persons in the host Member State;
         or


         (b) have sufficient resources for themselves and their family
         members not to become a burden on
         the social assistance system of the host Member State during their
         period of residence and
         have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member
         State; or


         (c) - are enrolled at a private or public establishment, accredited
         or financed by the host
         Member State on the basis of its legislation or administrative
         practice, for the principal
         purpose of following a course of study, including vocational
         training; and
         - have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member
         State and assure the
         relevant national authority, by means of a declaration or by such
         equivalent means as
         they may choose, that they have sufficient resources for themselves
         and their family
         members not to become a burden on the social assistance system of
         the host Member
         State during their period of residence; or


          (d) are family members accompanying or joining a Union citizen who
         satisfies the conditions
         referred to in points (a), (b) or (c).

         Article 13: Retention of the right of residence by family members
         in the event of divorce, annulment of marriage or termination of
         registered partnership

         1. Without prejudice to the second subparagraph, divorce, annulment
         of the Union citizen's
         marriage or termination of his/her registered partnership, as
         referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2
         shall not affect the right of residence of his/her family members
         who are nationals of a Member
         State.


         Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
         concerned must meet the conditions laid down in points (a), (b),
         (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


         2. Without prejudice to the second subparagraph, divorce, annulment
         of marriage or
         termination of the registered partnership referred to in point 2(b)
         of Article 2 shall not entail loss of the right of residence of a
         Union citizen's family members who are not nationals of a Member
         State where:


         (a) prior to initiation of the divorce or annulment proceedings or
         termination of the registered
         partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2, the marriage or
         registered partnership has
         lasted at least three years, including one year in the host Member
         State; or


         (b) by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred to in
         point 2(b) of Article 2 or by
         court order, the spouse or partner who is not a national of a
         Member State has custody of the
         Union citizen's children; or


         (c) this is warranted by particularly difficult circumstances, such
         as having been a victim of
         domestic violence while the marriage or registered partnership was
         subsisting; or


         (d) by agreement between the spouses or partners referred to in
         point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the spouse or partner
         who is not a national of a Member State has the right of access to
         a minor child, provided that the court has ruled that such access
         must be in the host Member State, and for as long as is required.


         Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the right of
         residence of the persons concerned shall remain subject to the
         requirement that they are able to show that they are workers or
         self-employed persons or that they have sufficient resources for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden on the
         social assistance system of the host Member State during their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of the family,
         already constituted in the host Member State, of a person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall be as
         defined in Article 8(4). Such family members shall retain their
         right of residence exclusively on personal basis.



         Article 18: Acquisition of the right of permanent residence by
         certain family members who are not nationals of a Member State


         Without prejudice to Article 17, the family members of a Union
         citizen to whom Articles 12(2)
         and 13(2) apply, who satisfy the conditions laid down therein,
         shall acquire the right of permanent residence after residing
         legally for a period of five consecutive years in the host Member
         State.



Factual Background

 4. On 4 December 2006 the appellant's father, a citizen of Ghana, married
    an EEA national (a citizen of the Netherlands) and on 12 December 2006
    they both moved to the UK. The genuineness of the marriage has not been
    questioned.

 5. On 31 December 2009 the appellant entered the UK with a valid EEA
    family permit as a family member of her father's wife.

 6. On 26 March 2010 the appellant applied for, and on 23 August 2010 was
    issued with, a residence card as a family member of an EEA national
    valid until 23 August 2015.

 7. On 21 November 2011 the appellant's father and wife divorced.

 8. On 8 August 2012 the appellant's father was issued a document
    certifying he had a permanent right of residence in the UK under
    Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations. He subsequently (in October
    2013) became a British Citizen.

 9. On 14 September 2013 the appellant attained the age of 21 years.

10. On 18 August 2015 the appellant applied for a permanent residence card
    as confirmation of a right to reside in the UK.

11. On 24 February 2016 the application was refused.

12. The appellant's education/work history in the UK is that she attended
    college from 2010 to 2013 and began working in a shop in 2015.

13. Whilst in the UK the appellant has been living with her father. She has
    two children, who were born in 2012 and 2016.

14. The respondent refused the application on the basis that the appellant
    did not meet the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006
    Regulations. The respondent's decision makes no reference to Regulation
    10(1)(f), and the respondent gave no consideration in the Reasons for
    Refusal letter to the conditions stipulated in Regulation 15(1)(f).

15. The reason given by the respondent in the Reasons for Refusal letter
    for refusing the application under Regulation 15(1)(b) was that the
    appellant had not shown that since turning 21 she had been dependent on
    an EEA national sponsor as she had been working at Primark and
    receiving Working Tax Credit and Child Tax Credit. In the Notice of
    Immigration Decision a different reason is given for refusing the
    application: that the appellant had failed to provide evidence that her
    EEA national sponsor resided in the UK in accordance with the 2006
    Regulations during the relevant five year period.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

16. The judge directed himself at paragraph 20 that the case fell to be
    determined by reference to Regulation 10 and Regulation 15 of the 2006
    Regulations. In paragraph 20 the judge referred to Regulation 15(1)(f).
    However, at paragraph 23 the judge proceed to assess whether the
    appellant met the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b).

17. At paragraph 24 the judge stated that the question for him to answer
    was whether the appellant has lived in the UK in accordance with the
    2006 Regulations for five years. He answered this question, also in
    paragraph 24, by concluding that the appellant ceased living in the UK
    in accordance with the 2006 Regulations in 2011 when her father
    divorced his wife. At paragraph 26 the judge stated:


             "The breakdown of [the appellant's] father's relationship with
             his spouse in 2011 put the appellant outside the protection of
             Community Law. I therefore find that the appellant has not
             lived in accordance with the regulations from 2001 until the
             present time."

  18. At paragraph 27 the judge commented that the issue of dependency did
      not arise but "in any event the appellant is not dependent on her
      father in the UK as she is working at Primark"

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

  19. The grounds argue that the judge erred by applying Regulation 15(1)(b)
      rather than 15(1)(f) and failing to appreciate that the appellant had
      lived for five years in accordance with the 2006 Regulations by the
      time of the divorce because she became a family member in December
      2006 when her father married an EEA national notwithstanding that she
      did not enter the UK until 2009.




  20. A further argument made in the grounds of appeal is that the judge did
      not recognise that there was only a need to show dependency prior to
      the appellant's admission to the UK and it was irrelevant that she
      subsequently, whilst in the UK, found employment.



  21. Before me, Mr Ume-Ezeoke, on behalf of the appellant made the
      following submissions:



   1) He argued that the appellant became a family member under the 2006
      Regulations upon her father marrying an EEA national in 2006 and it
      was an error of law for the judge to treat December 2009 (the date she
      entered the UK) as the starting point for assessment of her rights
      under the 2006 Regulations.




   2) He also argued that the judge erred by failing to recognise that the
      appellant retained a right of residence under Regulation 10(5) as
      consequence of her relationship with her father which meant that
      Regulation 10(6)(b) was satisfied.



  22. Ms Willocks-Briscoe acknowledged that the judge's assessment of
      Regulation 10(5) was confusing and it may be that, properly construed,
      the requirements are satisfied and the appellant retained a right of
      residence under that Regulation. However, she contended that if the
      judge erred in this respect it was not material as the appellant had
      failed to demonstrate a basis upon which she had resided in the UK for
      five years in accordance with the 2006 Regulations, which she was
      required to do in order to satisfy the condition stipulated in
      Regulation 15(1)(f)(i) of the 2006 Regulations.

Error of Law

  23. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the appellant
      acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK under Regulation
      15(1)(f) of the 2006 Regulations and the definition in Regulation
      10(5) of a "family member who has retained the right of residence".




  24. Although the judge referred to both Regulation 15(1)(f) and Regulation
      10(5), neither has been properly considered. The judge has not made a
      clear finding in respect of Regulation 10(5) and to the extent he
      found it was not satisfied it is not possible to discern the reason
      from the decision. It is also not clear if the judge has reached a
      conclusion about the applicability of Regulation 15(1)(f), given that
      he appears to have addressed only whether Regulation 15(1)(b) applies.
       These errors are material and accordingly the decision will need to
      be remade.



Remaking the Decision

  25. Before considering Regulation 15(1)(f) I pause to note that confusion
      appears to have arisen because the respondent refused the appellant's
      application on the basis that Regulation 15(1)(b) was not satisfied,
      without referring to Regulation 15(1)(f). It is clear (and it was not
      suggested otherwise by Mr Ume-Ezeoke and Ms Willocks-Briscoe) that
      Regulation 15(1)(b) is not, and could never have been, a viable route
      for the appellant to establish a right to permanent residence in the
      UK. Firstly, Regulation 15(1)(b) requires an applicant to be a family
      member of an EEA national. The appellant was not, at the time the
      application was made, a family member of an EEA national and had not
      been since her father divorced his wife in 2011. Secondly, Regulation
      15(1)(b) requires that the applicant must have resided in the UK with
      an EEA national for a continuous period of five years. It is clear
      that the appellant had not lived with her father's wife for five
      years.



  26. In order to consider whether Regulation 15(1)(f) is satisfied, I have
      considered, chronologically, the appellant's status under the 2006
      Regulation.



31 December 2009: Entry to UK

27. On 31 December 2009 the appellant entered the UK with a family permit
    as a family member of her father's wife. She was entitled to a family
    permit under Regulation 12 of the 2006 Regulations as a family member
    of her father's wife. She met the definition of a family member, under
    Regulation 7(1)(b)(i) of the 2006 Regulations, because she was under 21
    and a direct descendent of her father's wife.

  28. Although the appellant became entitled to apply for an EEA family
      permit to enter the UK as a family member of her father's wife in
      December 2006 when his father married and moved to the UK with his EEA
      national wife, the relevant date for assessing the appellant's
      entitlement to permanent residence is 31 December 2009 (the date she
      entered the UK as a family member of her father's wife). Mr Ume-
      Ezeoke's argument that the starting point is December 2006, which is
      when the appellant's father married, is not supported by the terms of
      Regulation 15(1)(f) which explicitly refer to the length of time the
      applicant must have resided in the UK. Nor does it accord with the
      scope of the 2006 Regulations, which, as summarised by Article 3 of
      the Citizen's Directive, are to apply to "Union citizens who move to
      or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a
      national, and to their family members..." Accordingly, the date of the
      appellant's entry to the UK is the starting point for assessing her
      rights under the 2006 Regulations.




23 August 2010: Appellant issued with a Residence Card

29. On 23 August 2010 the appellant was issued with a residence card as a
    family member of an EEA national valid until 23 August 2015. Her
    entitlement to a residence card arose under Regulation 17(1) of the
    2006 Regulations which provides that a residence card must be issued to
    a person who is a family member of a qualified person. It is common
    ground that when the residence card was issued the appellant was a
    family member of an EEA national and therefore that she was entitled to
    the card.

30. The appellant's right to reside in the UK under the 2006 Regulations
    arose from her relationship to her father's wife, not from the
    residence card itself. As made clear in Samsam (EEA: revocation and
    retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 at 18: "It is trite law that
    in EU cases, the residence document is the evidence of the right and
    not the source of it".  Therefore, the fact that a residence card was
    previously issued does not affect the assessment of whether the
    appellant has acquired a right to permanent residence.



21 November 2011: The appellant's father's divorce and the appellant's
retained right of residence under Regulation 10(5)

31. Until the divorce, the appellant was a family member of her father's
    wife pursuant to Regulation 7(1)(b)(i) (a direct descendent under 21
    years old of an EEA national's spouse).Once the divorce took place, the
    appellant ceased being the direct descendent of the spouse of an EEA
    national. She was therefore, as of 21 November 2011, no longer the
    family member of an EEA national.

32. Following the divorce, the potential route by which the appellant could
    retain a right of residence under the 2006 Regulations was by
    establishing that she was a family member who had retained the right of
    residence under Regulation 10(5).

33. In order for the appellant to fall within Regulation 10(5), there are
    several conditions to be satisfied. I consider each in turn:

      1) Firstly, under Regulation 10(5)(a), it must be established that the
         appellant ceased to be a family member of a qualified person on the
         termination of  the marriage. As explained above, it is clear that
         she did, as she was no longer the direct descendent, under
         Regulation 7(1)(b), of her father's (now former) wife. It was
         common ground that the father's wife was a "qualified person".

      2) Secondly, under Regulation 10(5)(b), the appellant must show that
         she was residing in the UK in accordance with the 2006 Regulations
         at the date of the divorce. It is accepted by both parties that, at
         the date of the divorce, the appellant was living in the UK in
         accordance with Regulation 7(1)(b)(i) as the daughter of the spouse
         of a qualified person under Regulation 6.  Accordingly, this
         condition of Regulation 10(5) is satisfied.

      3) Thirdly, under Regulation 10(5)(d)(i), the appellant must show that
         before the divorce the marriage between her father and his wife had
         lasted three years and her father and his wife had resided in the
         United Kingdom for at least one year during the marriage's
         duration. The evidence is clear, and it is not in dispute, that the
         duration requirements for the marriage in this regulation were
         satisfied.  It was raised that this Regulation could be interpreted
         as applying only to a spouse. However, both Regulation 10(5) and
         the corresponding Article of the Citizen's Directive (Article 3)
         are clear that it is applicable to "family members" and is not
         limited only to spouses. I am therefore satisfied that Regulation
         10(5)(d)(i) is satisfied.

      4) Fourthly, under Regulation 10(6), the appellant must show either
         (a) that (if she were an EEA national) she would be a worker, self-
         employed person or a self-sufficient person under Regulation 6; or
         (b) she is the family member of a person who (if he were an EEA
         national) would be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
         sufficient person under Regulation 6.  This condition is satisfied
         because, at the time of the divorce, the requirements of Regulation
         10(6)(b) were met as a result of the appellant's relationship with
         her father. This is because her father would, if he were an EEA
         national, have been a "worker", and because the appellant was his
         direct descendent under the age of 21 and consequently his "family
         member".

31 December 2014: Appellant has been in the UK for 5 years

34. By the end of December 2014 the appellant had been in the UK for five
    years.

35. To acquire a right to permanent residence under Regulation 15(1)(f) on
    that date, the appellant was required to show that:

      1) She had resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with the 2006
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and

      2) At the end of that period, she was "a family member who has
         retained the right of residence".

  36. In Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552 at 31, the Court of Appeal held that
      provided the conditions in Regulation 10(5) continue to be satisfied,
      after 5 years' continuous residence in the UK a non EEA national will
      be entitled to a permanent right of residence under Regulation
      15(1)(f).




  37. In Samson at 53, the Tribunal stated:



          "Residence in accordance with these regulations contemplates
         residence acquired under any of the rights recognised by the
         regulations and there is no need to have resided a continuous
         period of five years and only one category..."




  38. I am satisfied that between 31 December 2009 and 31 December 2014 the
      appellant resided in the UK in accordance with the 2006 regulations.
      She initially resided as a family member of her father's former wife
      in accordance with Regulation 7. She then resided as a family member
      who had retained a right of residence under Regulation 10(5) and (6).
      Throughout the period in question the appellant satisfied the
      requirements stipulated in regulation 10(6)(b) because she was a
      family member of a person (her father) who fell within regulation
      10(6)(a). Until 14 September 2013 she was a family member of her
      father because she was under 21; between 14 September 2013 and 31
      December 2014 she was his family member as his dependent (under
      Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii)). She was dependent because during this time
      she lived for free with her father, had no income, had a small child,
      and relied upon him for financial support.

Conclusion

  39. I am satisfied, for the reasons set out above, that the appellant
      retained a right of residence in the UK under the 2006 regulations
      following her father's divorce and that she has resided for a
      continuous period exceeding five years in the UK in accordance with
      the 2006 regulations. Consequently, she acquired a right to reside
      permanently in the UK under Regulation 15(1)(f).






Decision

  40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
      law and is set aside.




  41. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.


|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  5 May 2018           |

