

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03381/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 August 2017                      |On 30 August 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                           Efeose Francisca Ogbewi
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel instructed by Charles Ete & Co,
solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal to refuse her leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
   national,  pursuant  to  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
   Regulations 2006 (as amended), on  the  basis  that  her  marriage  is  a
   marriage of convenience.  The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.

Background

2. The appellant first came to the United Kingdom on 14 February 2005  on  a
   visit visa expiring 14 August 2005.  When it ran out, she did not  embark
   to Nigeria but remained in the United Kingdom without leave  and  made  a
   number of applications for EEA extended family member residence cards  in
   2010, 2011 and 2012, all without success.

3. The applicant claims to have met her husband  at  Church  in  June  2013,
   when he gave her a lift home.  They married on 10 October 2014 and on  20
   April 2015, the applicant made an application for a residence card as the
   spouse of an EEA citizen.  The supporting documents all dated  from  just
   before the marriage.  There were, it is now accepted, no photographs from
   Christmas 2014, as they did not spend it together.

First-tier Tribunal decision

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant  and
   his wife, but was not satisfied that the marriage was not a  marriage  of
   convenience.  There were some photographs of Christmas  2015  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge, which she regarded as 'staged'  and  to  which
   she gave little weight.  The evidence of the appellant  and  her  husband
   was extremely vague.

5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  at  [26]  by  saying  that  she  was
   surprised that there were no photographs from Christmas 2014 and that  no
   explanation for the absence of such photographs had been given.  In fact,
   the parties had told the Tribunal that they  did  not  spend  that  first
   Christmas together and so no photographs could have been expected.

6.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  the  marriage  to  be  one   of
   convenience and dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

7. The appellant advanced 3 grounds of appeal. Ground 1 related to [26]  and
   has merit, but the Upper Tribunal must consider whether the error therein
   is material on the basis of the totality  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   findings.

8. Ground 2 relates to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  surprise  that  the
   appellant's uncle provided neither a witness statement nor oral  evidence
   at her hearing.  The  grounds  of  appeal,  which  were  not  settled  by
   Counsel, assert that the appellant's husband told the Tribunal  that  the
   appellant's husband was no longer living in the United Kingdom.   Counsel
   who appears before me is not the Counsel who appeared at  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and the appellant has neither asked for the  Judge's  record  of
   proceedings nor produced the record of proceedings of Ms Appiah,  Counsel
   before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge's manuscript notes record that
   the husband was asked where his  uncle  was  living  now,  and  answered,
   Lythenshawe.

9. Ground 3 suggests that the Judge attached too much weight to  the  errors
   made by the husband in his oral evidence, and not enough  weight  to  his
   correct answers.

10. Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman granted permission on the basis  of  ground
   1, on the basis that the error about the Christmas 2014  was  capable  of
   amounting to a mistake of fact at the level  of  an  error  of  law.   He
   directed that the Judge be asked to clarify what was meant, but that  has
   not happened.

11. Judge freeman did not consider that grounds 2 and  3  were  arguable  on
   their own, though he did not exclude them from the grant of permission.

Rule 24 Reply

12. The respondent's Rule 24 Reply is generic in  [1],  [2]  and  [6].   The
   operative paragraphs of the Reply are [3]-][5]:

    "... 3.  The grounds of  appeal  amount  to  no  more  than  a  lengthy
    disagreement with findings properly open to the Judge on the  evidence.
    It is totally unrealistic to expect every last matter to be put to  the
    appellant in the circumstances where credibility is clearly  in  issue,
    they have been properly cross-examined,  and  there  is  an  evidential
    burden on them.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  entitled  to  make
    adverse findings on a lack of evidence.

    3.       The grounds are misconceived - weight  is  a  matter  for  the
    Judge.

    4.       The marriage was clearly a sham - the appellant has a  history
    of failed attempts to regularise her stay via the EEA  Regulations  and
    this is yet another contrived application. ..."

13. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

14. I heard oral submissions from Mr  Ezeoke  as  to  whether  there  was  a
   material error of law in this decision.  For a finding of fact to  amount
   to an  error  of  law,  it  must  meet  the  standard  of  irrationality,
   perversity and/or Wednesbury unreasonableness set out in the judgment  of
   Lord Justice Brooke in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for  the  Home
   Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  Mr Ezeoke accepted  that  the  point  at
   ground 1 was  a  narrow  one  but  submitted  that  it  was  nevertheless
   sufficient to render the First-tier Tribunal decision  unsound  and  that
   the decision should be set aside and remade.

15. I indicated at the hearing that it would not  be  necessary  for  me  to
   hear from Mr Bates.  I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

16. The question for the First-tier Tribunal was whether the marriage,  when
   entered into, was a marriage of convenience.  If it was,  this  appellant
   is not a spouse as defined by Regulation 2 of  the  EEA  Regulations  and
   cannot bring herself within Regulation  7  as  a  family  member  of  her
   claimed spouse.

17. It is right that the weight to be given to evidence is a matter for  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The contents of [26] are plainly  irrational.
   I therefore consider whether the remaining  findings  are  sufficient  to
   sustain the decision made by the Judge.

18. The Judge found at [22]-[28] that the appellant had  married  a  Spanish
   national  of  Ghanaian  origin;  that  his  evidence  was   'particularly
   unconvincing'.  The appellant said there were 5 people  at  her  wedding.
   Her husband said it was 4 people.  He could not remember the name of  the
   appellant's friend who attended as a witness for the ceremony,  nor  that
   her niece (her uncle's daughter) had been there.   He could not recognise
   the friend who was a  witness  in  the  Christmas  2015  photographs,  or
   identify one of the other people in the  photograph.   His  knowledge  of
   events in which he was supposed to have been a participant  was  so  weak
   that the Judge was unarguably  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  alleged
   events were a fabrication.

19. The Judge was entitled to place weight on the absence of  any  evidence,
   written or oral, from the uncle. The Judge's  manuscript  notes  indicate
   that the husband's evidence was that the uncle was still  in  the  United
   Kingdom at the date of hearing. The  appellant's  evidence  is  that  her
   sisters, who were also in the United Kingdom, did not attend the  wedding
   because they were busy with work and again, this is not indicative  of  a
   genuine wedding.

20. The findings at [22]-[25] and [27]-[28]  are  more  than  sufficient  to
   support a rational finding that the appellant's marriage was  a  marriage
   of convenience.

21. There is an error of law in [26] but I do not find  it  to  be  material
   and I uphold the First-tier Tribunal decision.

DECISION

22. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         25 August 2017                 Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


