
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03951/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                              |On 07 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MERCY [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Habtemariam, Anglian Immigration Law Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweet, promulgated on 6 December 2018. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 7 January 2019.



Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. The respondent applied for a derivative residence card  on  10  January
    2018, confirming that she was the primary carer of a British citizen.

 4. On  17  May  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  refuse  that
    application under Regulation 20 and 16(5) of the Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  on  the  basis  that  she  had  not
    demonstrated that her child "K" would be unable to reside in the United
    Kingdom or another EEA state if she were required to leave the  country
    indefinitely. The Secretary of State explained that K's father had been
    granted leave to remain outside the Rules on the basis that he was  K's
    primary carer, that the respondent lived with K, K's father and K2, who
    is said to be the respondent's child from another relationship. It was,
    therefore, considered that K could be cared for by his  father  if  the
    respondent was required to leave the United Kingdom.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge  concluded  that  the  respondent  met  the  requirements  of
    regulation 16 because he accepted that she shared care equally  with  S
    (her husband and K's father). Furthermore, the judge  took  account  of
    evidence before him including the emotional, medical and  psychological
    needs of K and concluded that he would not be able to reside in the  UK
    or another EEA state if the respondent left for an indefinite period.

The grounds of appeal

 6.  The  grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the  judge   accepted   the
    respondent's credibility without reference to the starting point  which
    was the decision of Judge Graham in  2017,  who  found  her  to  be  an
    unreliable witness who had manipulated the immigration system  via  she
    and her partner (S) entering into marriages of convenience and  seeking
    to pass off their child as that of another man. Secondly, it was argued
    that the judge failed to properly assess the case with correct test  in
    mind as set out in Patel v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2028.  Lastly,  it  was
    said that the judge used an artificial  test  in  concluding  that  the
    respondent would be leaving the country for an indefinite  period  when
    it was open to her to seek entry  clearance  to  return  by  making  an
    application under Appendix FM.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

The hearing

 8. Mr Tarlow relied upon the grounds, with reference to  the  findings  of
    Judge Graham that  the  respondent  and  her  partner  were  unreliable
    witnesses. He argued that there was nothing to stop K from  staying  in
    the United Kingdom with the father  looking  after  him  and  that  the
    reality was that the respondent could  apply  to  re-enter  the  United
    Kingdom under Appendix FM. Thus, the issue  was  whether  the  children
    could remain without her for the finite period in which it took her  to
    apply for entry clearance.

 9.  Mr  Habtemariam  contended  that  the  judge  had   directed   himself
    appropriately and recorded the previous determination at  [20]  of  the
    decision. He argued that the respondent was sharing  K's  care  equally
    and that she was not an exempt person as  in  Patel.  In  addition,  he
    emphasised the precarious position of K's father who was  not  able  to
    sponsor the respondent and as a result any separation would  be  of  an
    infinite duration. Lastly,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  K  to
    accompany the respondent to Ghana given the specialist care  he  needed
    for his mental health issues.  It was argued that if the respondent was
    removed, it was likely that K would go with her.

10. Mr Tarlow added only that the judge's reasoning at [25] did not  amount
    to the compulsion required by Patel.

11. At the end of the hearing, I announced that I would  be  upholding  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

12. The first ground of challenge related to the judge's treatment  of  the
    previous decision of Judge Graham. The judge made a direct reference to
    the decision at [20] but made no further mention of  it.  The  previous
    appeal resulted from the Secretary of  State's  refusal  to  issue  the
    respondent with a residence card as  evidence  of  retained  rights  of
    residence following divorce. It is the case that  the  respondent,  who
    gave evidence before Judge  Graham,  was  found  to  be  an  untruthful
    witness. The previous judge found that the respondent's marriage  to  a
    Portuguese  national  was  one  of  convenience  and  noted  that   her
    relationship with S (K's father) had continued throughout.

13. It is clear, that Judge Graham's findings did not relate  to  the  same
    issues which were part of the respondent's appeal before  Judge  Sweet.
    In the instant appeal, the respondent was relying on  K's  nationality,
    her relationship to K and medical evidence of K's condition.  Thus,  it
    is was not a material error of law for Judge Sweet to fail to  set  out
    the findings of the previous judge and to  state  that  those  findings
    were the starting point, as per Devaseelan.

14. The second ground concerned whether the judge used the correct test, as
    set out in Patel. It is said in the grounds that the  judge  failed  to
    explain why the child would not be able to reside in the United Kingdom
    with his father if the respondent was removed. The judge expressed  his
    findings succinctly, however the case advanced was not complicated. The
    respondent, S, K and K2 live together as a family unit and have done so
    even during their respective marriages to EEA nationals. They  recently
    married on another. The oral evidence of the respondent's  husband,  S,
    was that he would return to  Ghana  with  the  respondent  if  she  was
    removed  because  it  would  "be  difficult  for  him  emotionally  and
    practically as K needs help," S said that he worked nights  and  relied
    upon the respondent to look after the children and he did not  know  if
    the respondent's family in the United Kingdom could provide support  in
    her absence. S gave a longer explanation in his witness  statement,  in
    which he explained that he is not permitted to have recourse to  public
    funds under the terms of his Discretionary Leave and  relies  upon  his
    wife's earnings to pay their mortgage. At (19)  of  his  statement,  he
    states as follows "If Mercy was to leave the UK, it will mean the whole
    family will need to leave." The judge accepted all this evidence, which
    went unchallenged by Secretary of State's representative at the hearing
    and the judge further accepted at [24] that the respondent and  K  were
    joint carers of K and K2. Thus, there was  evidence  before  the  judge
    that K would be compelled to leave the United Kingdom if the respondent
    left because his father  would  accompany  his  mother  and  bring  the
    children as he would be unable to cope with the children  alone,  given
    K's special needs, or support the family financially for an  indefinite
    period.

15. Thirdly and lastly, the grounds contend that the judge erred in finding
    that the respondent would be separated from K for an indefinite  period
    when it was open to her to seek  entry  clearance  under  Appendix  FM.
    This last point can be disposed of swiftly.  The  respondent's  husband
    has only discretionary leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  which
    expires within a few months. His immigration status is  precarious  and
    he is not permitted to sponsor a partner to  join  him  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Accordingly, the judge  did  not  err  in  finding  that  the
    respondent's removal to  Ghana  was  likely  to  be  of  an  indefinite
    duration.

16. There was no material error in the approach of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date: 01 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
