
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03138/2015
                                                               ea/03139/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2016                    |On 1 September 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                  ARZU UYAR
                                RAMAZAN UYAR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is a citizen of Germany and she was born on 22  May
    1987. The second appellant is a citizen of Turkey and he was born on  4
    June 1982. The appellants are husband and wife.

 2. The appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Holt who in a determination of 7 March 2016 refused their  appeals  for
    an EEA residence card.

 3. The appellants maintain that Mrs  Uyar  is  exercising  Treaty  rights,
    doing so by working in her husband's  hairdressing  business  and  that
    they are both therefore entitled to an EEA residence card.

 4. The respondent did not agree, finding in her decision dated 21 November
    2015 that Mrs Uyar's  employment  had  not  been  demonstrated  by  the
    documents provided and that when multiple telephone calls were made  to
    her employer, her husband's business "A Few Good  Men",  there  was  no
    response.

 5. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal contained very little
    indeed by way of grounds but Ms Isherwood was prepared to  accept  that
    the brief statement in the box at section 6 of the appeal form on  page
    13 of 18 was sufficient to show the appeal was validly made.

 6. The appellants chose not to attend the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. At [13]-[16] Judge Holt found against them as follows:

         "13. There is no evidence that the 2nd appellant has rights to work
         in the United Kingdom given his Turkish nationality. Nonetheless  I
         note that the business "A Few Good Men2 which is allegedly the  1st
         appellant's employer appears, prima facie, to be his business. I so
         find because there is a Non-domestic rates demand form on  the  2nd
         appellant's file addressed to "Mr Ramazan Uyar T/A A Few Good  Men,
         62, Grosvenor Road, Tunbridge Wells Kent". I do not understand  the
         position that the 2nd appellant is apparently able  to  employ  his
         wife so that she can  exercise  Treaty  Rights  upon  which  he  is
         dependent.

         14.  In this case there are also a series of identical payslips  in
         the 1st appellant's name which do not appear to be remotely genuine
         because the tax, NI and total amount is  identical  every  week.  I
         take judicial notice that it is possible to buy wage slips  on  the
         internet.

         15.  Finally there is the deeply  unsatisfactory  letter  on  plain
         paper which simply says  "Dear  sirs,  I  confirm  that  arzu  uyar
         currently working with us. We do not take phone call if we are busy
         working. If you need to speak to employer please call [mobile phone
         number] Owner, A Few Good Men, 62 Grosvenor Road, Tunbridge Wells."
         [sic]

         16.  I am not remotely satisfied by the evidence  in  these  appeal
         which appear to be on the basis that the 1st appellant is  in  fact
         exercising Treaty Rights despite the lack of grounds of appeal.  In
         fact I would go as far as saying that much of  the  evidence  could
         amount to a fraud

 7. The appellants also did not attend the hearing before me. There was  no
    response when the court clerk telephoned the mobile  telephone  numbers
    in the application forms and letter from the first appellant  dated  24
    November 2015.

 8. The grounds of appeal are that:

      a. The first appellant has been  working  in  the  second  appellant's
         business  since  15  April  2015,  the  weekly  payslips  and  bank
         statements demonstrated this and the judge's  reasons  for  finding
         otherwise were not "objective"

      b. The second appellant had the right to run his business in  the  UK,
         confirmed by the respondent and HMRC

      c. The second appellant provided  a  letter  dated  24  November  2015
         explaining why the respondent's phone calls to the business had not
         been answered and the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  declining  to
         place weight on that letter

 9. After the hearing before Judge Holt  the  appellants  provided  further
    original financial documents which it would  appear  they  wish  to  be
    considered here. As those documents were not before Judge Holt they are
    not capable of showing error of law in his decision.

10. Ms Isherwood conceded ground (b) as the first appellant had  permission
    to run his business  under  the  Ankara  Agreement  and  his  wife  was
    entitled to exercise her Treaty rights by working in the business owned
    by her husband.  The  respondent  still  maintained  that  insufficient
    evidence of genuine employment for the second appellant  had  not  been
    provided and that First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt was entitled to refuse
    the appeal for the reasons given at [14] and [15] of the decision.

11. I find that I am in agreement  with  the  respondent  here.  The  first
    ground of appeal is really only a disagreement  with  the  reasons  for
    finding the payslips were not reliable evidence of  the  employment  of
    the second appellant. The judge was not obliged to find that  the  bank
    statements were sufficient to remedy the concerns about the  pay  slips
    in the  context  of  the  difficulty  the  respondent  had  in  seeking
    clarification by telephone. It was not disputed that the respondent had
    rung the business on the number provided but there had been no  answer.
    Judge Holt was entitled to place little weight  on  the  letter  of  24
    November 2015 about the  unanswered  telephone  calls  because  of  its
    format and wording.

12. The decision is not one that all judges would reach and is expressed in
    somewhat heightened terms. It remains the case that it was one open  to
    Judge Holt and does not disclose error on a point of law.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]    Date: 26 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

