
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03585/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2018                           |On 30 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                           Mr khurram usman khalid
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 5 January 1985.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 30 November 2015 to
    refuse to issue him with an EEA residence card as the  extended  family
    member of an Austrian national.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 21 February 2017, Judge C M Phillips  (the
    judge) found there was no valid  right  of  appeal  and  dismissed  the
    appeal for want of jurisdiction.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred in dismissing the appeal for want  of
    jurisdiction.  The grounds sought to distinguish Sala (EFMs:  right  of
    appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).

 5. On 5 September 2017, Judge Mark Davies refused  permission  to  appeal,
    finding that the judge correctly applied the law as set  out  in  Sala.
    The grounds were repeated to the Upper  Tribunal  and  on  18  December
    2017, Upper Tribunal Macleman said that in light of  Khan  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1755, he was minded to set aside the decision and remit the case to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  He directed that any party  opposed  to  such
    course of action was to inform the Upper Tribunal with reasons no later
    than seven days from the date of his decision.   As  I  understand  it,
    there was no response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Both sides agreed that the matter should be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 7. The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to allow  substantive
    consideration of the appeal.

 8. The judge through no fault of her own, erred in law for the reasons set
    out  in  Khan.   Accordingly,  the  First-tier   Tribunal   does   have
    jurisdiction to determine the appeal and therefore the decision of  the
    judge to the contrary is set aside.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error of law.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remit the appeal for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 15 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
