

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
EA/03251/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                              |                              |
|                                                  |Promulgated on:               |
|On 15 October 2018                                |                              |
|                                                  |On 19 October 2018            |
|                                                  |                              |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                            Bukky Kuburat Hassan
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                         Secretary of State for the
                               Home Department
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, of Counsel, instructed by  Matthew  James
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer



Background

   1.       The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 30 June  1976.  She
      seeks a permanent residence card as the former family member of an EEA
      national under reg. 15(1)(f). The respondent refused  her  application
      on the basis that she had failed to establish that her  former  spouse
      had been exercising treaty rights at the point of divorce.


   2.       The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell  at
      Hatton Cross  on  23  April  2018  and  was  dismissed  by  way  of  a
      determination promulgated on 16 May 2018.

   3.       The grounds supply the appellant's petition for  divorce,  which
      was not previously submitted, and argue that  on  the  basis  of  that
      evidence the judge was wrong to have dismissed the appeal.  Permission
      to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on  15
      August 2018.

   4.       There has been no Rule 24 response from the respondent.

The hearing

   5.       I heard submissions from both parties at the hearing  before  me
      on 15 October 2018.

   6.       Ms Jones submitted that the only issue before the judge had been
      whether the appellant's ex-spouse had been exercising treaty rights at
      the date of the commencement of  divorce  proceedings.  She  submitted
      that there was now evidence available which  showed  that  proceedings
      had commenced on 14 August 2014 and  not  in  September  2014  as  the
      appellant had claimed in oral evidence. The  appellant  had  therefore
      shown that she was entitled to retained rights of  residence  and  the
      judge had been wrong to  dismiss  the  appeal.  It  would  be  costly,
      intimidating and time consuming for the appellant to have  to  make  a
      fresh application and she had children.

   7.       In response, Ms Fijiwala submitted that there  was  no  material
      error.  There had been no documentary evidence about the date  divorce
      proceedings had  commenced  when  the  judge  heard  the  appeal.  The
      appellant had given evidence that this she had petitioned for  divorce
      in September 2014. The  appellant  had  been  represented  throughout.
      There was no good reason for why she  could  not  have  obtained  this
      document previously. No rule 15(2)(A) application  had  been  made  to
      admit the fresh evidence. The  judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
      appellant's evidence of the date of September 2014 and  to  find  that
      the evidence of work went up to 8 August 2014. He gave reasons why  he
      found that the sponsor had not retained worker status after that date.
      Even if the divorce petition were to be admitted, there  was  still  a
      period between the end of the sponsor's employment and the serving  of
      the petition. The issue of the respondent not making enquiries of HMRC
      was properly dealt with by the judge and had not been pursued.

   8.       Ms Jones briefly replied. She stated that the case related to EU
      law and the appellant was entitled to have her rights enforced.
   9.       That completed submissions. I  then  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give with reasons.

Findings and conclusions

  10.       I have carefully considered all the evidence before me  and  the
      submissions that have been made by both parties.

  11.       The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was a simple  one;  had
      the appellant established that her former husband had been  exercising
      treaty rights when divorce proceedings commenced. The appellant's oral
      evidence was that this had  been  in  September  2014.  Despite  being
      represented and despite her representatives knowing  that  this  would
      have been a relevant matter, no documentary evidence  was  adduced  in
      support. The judge was asked to come to his decision on the  available
      evidence and that is what he did. The fact that the appellant now  has
      evidence which provides a different date does not mean  that  he  made
      any error of law on the material before him and on which he was  asked
      to make his decision.

  12.       The judge took account of the previous  enquiries  made  by  the
      respondent of HMRC which established that the sponsor had worked until
      8 August 2014. Even taking the  amended  date  shown  on  the  divorce
      petition into account, he still ceased  employment  before  then.  The
      judge carefully considered whether the sponsor could be considered  to
      be a worker after that date. He gave compelling reasons as to why that
      inference could not be drawn and the grounds do not seek to  challenge
      those findings and conclusions.

  13.       It follows therefore that no material error of law has been made
      out. Firstly, the judge did not have the divorce petition  before  him
      and properly came to his  decision  on  the  evidence  he  was  given.
      Secondly, the petition does not, in any event, show he  erred  because
      even taking that date into account, the evidence  does  not  establish
      that the former spouse was exercising treaty rights at that time.

  14.       I accept that the appellant has children,  although  neither  of
      them is fathered by  the  EEA  sponsor.  If  she  wishes  to  make  an
      application on that basis, it is open to her to do so.

Decision

  15.       There are no errors of law in the determination  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.





Anonymity order

  16.       There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
      and I see no reason to make one.

      Signed:


      [pic]
      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      15 October 2018





