
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03768/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the Tribunal|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008|On 17th June 2020                    |
|Without a hearing                    |                                     |
|On 5th June 2020                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between
                               MOHAMMED AWAIS
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  in  December  1983.  He
       applied for a residence card as an extended family member of  an  EEA
       national, namely his brother, in August  2017.  His  application  was
       refused on 19th December 2017, it was reconsidered by the respondent,
       but refused again on 15th July 2019.  His appeal against the decision
       to refuse to grant him a residence card was dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Rea in a determination promulgated on the 1st November
       2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  JK
       Swaney on all grounds on 5th March 2020  on the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier Judge had erred  in  law  in   requiring
       that the appellant continue to be a member of the household which was
       arguably  not  a  requirement  of  Regulation  8(2)(b)(ii)   of   the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, and arguably was  not  consistent
       with Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2))  Mauritius  [2012]  UKUT  79
       (IAC).

    3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of COVID-
       19 and with regard to the overriding object  set  out  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  decide  matters  fairly  and   justly
       directions were sent out by the Vice President of the Upper  Tribunal
       by email on  7th  April  2020  seeking  written  submissions  on  the
       assertion of an error of  law  from  both  parties  with  a  view  to
       determining that issue on the papers, and giving an  opportunity  for
       any party who felt that a hearing was necessary in the  interests  of
       justice to make submissions  on  that  issue  too.  Submissions  were
       received  from  the  appellant  and  respondent,  but  no  reply  (as
       permitted by the directions) was received from the appellant  to  the
       respondent's submissions.

    4. The matter came before me to determine whether it is in the interests
       of justice to decide this matter without  a  hearing  and  if  so  to
       determine whether the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. The  error  of  law  submissions  from  Western  Solicitors  for  the
       appellant rely upon the grounds of appeal, and  the  summary  of  the
       error as set out in the grant of permission to appeal. In brief it is
       argued that it  is  clear  from  both  the  Regulation  8(2)  of  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 and Dauhoo that the  possibilities
       to qualify as an extended family member are via showing  that  either
       you were previously a member of the household or dependent on the EEA
       national and either that you are currently a member of the  household
       or dependent. It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law
       because the First-tier Judge found at paragraphs 18 and 19  that  the
       appellant is currently  a  member  of  his  brother's  household  and
       financially dependent on him, and  also  that  he  was  part  of  his
       brother's household in the past up until  1996,  and  that  thus,  in
       accordance with Dauhoo, this qualifies him under Regulation  8(2)  of
       the EEA Regulations.

    6. It is argued that there is  a  factual  error  or  an  insufficiently
       reasoned finding at paragraph 20 which states that the appellant  was
       financially dependent on his  parents  and  not  exclusively  on  his
       brother in the period 1996 to 2004, when his brother went to work  in
       Spain, as it is clear from the evidence that his brother was  sending
       the family funds  to  support  them.  Further  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant's  sister  which   supports   this   continuing   financial
       dependency was not considered. It  is  also  argued  that  there  was
       procedural unfairness as the sponsor was not given an opportunity  to
       address any specific concerns of the judge over financial matters and
       this was not properly explored in the hearing.

    7. In any case,  it  is  argued,  there  is  no  requirement  under  the
       Regulations as outlined in  Dauhoo  that  the  appellant  has  to  be
       continuously part of  the  household,  and  it  is  clear  that  past
       membership of a household and currently membership suffices  to  make
       the appellant an extended family member.  This  is  particularly  the
       case given what is said in Aladeselu and Others (2006 Regs -  Reg  8)
       Nigeria [2011] UKUT 253 (IAC) that no restrictions should be  applied
       to the Regulations other than  those  that  appear  in  the  ordinary
       language.

    8. It is submitted that the appeal should be remade and  allowed  unless
       the Upper Tribunal requires further evidence, in which case  an  oral
       hearing would be needed.

    9. The Secretary of State, through submissions from  Mr  C  Bates  dated
       21st April 2020, accepts that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
       potentially the requirements of the Regulations at 8(2)(b) and Dauhoo
       were met due to  the  appellant  having  satisfied  the  test  to  be
       currently dependent and a member of the EEA national's household, and
       having been a member of the same household in Pakistan prior to 1996,
       albeit that the household was headed by their parents.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal found however that there was limited evidence
       of prior dependency and had to consider whether the gap of  18  years
       was significant. The fact that the sponsor was not an EEA national in
       1996 (because he only became an EEA national after he lived in  Spain
       in or around 2014) meant that  the  Regulations  were  not  met,  see
       Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 341 (IAC), which  finds  that
       the EEA national must be such a national at  the  time  of  the  past
       household membership. There can be no material error of law therefore
       with respect to the issue of the past shared household as the sponsor
       was not an EEA national in 1996.

   11. It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal followed  the  guidance  in
       Reyes  (EEA  Reg:  dependency)  [2013]  UKUT  314   (IAC)   as   they
       holistically  examined  all  of  the  evidence  regarding   financial
       dependency. The evidence only showed sporadic and  limited  financial
       support, see paragraphs 12 to 20 of the decision.  It  was  therefore
       rationally open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  conclude  that  the
       sponsor had not provided for the appellant's essential  living  needs
       in the past. There was  no  procedural  unfairness,  particularly  as
       there is no witness statement evidence provided of anything happening
       at the hearing which was unfair,  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       entitled to conclude that the witness evidence  was  insufficient  to
       establish dependency for essential needs.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   12. It is clearly accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant
       is currently a member of  his  brother's  household  and  financially
       dependent on him and that this has been the case  since  his  brother
       came to the UK as a Spanish citizen in 2014, see paragraph 18 of  the
       decision.

   13. It was correctly identified from  the  start  of  the  decision,  see
       paragraph two, that the question to be determined in the  appeal  was
       whether the  evidence  of  past  dependency  and  membership  of  the
       household was sufficient to meet  Regulation  8  of  the  Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2016. Reference is made to Dauhoo, at paragraph  14
       of the decision, with the key test set out.

   14. It would have been desirable if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  then
       turned to the case of Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria which states at ii)
       of the head note as  follows:  "In  either  case  the  dependency  or
       membership of the household must  be  on  a  person  who  is  an  EEA
       national at the material time. For this reason it is  essential  that
       tribunal judges establish when the sponsor acquired EEA nationality."



   15. From the evidence of the appellant's brother set out at paragraph  12
       of the decision it is clear that  he, the sponsor,  obtained  Spanish
       nationality not early than 2009, as he explained that he obtained his
       citizenship as a result of result of working for ten years  in  Spain
       and gave evidence that he moved to Spain in 1999. As submitted by the
       respondent relying on Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria it  is  clear  that
       the appellant's brother was not therefore an EEA national  when  they
       were part of the same household in Pakistan.  As  such  there  is  no
       material error of law by the First-tier Tribunal in not allowing  the
       appeal on the basis of the prior membership of a household as it is a
       precondition that the EEA national has his citizenship at that  point
       in time. There is no evidence that at any  point  of  time  prior  to
       2014, when the appellant's brother entered the UK, that the appellant
       and his brother shared a "prior" household whilst his brother was  an
       EEA citizen.

   16. The only matter which therefore remains is whether the  consideration
       by the First-tier Tribunal of the issue of past dependency was  fair;
       included consideration of all of the evidence; and was rational.  The
       issue of dependency is dealt with at paragraph 20  of  the  decision.
       The First-tier Tribunal states that the evidence of the  brother  was
       that he sent some money between 1996 and 2004 to  the  appellant  and
       his family in Pakistan when he could, but decides that this  did  not
       amount to evidence which was sufficiently specific or of sufficiently
       regular support to show on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
       contribution was an essential part of the family  finances.   If  the
       evidence of prior dependency on which the appellant relies is  during
       this period then again there can be  no  material  error  of  law  in
       dismissing the appeal as at that time the appellant's brother did not
       have Spanish citizenship, which he must have held  to  qualify  under
       this provision, see once again Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria .  I  have
       checked the appeal  statements  and  the  recorded  evidence  in  the
       decision, and there is  nothing  which  contradicts  this  being  the
       position.

   17. There is no evidence  of  unfairness  in  the  determination  of  the
       appeal.  Unfortunately neither of the  parties'  representatives  nor
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge  gave  consideration  to  the  case  of
       Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria  which, as set out above,  points  to  it
       being  essential  to  determine  when  the   sponsor   acquired   EEA
       nationality, and consider whether this was the case at the  point  of
       time of the  claimed  prior  membership  of  the  same  household  or
       dependency.  Although, as  a  result,  the  decision  did  not  clear
       explain the fundamental reason why  the  appeal  could  not  succeed,
       which is the date on  which  the  appellant's  brother  obtained  his
       Spanish nationality, I do not find that the failure in reasoning is a
       reason to set aside the decision as it is inevitable on the facts  of
       the case that the appeal cannot succeed, and I find that  my  setting
       the reasoning out in  this  decision  suffices  to  ensure  that  the
       appellant understands why his appeal has been and must be dismissed.




    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of a material error on a point of law.

      2. I uphold the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
         appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.


Signed   Fiona Lindsley
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
Date 5th June 2020
