
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03199/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th January 2017                         |On 30th January 2017          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                Zaneta Goman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Poland whose date of birth is recorded as
    28th January 1975.  On 9th March 2016 the Secretary  of  State  made  a
    decision pursuant to Regulations 19(3)(a) taken together with 24(2)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  that  the
    Appellant was a person in respect of whom removal directions  might  be
    given in accordance with Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    1999 as a person who did not have or had ceased  to  have  a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom under the Regulations.

 2. At the commencement of the proceedings I invited Mr Diwnycz  to  assist
    me on the basis whether the Secretary of State had made her decision on
    a flawed premise  because  it  was  possible  that  the  Appellant  had
    acquired a permanent right of residence pursuant to Regulation 15.

 3. What had happened in this case was that the Appellant having been faced
    with the decision of March 2016 appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Her appeal was heard on 8th July 2016 before Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Moxon.  Judge Moxon not only dealt with the EEA  decision  but
    also appears to have considered  the  appeal  having  regard  to  human
    rights.  It is not clear whether a Section 120 notice was  ever  served
    but that does not matter given what occurred before me.

 4.  Judge  Moxon  dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  Appellant  then   made
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission
    was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro on 30th October
    2016 finding it  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not  give  sufficient
    consideration to the relevant Regulations of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

 5. That grant of permission in essence gives the Appellant the opportunity
    to argue "anything" under the Regulations.

 6. As I have already said, Mr Diwnycz, having regard to the  documentation
    that was before him and which he felt, having regard to paragraph 13 of
    the decision of Judge Moxon  had  not  been  before  Judge  Moxon,  was
    satisfied that the Appellant had  demonstrated  from  the  registration
    documents that she had established five years' continuous residence  in
    the United Kingdom which had not been lost by any  period  of  absence.
    By Regulation 15 of the Regulations an EEA national who has resided  in
    the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for a  continuous
    period of five years acquires the right to reside  permanently  in  the
    United Kingdom and that right shall be lost  only  through  an  absence
    from the United Kingdom for a period exceeding two  consecutive  years:
    15(2).  It was not suggested before the First-tier Tribunal nor  before
    me that the Appellant had had any period in excess of two years.

 7. The effect of permanent residence in the United  Kingdom  is  that  the
    test to be applied, having regard to Regulation 21(3),  is  not  simply
    whether there are public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health
    grounds, but whether there are serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public security justifying the decision.

 8. Mr Diwnycz told me that he could not argue given the nine  offences  of
    theft and kindred offences for which the  Appellant  was  convicted  on
    12th February 2016 and sentenced to two months' immediate  custody  was
    sufficient.  In the  circumstances  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to
    consider the matter further.  There was clearly a material error of law
    in that the judge did not apply the Regulations correctly.

 9. I am very grateful to Mr Diwnycz for the realistic  position  which  he
    took in relation to this appeal. I dictated this Decision in  front  of
    the  parties  to  avoid  any  suggestion  that  there  had   been   any
    misunderstanding of what occurred. It is in essence  the  Secretary  of
    State's position that the Appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed  in  the
    appeal and therefore the appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  decision
contained a material error of law.  I remake  the  decision  such  that  the
appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

