
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03343/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 December 2019                  |On 14 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                              tOMASZ BLACHEWICZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Rea of Rea Law.
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant is a national of Poland.  He came to the  United  Kingdom
    in March 2011.  At the beginning of March 2016  he  was  extradited  to
    Poland to answer criminal charges against him there.  On his  attempted
    return to the United Kingdom on 3 February 2018 he was  served  with  a
    notice of refusal of admission.


 2. He appealed, and his appeal  came  before  Judge  David  Clapham  on  8
    November 2018.  For various reasons the hearing  did  not  begin  until
    nearly 4 o'clock, and it may be that that affected what happened at it.
     Be that as it may, the judge's decision, issued on 14  December  2018,
    contains a number of errors, as the parties before me agreed.   My  own
    suspicion  is  that,  although  the  judge  allowed  time  for  written
    submissions of law to be made after  the  hearing,  the  truth  of  the
    matter was that there was not sufficient time to explore the issues  he
    needed to determine.


 3. There appears to be no doubt in this case that the burden of  proof  is
    on the respondent to establish that the appellant's exclusion from  the
    United Kingdom  is  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
    security or public health, and that the  appellant  poses  a  "genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society": that is the  effect  of  Regulations
    23(1) and 27(5) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2016 (SI 2016/1052).  The judge expressed doubt about the allocation of
    the burden of proof (though he did assume de bene esse that the  burden
    of proof was on the respondent): he distinguished  Arranz  [2017]  UKUT
    00294 solely on the ground that it applied only to removals and not  to
    exclusion.  It is difficult to see the basis for  the  distinction  the
    judge drew, given that the principles  of  both  EU  and  national  law
    appear to be the  same  in  either  case.   But  he  wholly  failed  to
    determine the appeal, instead providing a hypothetical  response  based
    on review, as follows:


         "47. In view of the nature of this Appellant's criminal  history  I
         consider that the Respondent was entitled  to  reach  the  decision
         that the Appellant should be excluded from the United  Kingdom  and
         if the position is that what I am required to do is to  review  the
         Respondent's decision,  I  consider  that  the  decision  that  was
         reached in the case of the Appellant was the correct  one  standing
         the fact that he had been convicted of assaulting a minor  and  had
         been sentenced to a significant term of imprisonment.


         48.  ... Had the Appellant had a right of  permanent  residence,  I
         consider that I  might  well  have  had  to  come  to  a  different
         conclusion but in light of my finding that no  right  of  permanent
         residence has been established, the Respondent's decision should be
         upheld."


 4. Not only did the judge fail to reach his own conclusion on  the  matter
    at issue: he reached  no  very  firm  conclusions  on  the  appellant's
    circumstances or his criminal history either.  It is thus  not  readily
    possible to substitute a determination.


 5. In any event, the appellant's appeal has not had the  consideration  in
    the First-tier Tribunal to which  the  appellant  was  entitled.   Both
    parties before me asked me to remit the appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  It seems to me that that is  the  appropriate
    outcome in this case.


 6. For the foregoing reasons I set  aside  Judge  Clapham's  decision  for
    error of law and direct that the appellant's appeal be heard afresh  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 9 January 2020
