
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03851/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 April 2019                        |On 10 May 2019                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                Asheba Edigbe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, E1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Borsada, promulgated on 29 November 2018, dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  4  May  2018  to
    refuse to issue her with a residence card as confirmation of her  right
    of residence in the United Kingdom as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national.

 2. The appellant's case is that she has, since 6 August 2013, been married
    to [L N], a Czech citizen. The couple had a child born on 13 June  2017
    but by then the relationship had broken down.

 3. The respondent refused the application for a residence card pursuant to
    Regulation 17 on the basis that the appellant  had  not  fulfilled  the
    requirements of Regulations 6  and  7  because  she  had  not  provided
    adequate evidence that her husband:

      1) was active as a worker or self-employed;

      2) retains a place of residence in the  United  Kingdom  to  which  he
         returns on a regular basis;

      3) had been continuously resident as a worker in the UK for  at  least
         three years.

 4. Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's husband was exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom
    and also noted that she had failed to provide a valid passport for him.



 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal but did  not  request
    an oral hearing.  It is averred in the grounds  that,  as  the  primary
    carer of an EEA national child the appellant qualifies for a derivative
    right of residence pursuant to Regulation 15A(2) (sic) as her son would
    be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if  the  primary  carer  were
    required to leave the United Kingdom.  It was  also  averred  that  the
    appellant met the definition of primary carer and also that she met the
    requirements of Regulation 15A(5).

 6. I note in passing that although in the grounds it is averred  that  the
    child is  an  EEA  citizen,  that  in  the  covering  letter  with  the
    application to the Home Office, it  is  stated  that  "because  of  the
    hostility of his father  the  child  neither  has  the  Czech  Republic
    nationality nor can he go to Nigeria with  his  mother  as  he  is  not
    Nigerian as well."

 7. I also note that reference is made in the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (and  indeed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal)  to   the
    Immigration EEA Regulations 2006, not the Immigration European Economic
    Area (Regulations) 2016 which had been in force  since  February  2017,
    over a year before the decision made  by  the  respondent  and  it  was
    therefore the 2016 regulations which are relevant.

 8. The judge concluded [6] that  the  appellant  was  married  to  an  EEA
    national and that there was a child of that relationship and that:-

      i) the child was entitled to Czech citizenship;

     ii) that appellant had not established on the evidence that she is  the
         primary carer of her  child,  there  being  nothing  from  the  EEA
         national that he is nowhere in the child's life or that he does not
         share parental responsibility for the child;

    iii) that there is a dearth of evidence  that  the  appellant's  partner
         remains a qualified person and that basis could not  succeed  under
         the 2016 Regulations.

 9. The judge also observed  that  the  appellant  had  not  requested  any
    assistance from the Tribunal such as asking for directions to assist in
    obtaining relevant information with regard to the husband  and  it  was
    open to her to make a fresh  application  supported  by  the  necessary
    evidence or to make an application on human rights grounds.

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) in failing properly  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  is  the
         primary carer of the child, it being averred that she had  provided
         sufficient evidence that this is so;

     ii) that the judge had erred that there is  no  statement  of  evidence
         from the EEA national as it had already been said that he is not in
         contact with the appellant or the child;

    iii) that a primary carer  of  an  EEA  national  would  qualify  for  a
         derivative right of residence under Regulation  15A(24)  (sic)  and
         that these requirements were met;

     iv) that the judge had failed to consider the  best  interests  of  the
         child.

11. On 29 January 2019 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  G  A  Black  granted
    permission to appeal, observing it was arguable the First-tier Tribunal
    had failed to properly consider the evidence before it.

12. At the hearing, I asked Mr Islam to address me on whether, even if  the
    claimed errors were made out, they were material.  That is  because  of
    the lack of evidence on file that the appellant met  all  the  criteria
    applicable under the EEA Regulations to show that she was entitled to a
    derivative residence card.

13. Mr Islam sought to rely on the cases of Zhu and Chen  [2004]  EUECJ  C-
    200/02 and Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09.

The Law

14. Immigration  European  Economic  Area  (Regulations)  2016  provide  as
    follows:

    17.    (3)      The  Secretary  of  State  must  issue  a  registration
             certificate to an EEA national who is the family member  of  a
             qualified person or  of  an  EEA  national  with  a  right  of
             permanent  residence  under  regulation  15   immediately   on
             application and production of-

                  (a)  a valid national identity card or passport issued  by
                      an EEA State; and

                  (b)  proof that the applicant is such a family member."

15. "Qualified person" is defined  in  Regulation  6;  "family  member"  is
    defined in Regulation 7.

16. Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows, so far  as  is
    relevant to the facts of this appeal:-

    "'Qualified person'

    6.-  (1) In these Regulations-

                'jobseeker' means an EEA national who  satisfies  conditions
                A, B and, where relevant, C;

                'qualified person' means a person who is an EEA national and
                in the United Kingdom as-

                  (a)  a jobseeker;

                  (b)  a worker;

                  (c)  a self-employed person;

                  (d)  a self-sufficient person; or

                  (e)  a student;

17. Mr Islam did not take me to any documentary evidence to  show  that  Mr
    [N], the appellant's husband, had ever  worked,  or  had  retained  the
    status of a worker or was otherwise a qualified person.  There is  only
    the unsupported evidence of the appellant who records that  a  previous
    application for an EEA permit  to  be  granted  on  the  basis  of  her
    marriage to her husband had been refused partly as he had not  attended
    the interview. That decision had been appealed  and  the  decision  had
    been withdrawn at appeal.  A further interview was then arranged  which
    the appellant's husband did not attend.

18. There is no mention in the witness statement of the husband having  any
    employment other than the brief sentence at [3] "...... we got  married
    my husband was in employment and he was exercising  EEA  treaty  rights
    through his work."

19. In the EEA application form it is stated at 2.14 that he has  left  the
    country which is  why  only  a  photocopy  of  the  passport  has  been
    submitted.  At Section 4 the application is stated to be  made  on  the
    basis of a retained right of residence (which is not  applicable  given
    that there had been no divorce by this point) and at Section 8(b) it is
    stated that the sponsor left the United Kingdom on 10 May 2017.   While
    at Section (e) at 8.36 it is stated that the husband was working for an
    employer, the section on employment is left entirely blank.

20. In the circumstances,  given  this  lack  of  evidence  the  judge  was
    manifestly entitled to conclude that it had not been shown that Mr  [N]
    was a qualified person and  accordingly  that  the  appellant  was  not
    entitled to a residence card on that basis.

21. Turning next to the issue of derived residence  rights,  Regulation  16
    provides as follows:-

    16.-(1)  A person has a derivative right to reside during any period in
                  which the person-

             (a)  is not an exempt person; and

             (b)  satisfies  each  of  the  criteria  in  one  or  more  of
             paragraphs (2) to (6

         (2)      The criteria in this paragraph are that-

             (a)  the person is the primary carer of an EEA national; and

             (b)  the EEA national-

                  (i)  is under the age of 18;

                  (ii) resides in the United Kingdom  as  a  self-sufficient
                       person; and

                  (iii)    would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom
                       if  the  person  left  the  United  Kingdom  for  an
                       indefinite period.

         (3) The criteria in this paragraph are that-

             (a)  any of the person's parents ('PP') is an EEA national who
             resides or has resided in the United Kingdom;

             (b)  both the person and PP reside  or  have  resided  in  the
             United Kingdom at the same time, and during such a  period  of
             residence, PP has been a worker in the United Kingdom; and

             (c)  the person is in education in the United Kingdom.

         (4) The criteria in this paragraph are that-

             (a)  the person is the primary carer of  a  person  satisfying
             the criteria in paragraph (3) ('PPP'); and

             (b)  PPP would be unable to continue to  be  educated  in  the
             United Kingdom if the person left the United  Kingdom  for  an
             indefinite period.

         (5)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

             (a)  the person is the primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen
             ('BC');

             (b)  BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and

             (c)  BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or  in
             another EEA State if the person left the United Kingdom for an
             indefinite period.

         (6)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

             (a)  the person is under the age of 18;

             (b)  the person does not have leave to enter,  or  remain  in,
             the United Kingdom under the 1971 Act;

             (c)  the person's primary carer is entitled  to  a  derivative
             right to reside in the United Kingdom under paragraph (2), (4)
             or (5); and

             (d)  the primary carer would be prevented from residing in the
             United Kingdom if the person left the United  Kingdom  for  an
             indefinite period.

         (7)  In this regulation-

             ...

             (c)  an 'exempt person' is a person-

                  (i)  who has a right to reside under another provision  of
                       these Regulations;

                  (ii) who has the right of abode under  section  2  of  the
                       1971 Act(13);

                  (iii)    to whom section 8 of  the  1971  Act(14),  or  an
                       order made under subsection (2) of that section(15),
                       applies; or

                  (iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or  remain  in  the
                       United Kingdom.

         (8)  A person is the 'primary carer' of another person ('AP') if-

             (a)  the person is a direct relative or a  legal  guardian  of
             AP; and

             (b)  either-

                  (i)  the person has primary responsibility for AP's  care;
                       or

                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for AP's care  with
                       one other person who is not an exempt person.

                  ...

22. Even assuming that the child is a  Czech  citizen,  which  is  unclear,
    given the absence of a passport and the ambiguity  in  the  appellant's
    case as put first  to  the  Home  Office  and  then  subsequently,  the
    appellant needed to show not only that she was a  primary  carer  under
    Regulation 16(2) but also that the child resides in the United  Kingdom
    as a self-sufficient person.

23. Self-sufficient is defined in Regulation 4(1)(c) and requires there  to
    be in placed  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover.  As  Mr  Aslam
    accepted, there is no comprehensive sickness insurance cover  available
    in this case.  Whilst I note his submission that the guidance  provided
    by the Home Office is such that the comprehensive sickness insurance is
    to avoid somebody being a burden on the state, that is a gloss it  does
    not absolve the appellant from having to meet that criterion.  She does
    not do so.

24. The appellant is not assisted either by Zhu and Chen. [2004]  EUECJ  C-
    200/02. It is important to note that on the facts of that case  as  set
    out at [13] that:

         "The  order  for  reference  also  makes  it  clear  that  ...  the
         appellants in the main  proceedings  provide  for  their  needs  by
         reason of Mrs Chen's employment, that the appellants  do  not  rely
         upon public funds in the United Kingdom and there is  no  realistic
         possibility of their becoming so reliant, and,  finally,  that  the
         appellants are insured against ill health."

25. The passages relied upon by Mr Islam at [45] and [46] are not authority
    for the proposition that sickness  insurance  is  not  necessary.  That
    submission is contrary to the paragraph [41]  and  the  ruling  of  the
    court. While the case does turn on an interpretation of  Article  1  of
    Directive 90/364, the wording of Directive 2004/38  is  not  materially
    different as it too imposes at Article 7.1.(e) a  requirement  to  have
    comprehensive sickness cover which is in addition  to  the  requirement
    not to become a burden on the social assistance system.

26. For these reasons, given the  acceptance  that  there  is  no  sickness
    insurance, the appellant cannot succeed under  Regulation  16(2).   The
    appellant is unable to benefit from any of the other categories  as  at
    16(3) to (6) as the child is not  in  education  nor  is  the  child  a
    British citizen.  Regulation 16 (6) does not apply as the appellant  is
    not entitled to a derivative right.

27. Accordingly, irrespective of  whether  the  judge  erred  in  assessing
    whether the appellant was the primary carer, this error was not capable
    of affecting the outcome as, for the reasons set out above, none of the
    other relevant criteria were met and the appeal was bound to fail.

28. For the sake of completeness, I have considered the position  in  light
    of  Chavez-Vilchez  [2017]  EUECJ  C-133/15.   The  Court  of   Justice
    concluded in this case as follows:

    1.   Article 20 TFEU must be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  for  the
         purposes of assessing whether a child  who  is  a  citizen  of  the
         European Union would be compelled to leave  the  territory  of  the
         European Union as a whole  and  thereby  deprived  of  the  genuine
         enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred on him  by  that
         article if the child's third-country national parent were refused a
         right of residence in the Member State concerned, the fact that the
         other parent, who is a Union citizen, is actually able and  willing
         to assume sole responsibility for the primary  day-to-day  care  of
         the child is  a  relevant  factor,  but  it  is  not  in  itself  a
         sufficient ground for a conclusion that there is not,  between  the
         third-country national parent and the child, such a relationship of
         dependency that the child would indeed be so compelled  were  there
         to be such a refusal of a right of residence.  Such  an  assessment
         must take  into  account,  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child
         concerned, all the specific circumstances, including the age of the
         child, the child's physical and emotional development,  the  extent
         of his emotional ties both to the Union citizen parent and  to  the
         third-country national parent, and the risks which separation  from
         the latter might entail for the child's equilibrium  Although  this
         case was not pleaded, I  consider  that  it  does  not  assist  the
         appellant given what is said at paragraph 2 above.  It is of course
         open to the appellant to make the appropriate  application  in  the
         light of this supported by relevant evidence.

    2.   Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as not  precluding  a  Member
         State from providing that the right of residence in  its  territory
         of a third-country national, who is a parent of a minor child  that
         is a national of that Member State and who is responsible  for  the
         primary  day-to-day  care  of  that  child,  is  subject   to   the
         requirement that the third-country national must  provide  evidence
         to prove that a refusal of a  right  of  residence  to  the  third-
         country national parent would deprive  the  child  of  the  genuine
         enjoyment of the substance of the rights pertaining to the  child's
         status as a Union citizen, by  obliging  the  child  to  leave  the
         territory of the European Union, as a whole. It is however for  the
         competent authorities of the Member State concerned  to  undertake,
         on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  provided  by  the  third-country
         national, the necessary enquiries in order to be able to assess, in
         the light of all the  specific  circumstances,  whether  a  refusal
         would have such consequences

29. Nonetheless, for these reasons, I conclude that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making an error of law  capable
    of affecting the outcome and I uphold it.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it;

 2) I do not make an anonymity order.


Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
