
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/03338/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |         Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9th November 2018                |         On 27th November 2018           |
|                                    |                                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                        Ms margaret chinyere ezeigbo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra (instructed by Victory Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the Upper  Tribunal,  by  the  Appellant,  in
    relation to a judgment of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain who,  after
    a hearing at Hatton Cross on 18th May 2018, by a Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 20th June 2018, dismissed the appeal.

 2. The appeal was by a Nigerian national who entered  the  UK  in  January
    2009 as a visitor.  She overstayed and when served with a  notice  that
    she should leave the UK, applied for a residence card  as  the  durable
    partner of an EEA national.  A residence card was duly issued  on  21st
    July 2011.  She then applied for a permanent residence card and it  was
    the refusal of that application which was the  subject  of  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. There seems to have been some confusion in that the Secretary of  State
    was under the impression, apparent from the Letter of Refusal, that she
    and the EEA national were married.  They were not; nor were they  civil
    partners.

 4. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant and  from  one  witness  (a
    friend of the Appellant) and found, on the basis of  evidence  obtained
    by the Secretary of State from HMRC, that the EEA national had not been
    exercising Treaty rights as there was no  record  of  him  being  self-
    employed or employed between 2010 and 2017.

 5. The Judge referred to a non-molestation order which the  Appellant  had
    produced.  The Judge clearly misunderstood the purpose of that thinking
    it had been submitted to establish that the EEA national was in the  UK
    at the relevant time.  In fact it was relied upon as an explanation for
    why the  Appellant  could  not  provide  financial  evidence  from  her
    Sponsor; namely because she was afraid of him.

 6. The Judge erred in a number of ways. The first was his misunderstanding
    about the non-molestation order and the second was that  he  failed  to
    make any findings about the witness's evidence.  Whilst  the  case  was
    not the strongest, the Appellant was  entitled  to  a  proper  reasoned
    judgment with findings made on the evidence she adduced.  She  did  not
    have that and for that reason I set aside the judgment.

 7. All  the  evidence  being  within  the  file,  I  am  able  to  proceed
    straightaway to redecide the  appeal.   Both  representatives  accepted
    that to be the case.  In so doing I note that, as the Appellant is  not
    married to the EEA national, her reliance upon  Regulation  10  is  ill
    founded. She is not a spouse or  civil  partner  and  therefore  cannot
    claim retained rights of residence.

 8. Furthermore, even if she could rely on Regulation 10, she has not shown
    that the Sponsor  was  exercising  Treaty  rights.   Whilst  there  was
    evidence from a witness, that evidence attracts little weight.  It  was
    no more than a bald assertion that the EEA national  had  said  he  was
    working, trading in cars and working for a wine shop.  However, that is
    nowhere near sufficient to outweigh the evidence of HMRC.

 9. The evidence relied upon by the Appellant to explain why she could  not
    obtain financial information from the EEA national, namely the ex parte
    non-molestation order is also inadequate.  An ex parte  application  is
    obtained by an applicant going to court, without anybody from the other
    side, and claiming to be at risk from the respondent. At most they  get
    a temporary, short-lived order which has to be served on the respondent
    and the matter is listed for an inter partes hearing when the matter is
    finally adjudicated upon.  That appears not to have  happened  in  this
    case and therefore the ex parte order is of  little  evidential  value.
    It is evidence only that the Appellant went to court  and  persuaded  a
    Judge, without opposition, that she was in need of protection.

10. For all those reasons the Appellant in this case cannot  succeed.   She
    would have to show that she had five  years'  residence  in  accordance
    with the Regulations. She has not done that and  therefore  the  appeal
    must be dismissed.

11. There was no anonymity direction made in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    see no justification in making one today.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


                 [pic]


Signed                              Date 21st November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



