
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03152/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2018                            |On 1 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                         mr fabricio siqueira nunes
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Brazil, has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Oxlade of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 9 May
    2017 following a hearing on 3 May 2017 dismissing  his  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent dated 3 March 2017 refusing to  issue  a
    residence card as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights.

2.   The appellant did not appear nor did anyone  on  his  behalf.   In  the
    absence of any explanation for his failure  to  attend,  I  decided  to
    proceed with the hearing in the absence of one of the parties.  I heard
    brief submissions from Mr Clarke.

3.   It is unnecessary for me to set out the grounds in any  detail  because
    Mr Clarke accepts that the appellant is  entitled  to  succeed  in  his
    grounds.  In deciding to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal,  the  judge
    counted against him the fact that  there  was  a  lack  of  documentary
    evidence.  At paragraph 13 the judge stated:

         "The Appellant relies on his summary of the work his wife has done,
         together with offers of employment from Adludi and  a  probationary
         contract of employment with Dentsu Aegis.  However,  he  failed  to
         file copies of payslips, bank statements, a P60 or P45 to show that
         the EEA National had actually taken up the job for the probationary
         period with Dentsu, nor that was still in the  job  shortly  before
         the hearing,  or  alternatively  that  she  had  moved  onto  other
         employment."

4.   In point of fact on 28 March  2017  the  appellant  had  sent  payslips
    pertaining to the sponsor's employment at Dentsu Aegis Network since  1
    February 2017, but these had not reached the judge's file.  One  reason
    why these documents were not linked to the judge's file may  have  been
    that he did not quote the appeal number, but even so, sufficient  other
    reference numbers were given that should have led to their linkage.  In
    such circumstances, although no fault of  the  judge,  there  has  been
    procedural unfairness  necessitating  that  I  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.

5.   In regard to the decision I should re-make, Mr Clarke stated  that  the
    respondent accepts that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

6.   It is unfortunate that the appellant has failed to attend  the  hearing
    before me today because I must decide  whether  he  is  entitled  to  a
    residence card  on  the  basis  of  the  sponsor's  current  employment
    position.  However:

    (1)  it is clear that the appellant was  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
         national exercising treaty rights at the time of the hearing before
         the FtT judge and so would in the ordinary course  of  events  have
         been entitled to a residence card at least from the  date  of  that
         hearing; and


    (2)  the sponsor's employment history particulars - which are  not  now
         disputed - demonstrate that she is a person who has built up strong
         connections with the labour market.

7.   In light of (1) and (2) I consider it reasonable  to  assume  that  the
    sponsor remains a person who presently qualifies as a worker  in  light
    of her continuing connection with the labour market.   Accordingly  the
    decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.

8.   If for some reason evidence comes to light that (unbeknown to  me)  the
    sponsor ceased working soon after the hearing  before  the  FtT  judge,
    then (in order to put the appellant in the position he would have  been
    but for the error on the part of the FtT judge)  the  respondent  would
    need to proceed on the basis that a residence  card  should  have  been
    issued at least at the date of hearing before the FtT judge  but  would
    then need to give consideration to   revoking  it.   Against  any  such
    revocation decision there would be a fresh right of appeal.

To summarise:

The FtT judge's decision is set aside for material error of law.

The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 25 February 2018

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

