

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      EA/03019/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 24 January 2017                       |On: 25 January 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                 AZMAT BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Gill (Gill Law Chambers)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 3 August 2016 in which it dismissed  an  appeal  against
    the decision of the  respondent  dated  18  November  2015  refusing  a
    residence card.  The respondent did not accept that the  appellant  had
    provided sufficient evidence to support  her  claim  that  her  husband
    ('the sponsor'), a Dutch national, had been working on a  self-employed
    basis, as a taxi driver since 2009.

Procedural history

 2. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that there was a paucity of  reliable
    evidence to support the sponsor's claim to have  been  a  self-employed
    taxi driver and dismissed the appeal.


 3. In a decision dated 10 November 2016 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane
    granted permission to appeal on the basis, inter alia, that the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to arrive at sufficiently  comprehensive  findings
    of fact.

Error of law

 4. At the hearing before me both  representatives  agreed  that  the  only
    issue in dispute before the First-tier Tribunal was whether or not  the
    appellant had discharged the burden of demonstrating that it  was  more
    likely than not that her husband was a self-employed taxi  driver.   Mr
    Gill focused his attention on the failure to address HMRC documentation
    confirming  that  the  sponsor  owed  and   paid   national   insurance
    contributions as a self-employed person from 9 August 2009 to 28  March
    2015.


 5. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that the First-tier Tribunal made no  reference
    to the national insurance documentation  but  submitted  that  adequate
    findings had been made regarding the other evidence.


 6. In failing to address and / or give reasons for rejecting the  national
    insurance documentation, the First-tier Tribunal has  materially  erred
    in law.  This  documentation  came  from  an  official  source  and  is
    detailed: it includes the quarterly contribution bills from August 2009
    to March 2015.    In addition, each bill contains a post  office  stamp
    indicating that it has been paid.  The original bills were available to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  This significant evidence  should  have  been
    addressed directly, but it was not.  Mr Diwnycz accepted that paragraph
    6  of  the  decision  does   not   address   the   national   insurance
    documentation, only the HMRC documentation relevant to income tax.


Remaking the decision

 7. Both representatives agreed that the appeal turned on  a  single  issue
    and that little oral evidence was necessary because much turned  on  an
    analysis of the documentary evidence.  Both  representatives  therefore
    agreed that the decision should be remade by me.


 8. Mr Diwnycz indicated that  there  was  no  need  to  cross-examine  the
    appellant and only cross-examined the sponsor.  After hearing from  the
    sponsor I heard submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mr  Diwnycz
    accepted that the evidence tended to indicate that the appellant  is  a
    self-employed taxi driver.


 9. After hearing from both representatives I announced that I accept  that
    the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights as a self-employed taxi driver
    from 2009 and continues to do so.  I now give my reasons  for  reaching
    this decision.

10. Having heard the sponsor give evidence, I find  that  he  has  provided
    credible, straightforward evidence.  He was asked  questions  regarding
    his work as a taxi driver and was able to provide cogent  and  detailed
    responses.  Mr Diwnycz did  not  take  me  to  any  inconsistencies  or
    implausibilities in the sponsor's evidence, and  did  not  dispute  the
    genuineness of the sponsor's self-employment.


11. The  sponsor's  evidence  is  supported  by  an  array  of  documentary
    evidence.  That evidence is by no means perfect and there  are  obvious
    gaps in the evidence but it is sufficient, when  viewed  alongside  the
    sponsor's oral evidence, to support my finding that it is  more  likely
    than not that the sponsor has been  working  as  a  self-employed  taxi
    driver from 2009.


12. I accept that the sponsor was paid in cash and paid  for  his  expenses
    (including his taxi licence, vehicle rental,  accountants,  petrol)  in
    cash.  His self employment has been almost entirely  cash-based.   This
    explains the lack of bank statements.  I also accept that  the  sponsor
    earned below the minimum threshold to pay income tax and  as  such  his
    accounts were prepared on a very basic level.  This  accounts  for  the
    failure to include the licence fee in the  profit  and  loss  accounts.
    The sponsor has clearly been the holder of a  Hackney  Carriage  Driver
    Licence from Tameside Metropolitan  Borough  for  the  years  2009-2015
    inclusive.  There is detailed and cogent documentation from Tameside to
    support this.  This must be viewed together  with  the  basic  accounts
    prepared by non-chartered accountants, the  tax  credits  paid  to  the
    family,  the  HMRC  income  tax  returns  and  the  national  insurance
    documentation as set out above.


13. When all the evidence is viewed  in  the  round,  I  am  satisfied  the
    sponsor has been self-employed from 2009-15 as claimed,  and  continues
    to be self-employed.  This was the sole issue in dispute before me.  Mr
    Diwnycz accepted that that if I reached this finding, it followed  that
    the appellant's appeal should be allowed.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


15. I remake the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 24 January
2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
