

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: EA/03543/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 June 2017                             |On 16 June 2017                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           MS NNEKA MAUREEN OKECHI
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 17 October 2016, dismissing her
appeal against the respondent's decision of 30 November 2015 to refuse her
a Derivative Residence Card on the basis that she is the primary carer of  a
British national child.

2.    The First-tier Tribunal had dismissed the  appeal  but  permission  to
appeal had been granted because  it  was  thought  the  First-tier Tribunal
might have misconstrued certain information given by the appellant when  she
had made her application for the Residence Card.

3.    It is clear that the appellant has  previously  been  assisted  by  an
organisation called Lifeline Options Community Interest  Company.   However,
despite that she did not attend the hearing before me in  order  to  further
pursue her appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Mrs Aboni was helpfully able  to
explain that, in fact, she had been granted leave to remain in the UK on  an
entirely different basis.   That  may  well  explain  her  decision  not  to
attend.

4.    In any event, it did not seem to me that the First-tier Tribunal  had
misconstrued the information at all in the manner which had  been  suggested
in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In the circumstances,  and
given  the  appellant's  failure  to  further  pursue  her  appeal,  it   is
dismissed.  However, that will not affect the validity of  the  leave  which
she has, according to Ms Aboni, already been granted on a different basis.

5.    For the purposes of this appeal, though, I conclude  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal did not err in law and that its decision shall stand.

6.    I have made no anonymity order because none was  made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal, none has been sought before the  Upper Tribunal  and  there
does not appear to be any reason to make such an order.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision shall stand.

Anonymity

No anonymity order is made.


Signed:                           Date: 15 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                           Date:    15 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemmingway
