
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03868/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2017                          |On 10th November 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                 NOYA IKCHE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Manu, Solicitor for Galaxy Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on the 15th August 1977.  He
    appeals with permission, against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hudson, who, in a determination promulgated on the 26th July 2017
    dismissed his appeal against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse
    to his application for a permanent residence card.

 2. No anonymity direction was made  by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  and  no
    application has been made on behalf of the appellant or any grounds put
    forward to support such an application.

The background:

 3. The appellant is a national of Nigeria. When resident in Manchester the
    appellant met and married a French national  who  was  working  in  the
    United Kingdom. They married on 7 February 2009. It was asserted by the
    appellant that during the  time  that  they  were  married  his  spouse
    continued to exercise a treaty rights by being in employment and  self-
    employment as a hairdresser. It was also stated that  he  also  was  in
    employment.

 4. The appellant started divorce proceedings which were finally  concluded
    by way of a Decree Absolute on 10 January 2017.

 5. On the 20th October 2015 he applied for a permanent residence card as a
    confirmation the right to reside in the United  Kingdom  based  on  his
    prior residence in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  family  member  of  EEA
    national.

 6. The application was refused in a decision made on the 21st March 2016.

 7. Accompanying the notice of decision was a reasons  for  refusal  letter
    which expanded on the reasons given for the refusal of the  application
    and made reference to the documentary evidence that had  been  produced
    with the application. The decision letter made reference  to  assessing
    the application under Regulation 10 (5) and Regulation 15(1) (f) of the
    EEA Regulations 2006. By reference to  the  application  form,  it  was
    stated that the appellant had failed to provide evidence in the form of
    a Decree Absolute to show that he was divorced from his EEA sponsor and
    thus failed to meet the criteria of Regulation 10 (5).

 8. As to the application for permanent residence, the decision letter made
    reference to the material provided for the purposes of the application.
    The decision letter noted that the EEA national sponsor  was  a  worker
    between March 2013 to July 2013 and from April 2014 to  June  2014  but
    had failed to provide any evidence during  the  period  between  August
    2013 to March 2015. Thus the Secretary of State was not satisfied  that
    the EEA national sponsor was a qualified person.  The  decision  letter
    went on to consider other documents including a P 45 dated  16  October
    2014  demonstrating  the  EEA  national  sponsor  may  not  have   been
    exercising treaty rights as a worker or self-employed person  that  the
    printed bank statements showing payments of jobseekers  allowance  were
    also noted but no evidence to show that the sponsor was seeking  a  job
    during this period.

 9. As to evidence of self-employment, the decision letter  made  reference
    to the tax returns  but  that  they  had  stated  that  they  were  "in
    progress" and not complete and had not been submitted to the  HMRC.  It
    also made reference to expected  evidence  such  as  SA302  tax  return
    forms, audited accounts and  evidence  of  NI  contributions.  It  also
    considered a letter from JRK Accounting Services  making  reference  to
    the period of self-employment. This was not acceptable as a  sufficient
    evidence of  self-employment.  In  addition,  it  was  noted  from  the
    evidence there was no address  for  the  business.  As  a  result,  the
    Secretary of State was unable to establish whether the EEA sponsor  had
    been exercising treaty rights for a continuous  period  of  five  years
    whilst employed self-employed.

10. It further stated that as he had not made  a  valid  application  under
    Article 8, consideration had not been given as to whether  his  removal
    from the UK would breach Article 8 of the ECHR. The letter went  on  to
    state that the decision not to issue a residence card did  not  require
    him to leave the United Kingdom if he could otherwise demonstrate  that
    he had a right to reside under to reside under the Regulations.

11. The appellant appealed the decision on the 30th March 2016. The  appeal
    came before the FTT (Judge Hudson). For the purposes  of  that  hearing
    the appellant had produced a bundle of documentation  that  included  a
    copy of the Divorce Absolute, a letter from  the  HMRC  confirming  the
    work history of the EEA national from 2011  -  2015,  letter  from  the
    accountancy services plus accounts and payslips from the  EEA  national
    and additional evidence relating to  the  appellant's  work  in  United
    Kingdom.

12. In a determination promulgated on 26 July 2017, Judge Hudson  dismissed
    his appeal. The judge made reference to the appellant having failed  to
    provide  accurate  information  in  the  application  form  having  not
    supplied details of the EEA sponsor's activity within the UK and having
    stated clearly that he was divorced at  the  date  of  the  application
    whereas in fact, he and his wife divorced on 10 January 2017 (which was
    after the application form and been submitted).

13. The judge considered  the  evidence  that  had  been  provided  by  the
    appellant relating to  the  work  history  of  his  former  spouse.  At
    paragraphs 13 to 14 the judge considered the evidence  as  recorded  in
    the refusal letter but noted that he had seen  incomplete  tax  returns
    and a letter from  the  JRK  accountancy  services  relating  to  self-
    employment from September 2009 to September  2015  and  had  also  seen
    accounts.

14.  At paragraph 13, the judge  again  made  reference  to  the  appellant
    having failed to supply evidence for the period of August 2013 to March
    2014 which was a point raised in  the  refusal  letter  but  the  judge
    further noted that  he  had  now  been  provided  with  "year  overview
    evidence and finalised tax returns" but that there was "nothing to tell
    me what form of self-employment was taking, when she  was  continuously
    trading or took any time off. I  do  not  know  in  what  way  she  was
    exercising treaty rights during that period, if indeed she was."

15. At paragraph 14, the  judge  noted  that  at  some  point  she  claimed
    jobseekers allowance  and  that  whilst  she  would  potentially  be  a
    qualified person during that period no information had been supplied as
    to when she was claiming what she had been doing. Thus he dismissed the
    appeal.

16. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the judge had erred in law by  failing  to  consider  all  of  the
    supporting documents in the appellant's bundle which set  out  the  EEA
    nationals working history throughout the marriage and  period  of  five
    years. The  grounds  also  relied  upon  the  respondent's  own  policy
    guidance published  on  1  February  2017  whereby  the  policy  listed
    reasonable evidence as proof of employment and self-employment.

17.   On  the  2nd  May  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  granted
    permission for the following reasons:

         "It  is  arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  relevant
         supporting documents from pages 3 - 34 the bundle, setting out  the
         EEA nationals working history between 2009 and  2015.  It  is  also
         arguable that the respondents policy guidelines which it is claimed
         produced and referred to, were not considered  by  the  judge.  The
         latter came should be  substantiated  at  the  hearing  before  the
         Tribunal."

18. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I heard from both  advocates.
    Mr Manu relied upon the grounds  and  took  the  Tribunal  through  the
    documentation to demonstrate the EEA nationals working history for  the
    relevant period of time. He provided a copy  of  the  relevant  extract
    from the respondent's guidance which made reference to  the  definition
    of self-employment and in particular the reasonable evidence  of  self-
    employment which included proof of registration for  tax  and  national
    insurance  purposes  with  HMRC,  business  bank  statements.  Thus  he
    submitted that in line with the  policy,  the  appellant  had  produced
    before  the  Tribunal  reasonable  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the
    appellant was self-employed during the relevant period.

19. Following those submissions, Mr McVeety on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State did not seek  to  uphold  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal observing that there had been sufficient evidence provided  to
    demonstrate that the EEA national was self-employed (and  employed  for
    some of those periods) for the relevant five year period. He  submitted
    what was required was  evidence  to  show  economic  activity,  whether
    employed or self-employed, and that on the material that was  presented
    when  seen  in  the  light  of  the  policy  guidance,  this  had  been
    sufficient.

20. In the light of those submissions, it was accepted that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a  point  of
    law by reference to the documentation presented to the Tribunal.

21. Dealing with that material, there was a  letter  from  the  accountants
    (page 10) confirming her registration with the HMRC as self-employed in
    September 2009-2015. Complete accounts for the periods 2009 - 2015 were
    exhibited in the bundle between pages 11 -  34  showing  evidence  from
    self-employment during those accountancy periods. In addition at page 3
    there was a letter from the HMRC enclosing the SA302 documentation from
    2011 to 2014. These were the documents  referred  to  in  the  original
    refusal letter which had not been previously provided. Those  documents
    set out the profit  from  both  self-employment  but  also  periods  of
    employment for the years 2011-2012, 2012  -  2013,  2013-2014,  2014  -
    2015. Those documents also made reference to National  Insurance  being
    paid and tax also being paid for her periods of  employment  and  self-
    employment. There were also payslips within the bundle for  periods  in
    2013 and 2013 - 2015 which supported the periods of employment referred
    to in the HMRC documentation.

22. As Mr Manu submitted, the  documentation  that  had  been  produced  to
    demonstrate self-employment corresponded  to  the  reasonable  evidence
    expected. The policy does make reference  to  the  reasonable  evidence
    expected to be produced in such applications. It is not exhaustive  nor
    can it be conclusive. However by reference to the  documentation  taken
    in its totality and the submission made by Mr McVeety  that  there  was
    sufficient evidence to demonstrate self-employment during the  relevant
    period, the appellant is entitled to succeed  in  his  application  for
    permanent residence.

23. Therefore in the circumstances, the  appellant  has  demonstrated  that
    there was a material error of law in the decision made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. I set aside that decision and re-make  it  allowing  the
    appeal.


    Decision:


    The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The decision  is
    re -made; the appeal is allowed.



Signed [pic]
                                Date: 8/11/2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds








