
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03004/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th December 2016                    |On 05th January 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                          DR EMEKA HENRY NWANONYIRI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed against the decision
    of the Respondent dated 26th February 2016 refusing his application for
    a residence card as the former spouse of an  EEA  national  (Ms  Ramata
    Sy).

 2. His appeal was heard and dismissed by Judge  Manyarara  under  the  EEA
    Regulations on the basis that the judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's former spouse was exercising treaty rights at the time that
    the decree absolute was pronounced. The judge noted that the  Appellant
    had  chosen  not  to  have  an  oral  hearing,  noting  that  the  only
    documentation relating  to  his  former  EEA  spouse's  employment  had
    already been considered by the Respondent in the refusal decision.

 3. The grounds of application were lodged on the basis that  the  required
    evidence was in existence and it is said by the Appellant "I have  been
    able to secure my former spouse's July payslip" which proves  that  she
    was in fact exercising treaty rights at the material date.

 4. The grounds of application were initially refused on the basis that the
    judge could not be  faulted  for  not  considering  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had not submitted with the  application.   The  grounds  were
    renewed to the Upper Tribunal it being noted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rimington that new evidence could not be taken into account  unless  it
    was before the judge and would not unsettle the decision.  Nevertheless
    it is said it was arguable that the judge gave only  limited  reasoning
    as to why the evidence was deemed insufficient.

 5. A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the Secretary of State stating that  the
    grounds were a simple disagreement with the findings of the  judge  and
    it was clear at paragraphs 15 and 16 that the judge was observing  that
    despite being put on notice in the issue the Appellant had not provided
    the relevant evidence.

 6. Thus the appeal came before me on the above date. At  that  time  there
    were two further small bundles from the Appellant.  In a  letter  dated
    1st December 2016 he gives the reason why  the  July  payslip  for  his
    former spouse was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. Before me the Appellant confirmed that this document had  been  missing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and that he  had  elected  to  have  his
    appeal heard on the papers.

 8. Mr Duffy relied on the Rule 24 notice.

 9. I reserved my decision.

 Conclusions

10. It is not disputed that the July payslip was a crucial document in  the
    judge's assessment of whether or not the Appellant's former spouse  was
    working as at the date of divorce. It is accepted by the Appellant that
    this document was not before the  judge  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given his absence the judge was, at the least, entitled to  proceed  in
    the manner he did, namely by  concluding  that,  in  its  absence,  the
    Appellant had not proved his former spouse was exercising treaty rights
    at the material time.

11. There is therefore no error of law in the judge's decision  which  must
    stand.

12.  The  remedy  for  the  Appellant  is  to  lodge  a  fresh  application
    particularly  now  that  he  does  appear   to   have   the   necessary
    documentation to prove his case.  However, in relation to  the  present
    proceedings, there is no error of law in the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

14. I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

