

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/03582/2018
      EA/03954/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 19 December 2018                 |On Wednesday 9 January 2019  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MS TSEHAINESH ZERAI
                              MR DANIEL VACCARO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Patel, Counsel instructed on a direct access
basis
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1.    The Appellants appeal against the  decisions  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  John  Hillis  both  promulgated  on  10   August   2018   ("the
      Decisions"). By the Decisions  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellants'
      appeals against the Respondent's decision dated 2  May  2018  refusing
      them a permanent residence card as an EEA (Italian)  qualified  person
      and her family member (spouse).   The appeals are linked  to  that  of
      the  Appellants'  minor  son  (Mr  Massimo   Vacaro:   appeal   number
      EA/03955/2018) but the Judge appears to have  overlooked  that  appeal
      and, on the face of it, there is as yet no  decision  in  relation  to
      that appeal and therefore no  application  for  permission  to  appeal
      against any decision.

2.    The Judge dismissed the appeals on the basis that the  Appellants  had
      failed to provide evidence in support of their  case  that  the  First
      Appellant has exercised Treaty rights in the UK from  29  August  2010
      onwards, first as a self-employed person and, after 9 February 2012 on
      an employed basis.   The appeals were determined on the papers at  the
      Appellants' request.  The Appellants  indicated  that  they  would  be
      serving the relevant documentation  following  the  lodging  of  their
      grounds of appeal, but the Judge found that  they  had  not  done  so.
      The Appellants' sole ground of appeal is on the basis that this is  an
      error of fact because they had sent the documents  under  cover  of  a
      letter dated 3 July 2018 and those were signed for  on  5  July  2018.
      They say that this error of fact amounts to an error  of  law  because
      the Judge failed to take into account relevant evidence.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mailer
      on 15 October 2018 in the First Appellant's appeal  in  the  following
      terms so far as relevant:

         "... [2] The grounds assert that all the documents were  filed  and
         served by her letter dated 3 July 2018. She complied with  the  FTT
         directions  dated  7  June  2018.   The   documents   and   written
         submissions relating to her appeal as well as the  related  appeals
         of Mr Daniel  Vaccaro  and  Mr  Massimo  Vacaro,  were  sent.   She
         enclosed a copy of the relevant post office reference  numbers  and
         proof of delivery which was signed for on 5 July 2018, by Madhu and
         Fawad.


         [4]      It is arguable that in the circumstances  there  may  have
         been procedural unfairness through no fault of the Judge.


         [5]      The grounds are arguable."


      The grant in the Second Appellant's appeal is in similar terms.

4.    The matters come before me to assess whether  the  Decisions  disclose
      an error of law and to re-make the decisions or remit  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Discussion and Conclusions

5.    I can deal with these appeals very shortly.  A  letter  dated  3  July
      2018 and headed with the details of the three appeals is on the  First
      Appellant's file along with the evidence  served  thereunder.   It  is
      date-stamped as received at Arnhem Support Centre on 5 July 2018 which
      is consistent with the Appellants' evidence as to delivery.  There  is
      a note asking for this to be linked with the  files,  but  it  is  not
      clear when that was done and therefore whether  it  was  before  Judge
      Hillis.  Whatever the position in that regard, the  Decisions  contain
      an error of fact because the evidence had been filed with the Tribunal
      prior to those Decisions being made.  That amounts to an error of  law
      because, as a result of the error of fact, the  Judge  has  failed  to
      take into account relevant  evidence  that  was  before  the  Tribunal
      (whether or not it was actually on the file before the Judge).

6.    For those reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Decisions  contain  a
      material error of law.  I therefore set aside the Decisions.

7.    In relation to the question whether I should remit the appeals to  the
      First-tier Tribunal or re-determine them myself, I have had regard  to
      the Joint Practice Statement of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
      Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in  this  Tribunal.   That
      reads as follows:

         "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-


          a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or


          b) the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

 8.   Although as Judge Mailer  made  clear,  Judge  Hillis  may  have  been
      unaware of the evidence which had been lodged if that had not  reached
      the file, there are no findings about what that evidence shows.  I  am
      therefore satisfied that it is appropriate to remit the appeals to the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing  before  a  Judge  other  than
      Judge John Hillis.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  should  note  that  the
      linked appeals include that of the minor son of the First  and  Second
      Appellants which also needs to be determined alongside their appeals.


DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decisions  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  John  Hillis
promulgated on 10 August 2018 are set aside.  The appeals  are  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.

Signed           [pic] Dated: 19 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
