
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03096/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 30 March 2021                    |On: 07 April 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                          olarewaju akunyun akinola
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Ferguson, instructed by SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant, a national  of  Nigeria  born  on  25  September  1956,
      appeals with permission against the respondent's decision to refuse to
      issue him with an EEA family permit under  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations") as the  family
      member (spouse) of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

   3. The appellant applied on 6 February  2019  for  a  residence  card  to
      confirm that he  was  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  (Irish
      national) exercising Treaty rights in  the  UK.  His  application  was
      refused on 4 June 2019 on the basis that the evidence relied  upon  to
      demonstrate that his wife was exercising Treaty rights as a worker was
      not accepted. The appellant had claimed that his wife was employed  by
      Heathfields Care Ltd as a carer and had provided  wage  slips  and  an
      employer letter purporting to confirm  her  employment.  However,  the
      respondent, having conducted external checks to verify the  documents,
      noted that the wage slips submitted  for  Heathfields  Care  Ltd  were
      found to be false and that there was no record of the  sponsor  having
      worked at Heathfields Care Ltd.

   4. The appellant lodged an appeal against that decision on 28 June  2019,
      asserting that he had produced adequate  evidence  to  show  that  his
      sponsor was in paid employment  and  exercising  treaty  rights  as  a
      worker and further that  it  was  in  the  interests  of  justice  and
      fairness that the  respondent  should  disclose  the  external  checks
      verification report.

   5. Directions were made by the First-tier Tribunal on 27  September  2019
      for the parties  to  file  appeal  bundles.  On  8  October  2009  the
      appellant's  solicitors  produced  copies  of  the   appellant's   and
      sponsor's passports together with  further  evidence  of  the  sponsor
      exercising treaty rights in the  UK,  namely  eight  wage  slips  from
      February 2019 to September 2019, a letter dated 7  October  2019  from
      Heathfields Care Ltd and the sponsor's P60  for  the  tax  year  ended
      2019.

   6. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-
      Thompson on 7 November 2019. Neither the appellant nor the  respondent
      appeared before the Tribunal and the judge noted  that  the  appellant
      had indicated that he wanted the appeal determined on the papers.  The
      judge found that the appellant had produced no evidence to  contradict
      the respondent's allegations in the  refusal  decision  and  concluded
      that he had failed to demonstrate that his sponsor was exercising  her
      treaty rights in the UK. The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on the grounds that the respondent had failed to disclose the
      external checks verification report and that he had submitted  further
      evidence for the appeal, none of which  had  been  considered  by  the
      judge.

   8. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal and the matter  came
      before me for a hearing.

   9. Following a discussion between  myself  and  the  parties  as  to  the
      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, Ms Everett accepted that  the
      decision was flawed by reason of the lack of recognition by the  judge
      that the burden  of  proof  lay  upon  the  respondent  and  that  the
      respondent had provided no evidence to support the allegation  of  the
      sponsor's documents being false.  It  was  also  unclear  whether  the
      judge's finding, at [16], that the appellant had not provided evidence
      to contradict  the  respondent's  allegations,  took  account  of  the
      documents referred to at [6]. Those were the documents referred to  in
      my paragraph 5 above, as produced on 8 October 2019.

  10. As to the disposal of the  appeal,  Ms  Ferguson  requested  that  the
      decision be re-made on the documentation before me and that the appeal
      be allowed on the grounds that there was evidence to demonstrate  that
      the sponsor was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  Ms  Everett
      accepted that she was in  some  difficulty  as  she  did  not  have  a
      document verification report and therefore no evidence to support  the
      allegations made in the  refusal  decision.  She  requested  that  the
      matter be adjourned in order to enable the respondent to produce  such
      evidence, but she accepted that it was a matter for me whether or  not
      such an opportunity should be provided.

  11. It seems to me that there is no proper reason for  the  matter  to  be
      adjourned for the respondent to be given an opportunity to provide the
      evidence upon which she concluded that the  sponsor's  documents  were
      false. There has already been ample opportunity for the respondent  to
      have done so, with the appellant raising the matter in her grounds  of
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal prior to the hearing and the  matter
      forming part of the grant of permission leading to the hearing  before
      me. On the other hand, the appellant has continued to provide  further
      evidence  when  requested  and  is  entitled  to  have  that  properly
      considered. Accordingly, having set  aside  Judge  Suffield-Thompson's
      decision, I have proceeded to re-make the decision on the evidence now
      available to me.

  12. The  appellant  has  produced  a  substantial  amount  of  documentary
      evidence of the sponsor's employment, in the form  of  HMRC  documents
      confirming her previous employment as a carer for Medicrest  Ltd  from
      17 March 2016 to 13 August 2018 together with letters from Heathfields
      Care Ltd, wage slips and a P60 for her employment  with  that  company
      from 15 August 2018. The evidence before the ECO included the evidence
      from the previous employment with Medicrest  Ltd,  together  with  two
      letters dated 2 July 2018 and 30 January 2019  from  Heathfields  Care
      Ltd confirming the  sponsor's  employment  and  wage  slips  dated  30
      September 2018 to 31 January 2019. For the appeal  before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, the appellant produced the documents at my paragraph  5
      above, and in response to directions from the  Upper  Tribunal  on  22
      June 2020 the appellant provided a further letter dated  1  July  2020
      from Heathfields Care Ltd and a P60 for the tax  year  ended  5  April
      2020. There  is  no  evidence  from  the  respondent  to  support  the
      allegation made in the decision of 4 June 2019 that the wage slips for
      Heathfields Care Ltd were false.

  13.  The  respondent's  case   is   therefore   nothing   more   than   an
      unsubstantiated allegation and accordingly the respondent  has  failed
      to discharge the burden of proving that the sponsor's  documents  were
      false. In the absence of any  evidence  to  support  the  respondent's
      allegation, and in the light of the numerous documents produced by the
      appellant which pre-date and post-date the respondent's decision,  the
      only conclusion to be reached is that the  appellant  has  established
      that the sponsor is exercising treaty rights in the UK as a worker.

  14. Given that there was no other basis for the respondent having  refused
      the appellant's application, this appeal must succeed on  the  grounds
      that the respondent's decision is in breach of the appellant's  rights
      under the EEA Regulations.


DECISION

  15. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and is
      re-made by allowing the appellant's appeal under the  EEA  Regulations
      2016.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  30 March 2021
