
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ea/03073/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                            |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 28th November 2018                         |On 3rd December 2018         |


Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


Between:
                                  amadu [b]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Harshaka Kannangara (counsel instructed by Jade Law)
For the respondent: Mr Toby Lindsay


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Chris Nicholls), sitting at  Taylor  House  on  6  July
    2017, to  an EEA appeal by a citizen of Sierra Leone, born 1975.

 2. The appellant's history is not in dispute. He arrived here in 2004, and
    by 2008 had formed a relationship with a Polish citizen, with  whom  he
    had a son on 9 November that year. On the basis of that relationship he
    was given a residence card on 29 November 2010, valid for  five  years.
    In November 2013 he parted company with  his  baby-mother,  but  on  19
    November 2015 applied for a permanent right of residence on  the  basis
    of the qualifying period he had spent in this country.  On  27  January
    2016 that was refused, on  the  basis  that  his  residence  here  only
    qualified from when he got his residence  card,  so  that  he  had  not
    achieved the necessary five years by the date  of  his  separation.  On
    that basis the judge dismissed the appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier Tribunal, but  given
    by a deputy Upper Tribunal judge, on  the  basis  of  various  reported
    decisions. Of these, PM (EEA - spouse - 'residing with') Turkey  [2011]
    UKUT 89  (IAC)  applies  expressly  to  spouses,  while  the  questions
    referred to the Court of Justice of the European Communities in  Banger
    (Unmarried Partner of British National : South Africa) [2017] UKUT  125
    (IAC) have nothing to do with the present case. The  answers  to  those
    referred in Netherlands v Reed [1986] EUECJ R-59/85  do  no  more  than
    require parity in treatment as between 'unmarried partners' of citizens
    of the country in question, and those of other EEA citizens.

 4. Mr Kannangara did not seek to rely on any other European  jurisprudence
    or legislation, so I  shall  turn  now  to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016. These are the relevant  provisions  on
    permanent right of residence:

         '15. -      (1)   The following persons acquire the right to reside
             in the United Kingdom permanently-

                  (a)      an EEA national who has  resided  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for   a
                  continuous period of five years;

                  (b)      a family member of an EEA national who is not  an
                  EEA national but who has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  with the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations
                  for a continuous period of five years;

                  ...

                  (f)      a person who-

                      (i)  has resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance
                      with these Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
                      five years; and

                      (ii) was, at the end of the period, a  family  member
                      who has retained the right of residence.'

 5. As for who is a family member, the relevant provisions are these:

         '7. -       (1)   In these Regulations, "family member"  means,  in
             relation to a person ("A")-

                  (a)      A's spouse or civil partner;

             (3)    A person ("B") who is an extended family member and has
             been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a   registration
             certificate or a residence card must be treated  as  a  family
             member of A, provided-

                  (a)       B  continues  to  satisfy  the   conditions   in
                  regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5); and

                  (b)      the EEA family permit,  registration  certificate
                  or residence card remains in force.'

 6. It follows that, if and so long as a residence card remains  in  force,
    an 'unmarried partner' who is living in a 'durable relationship' with a
    'qualified person' may acquire a permanent right of residence. On  that
    basis, if the appellant's qualifying residence began with his  'durable
    relationship' with his baby-mother in or before November 2008, then  he
    would have become  entitled  to  a  permanent  right  of  residence  by
    November 2013, when their relationship came to an end; but  not  if  it
    could only be treated as  starting  from  the  issue  of  his  card  in
    November 2010.

 7. Mr Kannangara, as already noted, did not refer to any specific European
    material; but, as he quite rightly  said,  on  general  principles  the
    grant of a residence card, like the grant of  asylum,  but  unlike  the
    grant of leave under domestic  provisions,  recognizes  a  status  that
    already exists, rather than creating one. He was also right  in  saying
    that reg. 7 is silent as to when family member status arises.

 8. However the first question in this case is whether there  was  anything
    to give the appellant the  status  of  family  member,  as  opposed  to
    extended family member, before the issue  of  his  residence  card.  At
    best, from his point of view, he might have qualified for  that  status
    from 2008 to 2010, if he had put forward evidence to the judge to  show
    that his baby-mother had been here as a 'qualified person',  exercising
    Treaty rights throughout that time. However he made no  attempt  to  do
    so.

 9. On the other hand, there is in my view a  great  deal  to  be  said  in
    general terms for reading reg. 7 on the basis  of  what  it  does  say,
    rather than what might, or might not be read  into  it.  It  creates  a
    status of family member in favour of an extended family member  with  a
    residence card, who  would  not  otherwise  have  that  status.  It  is
    entirely reasonable to treat that status as only arising at that point,
    at which it may well be assumed that the EEA citizen concerned was here
    as a 'qualified person'.

10. There is another consideration in many cases of this kind,  though  not
    so much in this one. While spouses are able  to  point  to  a  definite
    beginning of their status as family  members,  by  reference  to  their
    marriage certificate, an  'unmarried  partnership'  (as  opposed  to  a
    registered civil partnership) has by definition no recognized beginning
    before the issue of a card. It is not  unreasonable  to  treat  it,  on
    principle, as starting from that point.

11. The reason that consideration is not so strong in  this  case  is  that
    there can be no argument but that the appellant and his baby-mother did
    have a 'durable relationship', from before the birth of  their  son  in
    2008 till their separation in 2013. However the fact that here so  much
    is clear cannot affect the rightness, or otherwise,  on  principle,  of
    regarding his status as family member as beginning from  the  issue  of
    his residence card in 2010.

12. There  is  no  dispute  but  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  'durable
    relationship' for five years; but he has not  shown  that  he  had  the
    status to qualify him for a permanent right for more than  three.  Even
    if I were wrong about the meaning to be given to regs. 7 and 15, he has
    not shown that his baby-mother was here as a 'qualified person'  before
    2010.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                       Date
                                   : 28th November 2018
