
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/03797/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 January 2018                         |On 12 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                            mr evans Akogu amana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     M A Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria,  born  on  14  May  1971.   He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission from Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Brunnen given on 13 October 2017.  Judge Brunnen  decided
    that the reason for deciding the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the appellant (based on the case of Sala [2016] UKUT 416 (IAC))
    was arguably wrong.   Accordingly, Judge Brunnen granted permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The Upper Tribunal was referred to the case  of  Khan  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 by  Mr  Tarlow,  who
    represents the respondent.  According to that  case  Sala  was  wrongly
    decided. In Khan the Court of Appeal decided  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had jurisdiction to hear an appeal from a refusal by the  Secretary  of
    State to issue a residence card, for example,  to  an  extended  family
    member.  The appellant in  this  case  claims  to  have  established  a
    relationship with a Polish  national  called  Teresa  Baleyzer.  Having
    established such a relationship, the appellant applied for a  permanent
    resident card  and,  following  refusal,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.   At the hearing I  was  shown  a  fax  of  23  November  2017  from  the
    appellant's representatives, Messrs M A  Consultants,  indicating  that
    they were in receipt of correspondence from the Home Office  confirming
    that there was no objection to the matter being remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. This was, presumably,  in  the
    light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of Khan.   The
    fax records that in her Rule 24 response the respondent  has  indicated
    that she does not oppose the application for permission  to  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. I understand from Mr Tarlow that the basis for
    the consensual remittal of this matter is that the  case  of  Khan,  to
    which reference has been made.

4.   I take into account the fact that  there  was  no  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and certainly no hearing on the merits, the appeal
    being dealt with on the papers. It is clear to me having regard to  the
    case of Khan that there was a material error by the First-tier Tribunal
    in determining that there was no right of appeal. I  therefore  find  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It
    will be necessary to hold a de novo hearing in front of  any  judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   I therefore direct that this  matter  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by  any  judge  of  that  tier.    All  additional
    directions will be made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

I direct that the appeal against the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse
to issue a residence card be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 07 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award but have decided to make no fee award



Signed                                  Date 07 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury






