
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03797/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                seyaka sonko
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Chowdhury, instructed by Stuart & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia born on 12 May  1957.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan  promulgated
    on 13 March 2013  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
    residence card under Regulations 7  and  8  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016.




Facts

2.   The Appellant entered the UK in 2004 on a visit visa. At  the  time  he
    was married  to  his  ex-wife  Haji  Yai  Ngoneh  Jallow,  a  Norwegian
    national. On 28 June 2010 the Appellant was issued  with  a  five  year
    residence card on the basis of his relationship with his  ex-wife.  The
    parties separated in April 2010 and divorced on 15 March 2013.

3.   The Appellant married his second wife Neneh Sanyang  Bajao,  a  Swedish
    national, by proxy on 4 July 2013. They have lived  together  since  19
    May 2010. On 15 June 2015, the Appellant  made  an  application  for  a
    residence card as a spouse. This was refused on 16 December 2015 as the
    Appellant failed to provide evidence that he was legally divorced  from
    his first wife and free to marry again and that the laws of the  Gambia
    Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act,  Chapter  42:01  Act  No.  1  of  1941
    appertaining to customary marriages had been adhered to.

4.   The Appellant's appeal was dismissed on 25  April  2017  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birk because there was insufficient evidence of domicile
    of the parties such that the divorce and subsequent marriage  were  not
    valid. Secondly, the Appellant had not shown that  the  proxy  marriage
    would be recognised as valid in the country of the EEA  national,  i.e.
    Sweden. Thirdly, the case of Sala applied. There was no right of appeal
    under Regulation 8 as an unmarried partner.

5.   On 14 February 2018 the Appellant submitted a second application for  a
    residence card which was refused on 10 May 2018. The Appellant appealed
    the decision and the matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan.
    The sole issue before the First-tier Tribunal was the validity  of  the
    Appellant's divorce and  subsequent  marriage  to  their  Sponsor.  The
    second and third reasons given by Judge Birk no longer applied  because
    Kareem and Sala had been overturned  on  those  points.  The  Appellant
    produced further evidence in the supplementary bundle namely  a  letter
    from the Gambian High Commission dated 21 January 2019 confirming  that
    the marriage was valid.


Permission to appeal

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 18 April 2019 for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the judge has misdirected himself


         (a)  by failing to take into account the  letter  from  the  Gambia
             High Commissioner dated 21 January  2019  which  confirms  the
             genuineness of the Appellant's marriage to his EEA national by
             the Gambian authorities where the marriage was contracted;


         (b)  when considering  the  expert  report  of  Cherno  Marenah  by
             finding that the expert does  not  explain  how  and  on  what
             authority she has based  her  interpretation  of  domicile  in
             Gambia when the expert stated that there is no  definition  of
             domicile in any statutes in the Gambia. The expert went on  to
             state that a person is deemed to be domiciled if  that  person
             has a substantial connection with the Gambia even  though  the
             person is living abroad. In addition, by making no findings in
             relation to the case of SM (domicile  of  choice:  Scots  law)
             Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00092  which  was  relied  upon  by  the
             Appellant in this regard; and


         (c)  by failing to give adequate reasons as to  the  weight  to  be
             given to all the evidence lodged (pages  32  to  402)  of  the
             Appellant's bundle to show that the Appellant is in a  durable
             relationship with his EEA national and not just relying on one
             letter which is in joint names to show that  they  are  living
             together."


Submissions

7.   Ms Chowdhury  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  grant  of
    permission. She submitted that the judge failed to consider the  expert
    report when considering the genuineness of the  proxy  marriage.  There
    was no definition of domicile in Gambian law and the Appellant's  links
    with Gambia were sufficient to show that he was domiciled there due  to
    his family ties and his two marriages.

8.   The case of SM was relied on in the Appellant's skeleton  argument  and
    in submissions before the judge, but the judge failed to refer  to  the
    case in his findings.  In  essence  the  judge  relied  on  a  previous
    decision and failed to make any  findings  on  domicile.  The  previous
    decision relied on Kareem (proxy marriage -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  24
    which at the date of the decision under challenge had been reconsidered
    by the Court of Appeal in Awuku [2016] EWCA Civ 1303. The judge  failed
    to consider the further evidence and the change in the  law  since  the
    previous decision. Further, there was an abundance of evidence  in  the
    bundle showing that the Appellant and his Sponsor had  cohabited  since
    May 2010. There  was  evidence  in  the  witness  statements  that  the
    relationship was genuine. The judge made no finding that the  Appellant
    and his sponsor were not credible witnesses.

9.   Ms Chowdhury explained that  the  Sponsor  was  unable  to  attend  the
    hearing before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Khan  because  of  the  late
    notice given for the appeal hearing by the Appellant's solicitors.  She
    had however attended the hearing on the previous  two  occasions  which
    had been adjourned.

10.  Ms Everett submitted that the  judge  had  made  an  error  of  law  in
    relation to Regulation 8. The conclusion that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence of a durable relationship was not open to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before him. She submitted that the burden was on the Appellant
    to show that their marriage was valid.

Error of law

11.  I found that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  relying  on  the  previous
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk and failing to consider  the
    letter from the Gambia High Commission dated 21  January  2019  stating
    that the marriage was valid. Accordingly, I  set  aside  the  decision.
    None of the findings were preserved and I adjourned  the  matter  until
    2pm for rehearing.


Re-hearing

12.  When the hearing  recommenced  Ms  Chowdhury  relied  on  the  original
    bundle of documents of 401 pages  and  a  supplementary  bundle  of  22
    pages. Helpfully, Ms Everett gave a preliminary view and submitted that
    she accepted there was sufficient evidence of  a  durable  relationship
    and there was no reason to cross-examine the witnesses or challenge the
    evidence that  was  in  the  bundle  and  in  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement.

13.  In relation to the  marriage,  Ms  Everett  submitted  that  there  was
    nothing from the Respondent to rebut the evidence in the expert  report
    regarding domicile. She accepted that late registration of the  divorce
    would not affect its legality. The marriage and divorce were  dependent
    on domicile and the expert evidence was very vague. However, there  was
    the letter at page 2 of the Appellant's supplementary bundle  from  the
    Gambia High Commission confirming the validity of the marriage.

14.  Ms  Chowdhury  submitted  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  satisfy
    Regulations 7 and 8  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016.  I
    indicated that I was satisfied this was the case and I would allow  the
    appeal.  My reasons are as follows.

15.  I have considered the evidence in  the  Appellant's  witness  statement
    dated 3 January 2019 and the Sponsor's witness statement of  5  January
    2019 in conjunction with the abundance of evidence in  the  Appellant's
    bundle that the Appellant and Sponsor have been cohabiting since  2010.
    I am satisfied on the basis of this evidence  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor are in  a  durable  relationship  and  I  am  grateful  for  Ms
    Everett's concession on that point.  The appeal  is  therefore  allowed
    under Regulation 8.

16.  In relation to the validity of the marriage, I take note of the  expert
    report at pages 14 to 19 of the Appellant's bundle confirming that  the
    certificate issued  in  respect  of  the  marriage  was  valid  and  an
    authentic legal document. The Appellant has also produced evidence from
    the Gambia High Commission which states:

         "Authentication of Marriage Certificate


         To Whom It May Concern


         The High Commissioner of the  Republic  of  the  Gambia  in  London
         hereby certifies that the affidavit  of  Declaration  of  facts  on
         Marriage between Mr Seyako Sonko and Mrs Neneh Sanyang both Gambian
         nationals residing in the United Kingdom is authentic and  genuine.




         The authentication  certificate  with  serial  number  0360170  was
         signed by Mr Abdou Conteh, registration of marriages on 15th day of
         August 2013 in accordance  with  Mohammedan  Marriage  and  Divorce
         Ordnance Act 1941."

17.  The issue of domicile does not arise given the evidence from  the  High
    Commission as to the validity of the marriage. If the marriage is valid
    the divorce must also be valid and therefore the Appellant was free  to
    enter into his marriage with the Sponsor. Accordingly, I find that  the
    Appellant has provided sufficient evidence to satisfy Regulations 7 and
    Regulation 8 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2016.  I  allow  the
    appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulation 2016

No anonymity direction is made.


                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid.


                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


