
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/03150/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th November 2018                   | On 27th November 2018              |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                          mr sanjaya bhakta kandel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr C U U Ikegwuruya (Almond Legals)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in respect  of
    a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross promulgated on 16th  March
    2018 after a hearing on 26th January 2018 at Taylor House.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal and had made an application  for  a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national.  The  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on the basis that the  Appellant  and
    his wife had  not  attended  on  four  occasions  for  interview.   The
    Secretary of State decided that this was not a genuine marriage  but  a
    marriage of convenience. That was the issue to be decided by the  Judge
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Judge heard evidence from both  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  but
    nowhere in his Decision and Reasons is there any mention of or analysis
    of that evidence. The Judge has not considered for himself  whether  or
    not this was a genuine marriage and has simply followed  the  Secretary
    of State's rationale.  The Appellant and his spouse  had  not  attended
    for interview and therefore he dismissed the appeal.  That is clearly a
    material error of law.  The Judge was tasked with deciding whether this
    was a marriage of convenience and he failed to do that.

 4. With the agreement of the representative for the  Secretary  of  State,
    the decision is set aside in its entirety and remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a full rehearing on all matters.

 5. There is no application for or necessity for an anonymity order in this
    case.

Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a full rehearing at Taylor House.




Signed [pic]                            Date 21st November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

