
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA035252015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided on the papers                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2017                               |On 3 July 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              MRS VIOLET IDEHEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by a national of Nigeria who applied for a  residence
    card as the extended family member of her EEA national (German) sponsor
    who is said to be her unmarried partner. The Appellant appeals  against
    the Respondent's decision dated 19 November 2015 refusing to issue  her
    with a residence card.  Her appeal was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thorne  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  3  October  2016  ("the
    Decision").

 2. The Judge accepted that the evidence given by  the  Appellant  and  her
    partner was credible, it not being challenged by the Respondent who was
    not represented.  He therefore allowed the  appeal  to  the  extent  of
    requiring  the  Respondent  to  exercise  her  discretion  to  grant  a
    residence card in light of the Judge's findings.

 3. The Respondent appealed the Decision on the sole basis that  the  Judge
    had no jurisdiction to decide the appeal following  the  case  of  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal) UKUT 00411 (IAC).

 4.  Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Nightingale by a decision sent on 11 January 2017.  The  terms  of  the
    refusal so far as relevant are as follows:-

         "[3] The grounds are correct in that there was no right  of  appeal
         to the First-tier Tribunal  in  light  of  the  decision  in  Sala.
         However, there is  also  no  onwards  appeal  from  the  First-tier
         Tribunal by reason of the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  Sala.  This
         application must, therefore, be refused for want of jurisdiction."

 5. On application to this Tribunal, I granted permission on the basis that
    the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision and this amounts  to
    an arguable error of law.  If a Judge  lacks  jurisdiction  to  make  a
    decision, then the decision is wrong in law and should not  be  allowed
    to stand.  Judge Nightingale was correct to observe that  the  case  of
    Sala means that  there  was  no  valid  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but wrong to conclude that as a result the Decision  discloses
    no arguable error of law.  There is an arguable error of law  precisely
    because the Judge made the Decision which he  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    make.  Accordingly, I granted permission by decision dated 23  February
    2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-

         "[2] This is an appeal which is  affected  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
         decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC).
         In that case, the Upper Tribunal decided that there is no right  of
         appeal in extended family member cases  such  as  this.   As  such,
         there is an arguable error of law disclosed by the Decision because
         the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear and  decide  this  appeal.
         The Judge does not refer to Sala which had been promulgated  nearly
         two months prior to the Decision.  The  refusal  of  permission  to
         appeal on the basis that if the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  have
         jurisdiction to decide the appeal then the First-tier does not have
         jurisdiction to set aside the Decision is wrong in  law.   Although
         the First-tier Tribunal (and indeed the  Upper  Tribunal)  did  not
         have jurisdiction to substantively decide the  appeal,  it  retains
         jurisdiction to decide whether the appeal is a valid one..."

    I then gave directions as follows:-

         "Unless either party files and serves objections in writing  to  be
         received within 14 days from the date when this decision is sent, I
         propose to find an error of law in the Decision on the  basis  that
         the Judge lacked jurisdiction to make it.  I then  propose  to  set
         aside the Decision and re-make it dismissing the appeal."

 6. I have not received a response from either party.

 7. As indicated in my grant of permission, the  Judge  made  the  Decision
    after the decision in Sala was promulgated.     The  decision  in  that
    case was promulgated on 19 August 2016.  I do not need to go  into  the
    substance of that decision in detail because neither  party  challenges
    the decision on the basis that it was wrongly decided.  In  short,  the
    Upper  Tribunal  (Mr  CMG  Ockelton,  Vice  President  and  UTJ  Grubb)
    concluded that in a case such as this involving the refusal to issue  a
    first residence permit to an extended family member there is  no  right
    of appeal against that refusal.  In that case, the Tribunal  found  for
    that reason that there was an error of law because there was  no  right
    of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The  Tribunal  therefore  set
    aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  substituted  its  own
    decision finding that there was no valid appeal.

 8. As I indicate, neither party challenges the correctness of the decision
    in Sala in this appeal.  For the same reasons as given in Sala, I  find
    that the Judge had no jurisdiction to make the Decision.   I  therefore
    set aside the Decision for that reason.  Since there  is  no  right  of
    appeal to the Tribunal, I have no jurisdiction to decide the appeal.  I
    therefore substitute my own decision finding that there was and  is  no
    valid appeal.


Decision
The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne discloses an error  of  law
because he made the decision when he had no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
appeal as the appeal was not valid.  I therefore set aside the  decision  of
First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thorne  promulgated  on  3  October  2016   and
substitute a decision that there was and is no valid appeal in this case.





Signed[pic]                         Dated:  30 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith







