
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03002/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 6 March 2018                     |On: 9 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                           Samuel Ibitosho Afolabi
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Dr Victor Onipede, Counsel
                    Instructed by London South Law Chambers
For the respondent:    Ms Zakera Ahmed, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal to
    grant him an EEA residence permit as a person as a  family  member  who
    has retained the right  of  residence  pursuant  to  Regulation  10  or
    Regulation 15 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (as amended).  The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.

Background

 2. The factual matrix in this  appeal  is  not  disputed.   The  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom in April 2006, on what basis is unclear.  On
    24 October 2009, he married an EEA citizen.   On  26  March  2010,  the
    appellant successfully applied for an EEA  residence  card,  which  was
    issued on 21 September 2010, to expire on 21 September 2015.

 3. However, on 15 February 2012, the appellant's EEA spouse deserted  him.



 4. On 18 September 2015,  the  appellant  applied  to  the  respondent  to
    recognise retained rights of residence.  He was then still  married  to
    his wife and divorce proceedings had not yet begun. The appellant  told
    the respondent that he did not know where  his  wife  was,  having  not
    heard from her since she deserted him.

 5. The appellant was unable to produce any evidence  of  his  wife  having
    exercised Treaty rights in the United Kingdom during the marriage.  The
    respondent endeavoured to verify whether the wife had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom at any time.

 6. The appellant thought his former spouse had worked for a company called
    CJA at a particular address.  The respondent's enquiries indicated that
    there was no company called CJA using that  postal  address,  that  the
    telephone number was not answered,  and  that  the  company  registered
    under that name at Companies House had a  different  address.   Neither
    party appears to have approached HMRC to see whether they had a  record
    of payment of income tax by the wife.

 7. On 9 November 2015, almost two months after making his  retained  right
    of residence claim, the appellant issued  divorce  proceedings  against
    his wife, as the petitioner.  He still did not know where she lived.

 8. On 15 February 2016, decree nisi was pronounced.  On 19 February  2016,
    the respondent refused to recognise retained rights  of  residence  for
    this appellant.

 9. On 15 April 2016, two months after the refusal letter, the marriage was
    finally ended by decree nisi of divorce.

First-tier Tribunal decision

10. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal.

Permission to appeal

11. Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that  the  period  under  Regulation  10(5)(d)(i)  had  arguably   been
    miscalculated.

Rule 24 Reply

12. There was no Rule 24 Reply.

13. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

14. I heard oral argument from Dr Onipede for the appellant,  and  from  Ms
    Ahmed for the respondent.  Dr Onipede relied on Regulation  10(5)(d)(i)
    and on the Upper Tribunal decision in OA as summarised in the  judicial
    headnote.  The appellant had produced forms P60 for the  years  2010  -
    2014 but not for the date of  the  termination  of  the  marriage.   He
    relied on the content of the appellant's bundle and accepted  that  the
    right of appeal in EEA cases did not arise out of  section  85  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

15. I did not consider it necessary to call upon Ms Ahmed in this appeal.

16. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

The EEA Regulations

17. So far as material, the provisions of Regulation 10 are as follows:

         10.-(1)  In these Regulations, "family member who has retained  the
         right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8), a  person  who
         satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5). ...

         (5)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

             (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person  on
             the termination of the marriage or civil  partnership  of  the
             qualified person;

             (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
             these Regulations at the date of the termination;

             (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

             (d)  either-

                  (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for  the
                  termination of the marriage or the civil  partnership  the
                  marriage or civil partnership  had  lasted  for  at  least
                  three years and the  parties  to  the  marriage  or  civil
                  partnership had resided in the United Kingdom for at least
                  one year during its duration;... or

                  (iv) the  continued  right  of  residence  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  of  the  person  is  warranted  by   particularly
                  difficult circumstances, such  as  he  or  another  family
                  member having been a victim of domestic violence while the
                  marriage or civil partnership was subsisting.

         (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person- ...

             (b)  is the  family  member  of  a  person  who  falls  within
             paragraph (a). ...

         (8)  A person with a permanent right of residence under  regulation
         15 shall not become a family member who has retained the  right  of
         residence on the death or departure from the United Kingdom of  the
         qualified person or  the  termination  of  the  marriage  or  civil
         partnership, as the case may  be,  and  a  family  member  who  has
         retained the right of residence shall cease to have that status  on
         acquiring a permanent right of residence under regulation 15."

18. Regulation 15(1)(f) allows for the acquisition of a permanent right  of
    residence for persons  who  have  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of 5 years, and
    who are, at the end of such period, a family member  who  has  retained
    the right of residence.

19. The definition of a  family  member  who  has  retained  the  right  of
    residence is pivotal both under Regulation 10 and Regulation 15.  If an
    appellant cannot bring himself within the definition of such  a  person
    in Regulation 10, then he also fails under  Regulation  15.  The  Upper
    Tribunal considered Regulation 10  in  OA  (EEA  -  retained  right  of
    residence) Nigeria (Rev 1) [2010] UKAIT 00003:

         "i.  Reg 10 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
         2006 is a free-standing provision which enables a family member who
         would otherwise cease to have a right of residence to  continue  to
         do so in certain circumstances. So far as concerns persons who fall
         within reg 10(5), so long as their marriage or civil partnership is
         at least three years old it is possible for them to qualify  for  a
         retained right of residence after just one year of residence in the
         United Kingdom. But to achieve a permanent right  of  residence  on
         the strength  of  a  retained  right  of  residence  it  is  always
         necessary to show residence in the UK for a  continuous  period  of
         five years.

         ii.  Under reg 10(5)(a) the phrase  "termination  of  the  marriage
         ..." can only mean the lawful  ending  of  the  marriage  by  legal
         proceedings (i.e.  divorce);  it  cannot  mean  "breakdown  of  the
         marriage"; see also WW (EEA Regs.  -  civil  partnership)  Thailand
         [2009] UKAIT 00014.

         iii. To count  as  a  qualifying  period  of  residence  under  reg
         15(1)(b) a person must show, inter alia, that  the  five  years  in
         question are  ones  in  which  the  said  residence  has  been  "in
         accordance with these Regulations". That entails that during  those
         five years the EEA national on whom the  family  member  relies  in
         order to establish his or her right must have been continuously  in
         the UK exercising  Treaty  rights  (save  for  certain  periods  of
         absence specified in reg 3).

         iv.  For the purposes of reg 15(1)(b) the  period  of  time  during
         which a person "has resided in the  United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
         national..." must commence from the date the person first became  a
         family member, that being the date of marriage in  the  case  of  a
         spouse.

         (v)  By contrast, Reg 15(1)(f) provides a  route  for  acquiring  a
         permanent right of residence based in part on a retained  right  of
         residence. Under reg 15(1)(f) the family member has to show that he
         was  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with   the
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years, and at  the  end
         of that period he has a retained right of residence."

20. In HS (EEA: revocation and  retained  rights)  Syria  [2011]  UKUT  165
    (IAC), the Upper Tribunal  considered  the  other  requirements  for  a
    genuine marriage and the exercise of  Treaty  rights  at  the  date  of
    termination of the marriage.  The judicial headnote in HS,  so  far  as
    material to this appeal, was as follows:

         "...2. Regulation 10 of Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 requires
         the applicant to demonstrate that: a genuine  marriage  has  lasted
         three years and the couple have spent  one  year  together  in  the
         United Kingdom and that the  EEA  national  spouse  was  exercising
         treaty rights at the time he ceased to be a family member."

21. The facts in this case do not entitle the appellant to a retained right
    of residence.  He can show from the forms  P60  that  his  wife  worked
    (perhaps) for CJA up to the end of the 2013/2014  tax  year.   But  CJA
    does not seem to be trading at the relevant address, at  least  not  in
    2015/2016 and there is no  other  evidence  that  his  wife  was  still
    exercising Treaty rights when this application was  made  in  September
    2015, nor in April 2016, when the marriage ended.

22. This application is  premature:  when  the  appellant  applied  to  the
    respondent for recognition that he was a family member who has retained
    the right of residence, the marriage had not been  legally  terminated.
    The appellant's wife had left him, some  three  years  previously,  but
    they were still married.  He did not  even  begin  divorce  proceedings
    until after he had made the application, and the  decree  absolute  was
    not received until after the refusal letter had been issued in February
    2016.

23. The ground on which permission to appeal was granted,  the  calculation
    of residence under Regulation 10(5)(d)(i), is a conjunctive part of the
    whole test in Regulation 10(5).  The appellant needs to show  that  the
    at the date of his application to be considered a  'family  member  who
    has retained the right of residence' under Regulation 10, the  marriage
    had been  terminated  by  a  decree  absolute  of  divorce  (Regulation
    10(5)(a)); that he was residing in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance
    with the Regulations at the date of termination (Regulation  10(5)(b)),
    in this case by showing that his former wife was  then  exercising  her
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom; that he is a  'family  member'  as
    defined in Regulation 10(6), about which there is no difficulty in this
    case; and that (in this  case)  the  marriage  lasted  for  the  period
    specified (Regulation 10(5)(d)(i)).  The present appellant cannot  meet
    either Regulation 10(5)(a) or (b) and therefore Regulation 10(5)(d)  is
    not reached.

24. This appeal is hopeless and I dismiss it.

DECISION

25. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:    8 March 2018  Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
