
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03944/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 March 2019                              |On 28 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                mAHMOOD SAJID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, NK Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born in June 1972, appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') against the  decision  of  the  respondent,
    taken on 14 May 2018, to refuse the appellant a  residence  card  as  a
    direct family member of his spouse, a British citizen ('the  sponsor').



 2. The respondent's reasons for  refusal  focussed  upon  the  absence  of
    sufficient evidence to establish that as  claimed  the  sponsor  was  a
    jobseeker for the purposes of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016
    ('the 2016 Regulations').

 3. The FTT dismissed the appeal against that decision, concluding that the
    appellant did not retain the status of jobseeker, given the  length  of
    time she purported to seek employment without a genuine chance of being
    engaged.

 4. In a decision dated 9 October 2018 FTT Judge Gibb granted permission to
    appeal, observing that the FTT arguably failed  to  take  into  account
    post-decision evidence, and arguably confined itself to the period 2013-
    2016 when determining the key issue - the  sponsor's  chance  of  being
    engaged.

 5. The matter now comes before me to determine whether the FTT's  decision
    contains an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Background facts

 6. The factual matrix  before  the  FTT  was  mostly  agreed  and  can  be
    summarised as follows.  The appellant and the sponsor married in France
    in 1998.  Prior  to  her  marriage  the  sponsor  worked  as  a  retail
    assistant in the UK between August 1997 and May 1998.  The  couple  had
    four  children  together.   Two  of  the  children  are  disabled.   In
    September 2013 the sponsor returned to the UK with her  four  children,
    whilst the appellant  continued  to  work  in  France.   The  appellant
    returned to live with the sponsor and  their  children  in  the  UK  in
    September 2016.  It has not been disputed that at  all  material  times
    the parties enjoyed a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 7. Shortly after her re-entry to the UK, the sponsor  was  in  receipt  of
    jobseekers allowance, in relation to which she had to demonstrate  that
    she was seeking work.  The sponsor was also in  receipt  of  a  carer's
    allowance in recognition of the care that she provided to her  disabled
    children.  The sponsor registered as an interpreter with an agency,  DA
    Languages Ltd, and signed a contract with them on 4 January 2018.  This
    required her to complete a DBS check, which was approved on 18  January
    2018.  The sponsor carried out work as an interpreter on  23  May  2018
    and 5 June 2018.   There  are  also  numerous  letters  /  applications
    (particularly for the second half of 2017 and the first half  of  2018)
    to confirm that the sponsor was actively  applying  for  jobs  at  this
    time.   These  include  unsuccessful  applications  to  a  variety   of
    employers (see pages 107-140 of the bundle before the FTT).  On 11 June
    2018 the sponsor started working for Zee Manufacturing  Ltd,  24  hours
    per week.

Legal framework

 8. For the purposes of the appeal to the FTT, Mr Tan agreed that the  only
    outstanding issue in dispute was whether or not the  sponsor  could  be
    said to be  a  jobseeker  as  defined  in  regulation  6  of  the  2016
    Regulations.  The parties accept that the sponsor remained a  jobseeker
    in excess of the "relevant period" defined at regulation  6(1)  and  as
    such was required to provide "compelling evidence of continuing to seek
    employment and having a genuine chance of being engaged"  in  order  to
    meet Condition B of being a jobseeker - see regulation 7  of  the  2016
    Regulations.



Hearing

 9. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Tan accepted that the FTT  erred  in
    law in confining its assessment of whether the sponsor  had  a  genuine
    chance of being engaged in employment to the period between her  return
    to the UK in 2013 and her husband's return to the UK  in  2016.   There
    was an obviously much lower prospect of being engaged in employment  at
    that time given the sponsor's caring responsibilities for her children,
    together with the absence of the appellant.   That  materially  changed
    when the appellant  began  living  with  the  family  in  the  UK  from
    September 2016.  He was able to assist in looking  after  the  children
    and the sponsor had a prima facie better chance of finding  employment.
    Mr Tan accepted that  the  FTT  erred  in  law  in  omitting  from  its
    assessment, consideration of the detailed evidence of applying for jobs
    from the second half  of  2017  and  eventually  obtaining  work  as  a
    translator prior to the decision letter and then  permanent  employment
    shortly after this - this was all available to the FTT as at  the  date
    of hearing.  Although the FTT referred to the sponsor's  employment  in
    passing at [14] of its decision, it is entirely unclear to what  extent
    if at all, it was taken into account.  Mr Tan was entirely  correct  to
    concede that the FTT erred in law for these reasons.

10. Mr Tan also accepted that given the detailed  evidence  available,  the
    sponsor  provided  compelling  evidence  over  a  sustained  period  of
    continuing to seek employment with a genuine chance of  being  engaged.
    Mr Tan also accepted that the sponsor became a worker on 11 June  2018.
    In these circumstances, Mr  Tan  accepted  that  I  should  remake  the
    decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.  The one issue in  dispute
    has been resolved in the appellant's favour  such  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of the 2016 Regulations.

Decision

11. The decision of the FTT contains an error on a point of law.  I set  it
    aside and re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.




Signed   UTJ Plimmer

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

26 March 2019
