
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03301/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Oral decision given following hearing |                                      |
|On 5 April 2017                       |On 13 June 2017                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                               MR NAGY ISTVAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented and not present
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Hungary.   He  is  a  lorry
    driver who had regularly been driving large lorries into this  country.



 2. On 3 November 2015 it was discovered that there were twelve clandestine
    entrants hiding in the vehicle which he was driving which  he  had  not
    discovered.  As a result of this the  respondent  made  an  immigration
    decision refusing to allow him to enter this  country  in  the  future.
    The reasons for this decision were set out in the notice of immigration
    decision as follows:

         "You sought admission  to  the  United  Kingdom  under  EC  law  in
         accordance with Regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 on the  ground  that  you  are  a  Hungarian
         national.  However, I am satisfied that your refusal  of  admission
         is justified on grounds of public policy as authorised by a  Border
         Force Senior officer.  This is because  on  3  November  2015,  you
         brought twelve clandestine entrants into  the  Calais  port  United
         Kingdom control zone, concealed in the trailer of the  heavy  goods
         vehicle you were driving.  Furthermore, by you own account of  your
         security checks you conducted prior to arrival,  you  only  checked
         the presence of your seal and did not  check  its  integrity.   You
         have also stated that you have run freight to the United Kingdom on
         a weekly basis for the last three to four years.   I  am  therefore
         satisfied  that  you  have  enough  knowledge  of  the  problem  of
         clandestine entrants around the ports of northern France.

         I  therefore  refuse  you  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom   in
         accordance with Regulation 19".

 3. The respondent also gave directions for the appellant to be taken  from
    the control zone "to a place where you may  be  accepted  back  by  the
    competent French authorities".

 4. The appellant exercised his out  of  country  right  of  appeal  (under
    Regulation 26) which appeal was decided, on the papers,  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hutchinson.  In a determination promulgated on  21  July
    2016, Judge Hutchinson dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  was  not
    represented before the First-tier Tribunal and is  still  unrepresented
    but representing himself as best he could he has submitted  grounds  of
    appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal having been granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Jeremy Gibb, on 17 February 2017, this appeal is now  before  me.   The
    appellant was not present and  neither  was  he  represented,  but  the
    respondent  was  represented  by  Mr  Armstrong,  Senior  Home   Office
    Presenting Officer.

 6. As the judge properly noted, the law is governed by  Regulation  19  of
    the EEA Regulations, coupled with Regulation 21,  which  provides  that
    with regard to decisions taken on public policy,  public  security  and
    public health grounds, the following provisions apply:

         "21(1)   In  this  Regulation  'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
                decision taken on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                security or public health.

               (2)     A  relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  to  serve
                economic ends.

               ...

               (5)     Where a relevant decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
                public policy or public security it shall,  in  addition  to
                complying with the preceding paragraphs of this  Regulation,
                be taken in accordance with the following principles -

                (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality;

                (b)    the decision must be based  exclusively  on  personal
                    conduct of the person concerned;

                (c)    the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                    represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
                    threat affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                    society; [my emphasis]

                (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                    which relate to consideration of general  prevention  do
                    not justify the decision;

                (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                    themselves justify the decision ...".

 7. As the judge also correctly noted in his decision, the burden of  proof
    in this case lies with the respondent to demonstrate on the balance  of
    probabilities that such a conclusion was justified on  the  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public health.

 8. Having considered the submissions made in writing on his own behalf  by
    the appellant, and all the documents in the case I  am  satisfied  that
    there was a material error of law in Judge  Hutchinson's  determination
    such that his decision must be remade.  Nowhere in this  decision  does
    the judge set out his reasons for considering that if granted admission
    this appellant would represent a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat" to one of the fundamental interests  of  this  country.
    The furthest the judge goes is finding that he is  not  satisfied  that
    the appellant had carried out all the checks  that  he  ought  to  have
    carried out.  On its own, that is an insufficient basis for  concluding
    that allowing him to enter the country in the  future  would  create  a
    sufficiently serious risk that he should be excluded.  The  judge  also
    failed to consider at all the fact (and this was in the  papers  before
    him) that the Border Force had taken what is stated on its face  to  be
    an "exceptional" decision not to impose any  penalty  on  him  for  his
    conduct.  He was written to by the Border Force in the following terms:



         "Further to an incident that took place on 03/11/15 at  UK  control
         zone in Calais, when twelve clandestine  entrants  were  discovered
         concealed in [your lorry], of which you were  the  driver,  it  has
         been exceptionally decided that no penalty should be imposed on you
         on this occasion".

 9. Later in the letter it is said that the procedures whereby  the  Border
    Force may impose a civil penalty "when a driver and/or company fails to
    have an effective  system  to  protect  vehicles  from  being  used  by
    clandestine entrants" and so on, "are designed to target only those who
    have been negligent".  It is in my judgment a reasonable inference from
    this letter that the Border Force formed the view that the behaviour of
    this  appellant  on  this  particular  occasion  was  not  sufficiently
    negligent to justify the imposition of any fine.  Certainly this  is  a
    matter which should at least have been considered by the judge.

10. I consider that I can myself dispose  of  this  appeal  because  in  my
    judgment on the basis of the material before  me,  the  respondent  has
    simply  not  made  out  a  case  that  this  appellant   represents   a
    sufficiently genuine present  or  serious  threat  to  the  fundamental
    interest of society (which of course must  include  preventing  illegal
    immigration) as to justify excluding the appellant on grounds of public
    policy or public security.  The highest that this case can  be  put  is
    that this appellant was  insufficiently  attentive  on  one  particular
    occasion to the security of his lorry and although he carried out  some
    checks did not carry out enough to ensure that illegal entrants did not
    gain admission to his lorry.  There is no evidence presented that  this
    was other than an isolated occasion and indeed the only evidence  which
    this Tribunal has seen tends to suggest the Border Force  regarded  the
    culpability of this appellant as so minimal as to justify exceptionally
    not imposing any separate penalty.

11. In these circumstances, it follows that the appellant's appeal must  be
    allowed and I so find.

Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hutchinson,  dismissing  the
appellant's appeal is set aside and the following decision is substituted:

The appellant's appeal is  allowed  under  the  European  (EEA)  Regulations
2006.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 7 June 2017

