
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03928/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2018                             |On 27th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr Md Badrul Mustak
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z McCallum (Counsel), Londonium Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, a male, and was born on  10th
    September 1986.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 21st March 2016, refusing his application  for
    a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence, on account of
    being a family member of an EEA national, who is  a  qualified  person.
    The application was considered in accordance with  Regulation  8(2)  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  It  was  considered  that  the
    Appellant had made a claim as  an  extended  family  member,  but  that
    following the decision in Sala (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT
    00411, where it was found that there is no statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  not  to  grant  a
    residence card, to a person claiming to be an extended  family  member,
    the Appellant had no right of appeal, and the  appeal  was  accordingly
    dismissed  for  want  of  jurisdiction  (see   paragraph   7   of   the
    determination by Judge Malcolm).

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal, which  was  granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 5th January 2018, on the basis that the decision
    in Banger (Unmarried Partner of British National) [2017] UKUT 125,  now
    suggested that the decision in Sala was unsustainable.

The Hearing

 3. At the error of law hearing before me, both  parties  agreed  that  the
    matter fell to be decided  on  the  basis  that  Sala  was  incorrectly
    decided.  Both parties agreed that in the light of the decision in Khan
    v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the First-tier Tribunal was wrong  in  law
    to conclude that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the  appeal  with
    the result that the decision be set aside.  I agreed.  As the  evidence
    is to be led it is appropriate that it be reheard in the First-tier.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  It is set aside and in terms of Section 12(2)(b)(i)
    of Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and of practice statement
    7.2, remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing  before  a
    judge other than FTTJ Malcolm.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th March 2018
