
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03110/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 September 2017                       |On 4 September 2017              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                         CHINWENDU EBENEZER IBENECHE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Sarwar instructed by Syeds LawCare Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Singh Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  Designated  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge McCarthy determined without a hearing  on  13  March
         2017  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  for  want   of
         jurisdiction.






Background


      2. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, was born on 1 July 1990.
      3. On 23 November 2015, the respondent refused to  issue  a  permanent
         residence card to the  appellant  as  she  was  not  satisfied  the
         appellant had provided  adequate  evidence  to  show  he  had  been
         dependent upon  his  EEA  national  sponsor  or  a  member  of  her
         household for a continuous period of five years.
      4. On 30 November 2015, the appellant lodged notice of appeal with the
         First-tier Tribunal although on  27  February  2016  that  Tribunal
         wrote to the parties drawing their attention to the decision of the
         Upper Tribunal in Sala [2016] UKUT 00411. It was stated that as the
         subject of the appeal appears to be an extended family member under
         the EEA Regulations 2006 the appellant's representatives were asked
         to submit legal reasons as to why the appeal should be regarded  as
         valid.
      5. The Designated Judge  notes  that  neither  party  replied  to  the
         directions within the period provided. This is disputed before  the
         Upper Tribunal by Mr Sarwar who refers to a letter having been sent
         by the appellant's representatives in response  to  the  direction,
         dated 8 March 2017.
      6. There is within the First-tier Tribunal file a letter of this  date
         stamped as having been  received  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
         Sheldon Court on 10 March 2017. The appellant has also  provided  a
         copy of proof of delivery showing the document  was  delivered  and
         'signed for' on 10 March 2017 at 8:46 AM. For whatever  reason,  it
         does not appear that the letter was in the file when the  documents
         were placed before the Designated Judge.
      7. During the Error of Law hearing Mr  Sarwar  was  advised  that  the
         content of the letter will be  considered  from  the  viewpoint  of
         ascertaining whether the failure to produce this  document  to  the
         Judge amounted to a procedural irregularity sufficient to amount to
         a material error of law.
      8. Having considered the content of the letter no  material  error  of
         law is made out on this basis for, even had the letter been  before
         the  Designated  Judge,  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  any  other
         decision,  other  than  that  appearing  in  the   decision   under
         challenge, would have been made. The letter sets out the  fact  the
         appellant considers the decision under challenge by  the  Secretary
         of State was made in error as he  had  been  previously  granted  a
         "five-year extended family route Visa". This comment  is  factually
         incorrect. It is accepted by all that the appellant  was  issued  a
         Residence Card confirming his right to  reside  in  the  UK  as  an
         extended family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.
         This is not a document that grants  permission  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom as that right flows from European law.
      9. The appellant also states he lodged the appeal before the  decision
         of the Upper Tribunal in Sala and that  whilst  the  case  of  Sala
         stated there was no right of appeal for extended family members  of
         an EEA national it did not give insight on applications made  after
         the end of an initial five years given to  family  members  of  EEA
         nationals. The letter asserts the appellant has paid for the appeal
         and as such deserves a fair hearing and that he was advised at  the
         material time that  an  appeal  was  possible  and  on  that  basis
         continued with the process  of  application  for  the  appeal.  The
         letter asserts the appellant will be disadvantaged if the case  was
         not heard as scheduled. The letter continues, on the  second  page,
         in the following terms:


             "We submit that given the information above, this  application
             subject to the appeal was made long before the above case, the
             decision of Sala [2016] should not affect the client. It would
             be unfair for our clients rights to family life to be stripped
             off due to a case, which was decided more than  a  year  after
             her application was submitted.


             We are hopeful that an independent judge would find  that  the
             decision made by the Home Office was unfair and completely  in
             error. The appellant has integrated into the society and would
             be difficult  for  the  family  if  removed  from  the  United
             Kingdom. In addition, this would  affect  his  progression  in
             pursuit of education.


     10. At [5 - 8] the Judge writes:


             5.   It is for the Tribunal to decide whether a person  has  a
                  right of appeal and it will do so by  application  of  the
                  law. I have considered whether the appellant might have  a
                  right  of  appeal  because  he  was  previously  issued  a
                  residence card as an extended family member and  therefore
                  might benefit from reg 7(3).  However, that  card  expired
                  on 29 July 2015. As such, he is no longer a person with  a
                  valid residence card. There is no provision in law  for  a
                  residence  card  to  be  extended  automatically   by   an
                  application. The appellant does not benefit from reg  7(3)
                  even though he applied  for  a  permanent  residence  card
                  before his five-year card expired.


             6.   For the reasons given in Sala the appellant does not have
                  a right of appeal against a decision to refuse a residence
                  card as  an  extended  family  member.  It  is  immaterial
                  whether the application is for a  five-year  or  permanent
                  residence card. The only course for redress is by judicial
                  review.


             7.   I mentioned, in case it is of  any  relevance,  that  the
                  Tribunal cannot address  any  arguments  relating  to  the
                  appellant's protected human rights for the  reasons  given
                  by the Court of Appeals judgment in TY (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD
                  [2015] EWCA Civ 1233. They  can  only  be  argued  if  the
                  respondent refuses a human rights claim, which is not  the
                  case here.


             8.   These reasons, I  find  there  is  no  valid  appeal  and
                  dismiss the appeal for want of jurisdiction.


     11. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
         another Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis it
         was arguable that Sala does not apply to an extended family  member
         applying for a permanent residence card  who  has  previously  been
         issued with a residence card (as the Appellant  had  been).  It  is
         said to be arguable this is an exception to the case of Sala as the
         grounds indicate.
     12. The Secretary State opposes the application and  submitted  in  her
         Rule 24 response of 13 July 2017 that the First-tier  Tribunal  was
         correct to find that the appellant did not have a right  of  appeal
         and that the date of application matters not in  this  appeal.  The
         case of Sala has made it expressly clear that individuals who apply
         under the same basis as  this  appellant,  as  an  extended  family
         member, do not have a right of appeal.




Error of law


     13. The point taken in relation to the timing of the decision  in  Sala
         has no arguable merit on the  facts.   It  was  held  there  is  no
         statutory right of appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
         State not to grant a Residence Card to a person claiming to  be  an
         Extended Family Member based upon the wording of  the  Regulations.
         It is not made out that there has been  any  change  in  the  legal
         provisions applicable between when the decision was  submitted  and
         the decision in Sala  that  may  have  any  relevance,  making  the
         effluxion of time arguably irrelevant. The appellant also fails  to
         establish that it is the  provisions  applicable  to  the  date  of
         application that should be  considered  which,  in  relation  to  a
         decision under the EEA Regulations, is arguably incorrect.

     14. In SGC and Others [2005] UKAIT 00179 the Tribunal said that (i)  in
         an EEA appeal under the 2002 Act the relevant date is the  date  of
         the hearing.

     15. Mr Sarwar argued that the Judge has erred in law in  the  statement
         in [6] of the  decision  under  challenge  that  it  is  immaterial
         whether the application is for a five year or  permanent  residence
         card.

     16. Mr Sarwar also refers to the conclusion of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Sala in which it is stated:

             84.  Although we have found the issue raised in this appeal  a
                  difficult  one,  we  see  no   sustainable   argument   to
                  deflectors from the natural meaning of the decision of  an
                  "EEA decision" in reg2(1) point  (b)  that  we  identified
                  earlier. A decision, taken by the Secretary  of  State  in
                  the exercise of her discretion, not to issue an EFM with a
                  residence card under reg 17(4) is not a decision under the
                  EEA  Regulations  2006  which  "concerns.....  a  person's
                  entitlement to be issued with..... a residence card".

     17. Mr Sarwar argues that if the Secretary of State has  no  discretion
         whether or not  to  issue  a  residence  card  a  refusal  in  that
         situation must confer a right of appeal as it is a  decision  which
         concerns a person's entitlement to be issued with a residence card.

     18. Mr Sarwar referred to Regulation 19 of  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  which  is  the  version  of  the
         regulations in force at the date of the  decision  under  challenge
         and  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         Regulation 19(2) states:

         (2) the Secretary of State must issue a person who is  not  an  EEA
         national who has a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
         with a permanent residence card no later than six months  after  an
         application is received and the production of-

              (a) a valid passport; and

              (b) proof that the person has a right of permanent residence.

     19. It was argued that as the regulation contains the word "must" there
         was no discretion conferred upon the Secretary of State.

     20. Mr Sarwar was asked  on  what  basis  it  is  argued  that  it  was
         established  before  the  Designated  Judge  that   the   appellant
         satisfies this provision to which the response was  to  claim  that
         this was a matter that will be established through any appeal. When
         asked on what basis it is claimed such a right was made out  before
         the Designated Judge and on what basis it is asserted the appellant
         is entitled to a right of permanent residence, Mr  Sarwar  referred
         to the bundle of evidence before the Designated  Judge  and  stated
         the appellant was able to satisfy the  requirements  of  Regulation
         15(1)(b) of the 2016 Regulations.

     21. Regulation 15(1)(b) states a family member of an EEA  national  who
         is not an EEA national but who has resided in  the  United  Kingdom
         with the EEA national in accordance with these  Regulations  for  a
         continuous period of five years can acquire the right to reside  in
         the United Kingdom permanently.

     22. The Designated Judge was clearly aware of the  relevant  provisions
         of European law and at  [5]  specifically  considered  whether  the
         appellant might have a right of appeal because  he  was  previously
         issued a residence card as an  extended  family  member  and  might
         benefit from regulation 7(3), although that card expired on 29 July
         2015. It was not arguably made out on the documents made  available
         to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  bundle  submitted  on   the
         appellant's behalf that the  appellant  was  able  to  satisfy  the
         requirements of Regulation 15.

     23. Regulation 7 provides:

        "Family member"

                                   This   section   has    no    associated
                               Explanatory Memorandum
  7. -   (1) In these Regulations, "family member" means, in relation to  a
person ("A")-

             (a)A's spouse or civil partner;

             (b)A's direct descendants, or the direct  descendants  of  A's
             spouse or civil partner who are either-

                  (i)  aged under 21; or

                  (ii) dependants of A, or of A's spouse or civil partner;

             (c)dependent direct relatives in A's  ascending  line,  or  in
             that of A's spouse or civil partner.

         (2) Where A is a student residing in the United Kingdom  otherwise
         than under regulation 13 (initial right of residence), a person  is
         not a family member of A under paragraph (1)(b) or (c) unless-

             (a)in  the  case  of  paragraph  (1)(b),  the  person  is  the
             dependent child of A or of A's spouse or civil partner; or

             (b)A  also  falls  within  one  of  the  other  categories  of
             qualified person mentioned in regulation 6(1).

         (3) A person ("B") who is an extended family member and  has  been
         issued with an EEA family permit, a registration certificate  or  a
         residence card must be treated as a family member of A, provided-

             (a)B continues to satisfy the conditions in  regulation  8(2),
         (3), (4) or (5); and

             (b)the  EEA  family  permit,   registration   certificate   or
         residence card remains in force.

        (4) A must be an EEA national unless regulation 9 applies  (family
    members of British citizens).

     24. It is not disputed that the appellant  claimed  an  entitlement  to
         reside in the United Kingdom as an extended family member of an EEA
         national exercising treaty rights  in  relation  to  which  he  was
         issued a Residence Card on 29 July 2010 which expired  on  29  July
         2015.
     25. The Secretary of State in refusing the application for a  permanent
         residence card noted from the evidence submitted that the appellant
         was no longer residing with the EEA national and that as he was not
         residing with the EEA national sponsor anymore it  was  stated  the
         respondent would expect to see detailed bank transfers between  the
         appellant and the EEA sponsor to show financial dependency of which
         there is no evidence of any such transfers  or  dependency  in  the
         documents  provided.  The  application  was  therefore  refused  by
         reference to regulation 15(1)(b) by reference to  regulation  8  of
         the EEA Regulations.
     26. Mr Sarwar submitted there was evidence in  the  bundle  before  the
         Designated  Judge  of  dependency.  The  limited  number  of   bank
         statements provided refer  to  transfers  of  funds  from  the  EEA
         national but satisfying the definition of dependency involves  more
         than just showing funds being transferred. It was not made  out  on
         the evidence before the Designated Judge or Secretary of State that
         the appellant had established financial dependency.
     27. The Designated Judge refers to the  fact  the  appellant's  earlier
         Residence Card had expired on  27  July  2015.  Having  been  given
         additional time to make further enquiries Mr Sarwar  accepted  that
         the matter is as recorded by the  Designated  Judge  regarding  the
         date of expiry and accepted this was a point against the appellant.
     28. Mr Sarwar also sought to take a second point  regarding  regulation
         7(3)(b) and whether, even though  the  date  the  card  expired  is
         correct, there was some sort of residual  benefit  with  a  similar
         effect to section 3C in a statutory appeal  which  would  have  the
         effect of the residence card remaining in force.
     29. After being given time to research this matter in  further  detail,
         Mr Sarwar accepted the wording of the regulation was in the context
         of the residence card and that it was accepted that  the  card  had
         expired.
     30. The Designated Judge does specifically consider whether there was a
         provision for a residence card to be extended automatically  by  an
         application but finds at [5] that no such provision exists.
     31. Having considered the evidence and submissions made  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal, I find no legal error material  to  the  finding  of  the
         Designated  Judge  that  the  appeal  is  dismissed  for  want   of
         jurisdiction made out. The determination shall stand.








Decision

    32. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

Anonymity

    33. The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order. I  make  no  order
        for the identity of the appellant to be anonymized as there  is  no
        basis for such an order being made on the facts of this appeal.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 1 September 2017












