
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03667/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype.   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2020                   |On 5 November 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     BOB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adewole of Liberty & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


      1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Clarke ('the Judge') promulgated on 28 January  2020
         in which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
         refusal to grant him a Residence Card as an extended family  member
         of his aunt, an EEA national.
      2. The appellant is a citizen of the United States of America born  on
         the 28 October 2003.
      3. The Judge refers to the documentary evidence at [4] of the decision
         under challenge. It is not  made  out  that  having  made  specific
         reference to this material the  Judge  then  effectively  chose  to
         ignore it or not factor it into the decision-making process.
      4. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
         Tribunal, the operative part of the grant being  in  the  following
         terms:

             "3.  The judge noted in the decision that  the  Appellant  did
                  not give evidence and was not subject to cross-examination
                  and that although he is a minor he had attained the age of
                  16 and could have given evidence as a  vulnerable  witness
                  subject  to  the  presidential   guidelines.   The   judge
                  confirmed that the Applicant had not  confirmed  what  the
                  aunt told him. It is arguable that the representatives had
                  a good reason  for  not  calling  the  Appellant  to  give
                  evidence bearing in mind the account he had to  deal  with
                  related to when he was about nine years old and there  had
                  been  a  statement  from  the  grandmother  and  also  the
                  Appellants aunt giving evidence. Although the judge refers
                  to a gap in the evidence there  is  no  reference  to  the
                  grandmother's statement in the judge's findings  of  fact.
                  That would be crucial bearing in mind the  claim  is  that
                  the Appellant lived with  his  grandmother.  Part  of  the
                  evidence is also that the aunt refers to  people  carrying
                  money  to   the   grandmother.   It   is   arguable   that
                  corroboration of the  Appellant's  evidence  need  not  be
                  required bearing in mind the  judge  failed  to  make  any
                  findings on the grandmother's  signed  witness  statement.
                  Bearing in mind the age  of  the  Appellant  there  is  an
                  arguable error of law in the manner  in  which  the  judge
                  dealt with the evidence. The grounds  in  the  application
                  arguable."


Error of law


    Article 3(2)(a) of Directive 2004/38 the  Citizens  Directive  requires
         the host member state to facilitate entry and residence  of  family
         members other than spouses, civil partners and direct relatives  in
         the ascending or descending line irrespective of their  nationality
         who, "in the country from which they had come", were dependents  or
         members of the household of the  Union  Citizen  having  a  primary
         right of residence.

      5. The EEA national is the appellants aunt  in  relation  to  whom  no
         issue was raised concerning their relationship. The refusal of  the
         application for the residence card was on the basis  the  appellant
         had failed to provide adequate evidence that he was dependent  upon
         his aunt prior to entering the United Kingdom.
      6. Guidance on the test for dependency can be  derived  from  relevant
         case law.  In Jia Migrationsverket  (Case  C  -1/05)  the  European
         Court considered "dependence" under Article  1(1)(d)  of  Directive
         73/148/EEC and said this was to be interpreted to the  effect  that
         "dependent on them" meant that members  of  the  family  of  an  EU
         national established in another member state within the meaning  of
         Article 43 of the EC Treaty, needed the material support of that EU
         national, or his or her spouse, in order to  meet  their  essential
         needs in the state of origin of those family members or  the  state
         from which they had come at the time when they applied to join  the
         EU national. The Court said that Article 6(b) of the Directive  was
         to be interpreted as meaning that proof of the  need  for  material
         support might be adduced by any appropriate  means,  while  a  mere
         undertaking by the EU national or his or her spouse to support  the
         family members concerned need not be regarded as  establishing  the
         existence of the family member's situation of real dependence
      7. In Bigia & Others [2009] EWCA Civ 79 at [24] Maurice  Kay  LJ  said
         that where the question of whether someone  is  a  "family  member"
         depends on a test of dependency, that test is as per  paragraph  43
         of the ECJ's judgement in Jia.  In essence members of the family of
         a Union citizen needed the material support of that  Union  citizen
         or his or her spouse in order to meet their essential needs.
      8. In Moneke (EEA - OFMs) (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00341(IAC)  (Blake  J)
         at para 41 the Tribunal accepted that the definition of  dependency
         was accurately captured by the current  UKBA  ECIs  which  read  as
         follows at ch.5.12: "In determining if a family member or  extended
         family member is dependent  (i.e.  financially  dependent)  on  the
         relevant EEA national for the  purposes  of  the  EEA  Regulations:
         Financial dependency should be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  the
         person needs financial support from the EEA national  or  his/  her
         spouse/civil partner in order to meet his/her essential needs - not
         in order to have a certain level of income. Provided a person would
         not be able to meet his/her  essential  living  needs  without  the
         financial support of the EEA national, s/he  should  be  considered
         dependent on that national. In those  circumstances,  it  does  not
         matter that the applicant may in addition receive financial support
         / income from other sources. There is  no  need  to  determine  the
         reasons for recourse to the financial support provided by  the  EEA
         national or to consider whether the applicant is  able  to  support
         him/herself by taking up paid employment. The person does not  need
         to be living or have lived in an EEA state which the  EEA  national
         sponsor also lives or has lived." At paragraph 42 the Tribunal went
         on "We of course accept (and as the ECIs reflect)  that  dependency
         does not have to be "necessary" in the  sense  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, that is to say an able bodied person who chooses to rely for
         his essential needs on material  support  of  the  sponsor  may  be
         entitled to do so even if he could meet those needs from his or her
         economic activity."
      9. Much was made of the Judges treatment of the witness statement from
         the appellant's grandmother in the error  of  law  submissions  and
         pleadings which appears at pages 22-23  of  the  appellants  appeal
         bundle in the following terms:

               1. I Ms [RA], Benin Republic Citizen of Cotonou, Republic  of
                  Benin do hereby state  support  of  my  grand  son  appeal
                  against the decision of the Home Office dated 9 July  2019
                  as follows.


               2. I am a Citizen of the Republic of  Benin  and  I  live  in
                  Cotonou.


               3. The Applicant/Appellant Master [BOB] is my grand-son as he
                  was born to my daughter [GM].


               4. My  daughter  who  is  the  Mother  of  the  Appellant  is
                  presently unwell due to mental ill-health and has been  so
                  for quite some time now.


               5. I confirm that my grand son is presently living  with  his
                  Aunt (the sponsor) who is a French citizen in the UK since
                  2013 as she has been the only person supporting  him  even
                  when he resided in Cotonou with me after his birth.


               6. I confirm that his Aunt  (the  sponsor)  has  always  been
                  sending money to me in Cotonou the UK through families and
                  friends travelling to Cotonou for his upkeep  before  2013
                  before the Auntie took him to the UK to reside with her.


               7. I confirm that he does not know his father  and  the  only
                  family who cares for him is the Aunt  (the  Sponsor)  with
                  whom he resides in the UK.


               8. I am also able to care for him here in  Cotonou  as  I  am
                  suffering from stroke and needed to look after myself.


               9. I believe that the decision to refuse his  application  to
                  stay with his family, in the UK is a breach of  their  EEA
                  Rights and under Private and Family Life, Article 8 of the
                  ECHR and Section 6 of the Human Rights Acts 1998 and  S.55
                  of the UK Borders Act 2009.


              10. He submitted this application for Residence Card in the UK
                  as a family member of an EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
                  Rights in the UK in view of their relationship and the  UK
                  immigration laws (including EEA Regulations 2016).


              11. I believe also that the  decision  of  the  Respondent  is
                  against their Human Rights as the same is contrary to  S.6
                  of the Human Rights  Acts  and  S.55  of  the  UK  Borders
                  Citizenship and Nationality Act 2009.


              12. The decision  to  refuse  his  application  will  have  an
                  adverse impact on the family members in the UK and same is
                  a violation of the UK obligations under  the  ECHR  and  a
                  breach of our Private and Family Life as the decisions  of
                  the SSHD or violates their Article 8 Right, S.6  of  Human
                  Rights and S.55 rights in the UK as a family unit.


              13. Decision  of  the  Respondent  against  him  will  not  be
                  proportionate as  it  will  affect  us  and  cause  untold
                  hardship to us and the children in general.


              14. I believe that the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
                  should be reversed as same  if  upheld  will  violate  our
                  rights to Private and Family Life in the UK in  line  with
                  the decision of the House of Lords in Beoku  -  Betts  -v-
                  SSHD [2008].


              15. I urge the Tribunal to allow his appeal.

     10. Although the appellant and the grandmother refer  to  human  rights
         aspects this is not a human rights appeal. It is  a  refusal  of  a
         residence card which is an appeal against an  EEA  decision  not  a
         decision on human rights grounds. The Court of  Appeal  ruled  that
         human rights cannot form part  of  an  EEA  appeal  in  Amirteymour
         [2017] EWCA Civ 353. If the appellant  wishes  to  pursue  a  Human
         Rights application one must be made in proper form.
     11. The Judge clearly noted the claim that money had been sent  to  the
         appellant's grandmother "for her to spend  on  him"  [8],  but  the
         Judge was not required to accept such an assertion without more. At
         [10 - 11] Judge writes:

             "10.     There is nothing to show that the  EEA  national  was
                  the provider of funds to support the Appellant. The school
                  reports do not mention her  by  name,  and  there  are  no
                  invoices for fees to her. The only evidence provided  does
                  not got to this issue, and simply goes to  show  they  are
                  linked, but that is not an issue before me because  it  is
                  accepted that they are related as claimed. The aunt refers
                  to people  carrying  money  to  the  grandmother  for  the
                  Appellant's upkeep but  no  names  are  provided,  and  no
                  witness attended to confirm the same.


             11.  I find there is a gap in the evidence, and the  Appellant
                  has the burden to substantiate the  claim.  The  Appellant
                  elected not to give evidence himself to further his claim.
                  Whilst I could accept the oral evidence of  a  witness  if
                  there is no other evidence available and  explanation  for
                  not being able to provide  supporting  evidence,  in  this
                  case there is no explanation given  as  to  why,  and  the
                  appellant failed to answer questions himself. Therefore  I
                  dismiss the appeal."

     12. As noted by the Judge the appellant was a  child  when  the  events
         relating to his alleged financial support in  Benin  occurred.  The
         Judge does not dismiss the appeal because  the  appellant  did  not
         give evidence but because the evidence that was provided and relied
         upon was insufficient to discharge any evidential or legal  burden.
         The test of dependency is set out above which  requires  it  to  be
         established that whatever sums of money were  being  provided  they
         were sufficient to meet the appellant's essential needs.  There  is
         no indication in the evidence of what those essential needs were or
         to show that the amount of funds that were being  received  by  the
         grandmother were sufficient to show the appellants essential  needs
         were being met by the EEA national sponsor. It  was  important  for
         the evidence to be considered as a whole in context when  assessing
         whether the evidence was sufficient to show the dependency test had
         been met.
     13. I accept there  is  no  specific  reference  to  the  grandmother's
         statement, but the assertion made in relation to the same  is  that
         it reflects the EEA national sponsor's claim which is mentioned  by
         the Judge.  A judge is not required to set out findings in relation
         to each and every aspect of the evidence provide the same has  been
         considered with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny  which  I
         find the Judge did in this appeal.
     14. The finding the appellant had not discharged the burden upon him to
         show the respondent's decision is contrary to EU law on  the  basis
         the  appellant  had  not  established  the  required   element   of
         dependency has not been shown to be a finding outside the range  of
         those reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.
     15. No error of law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal  has
         been made out.

Decision

     16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.

     17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.

         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 2 November 2020

