
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03663/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th December 2017                   |On 7th March 2018                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                              Mr vitaliy mahera
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  him  with
    a permanent residence card, as the former spouse of  an  EEA  national,
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore  ("the  judge")  in  a
    decision promulgated on 6th September 2017.

2.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred in making inconsistent findings.  The decision contained  a
    clear finding that the EEA national relied upon by  the  appellant  was
    economically active in the United Kingdom prior to and at the point  of
    divorce.  The decision also contained  a  finding  that  the  same  EEA
    national had not provided credible and reliable evidence  showing  that
    she  was  economically  active  during  the  same  periods   of   time.
    Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  the
    basis  that  the  judge  appeared   to   have   reached   contradictory
    conclusions.  In a Rule 24 response prepared on behalf of the Secretary
    of State, the appeal was opposed.

Submissions on Error of Law

3.   Mr Karim drew attention first to paragraph 21 of the decision.  At  the
    end of that paragraph, the judge made a finding  that  the  appellant's
    former spouse was economically active  in  the  United  Kingdom,  "both
    during and at the time of divorce."  In that same paragraph,  but  over
    the page, on page 9 of the decision, the judge found that he  was  "not
    satisfied  that  credible  and  reliable  evidence  has  been  provided
    demonstrating that  the  appellant's  former  spouse  was  economically
    active  at  the  time  of  divorce,  and  in  those  circumstances  was
    exercising  treaty  rights  at   that   time."    The   findings   were
    contradictory.

4.   Mr Mills said in reply that the Secretary of State accepted that  there
    was a clear contradiction.  The Rule 24 response was  prepared  on  the
    basis of preliminary consideration of the grounds of appeal and did not
    amount to a full or considered response.  It was clear  that  paragraph
    21 of the decision contained a finding that  the  judge  was  satisfied
    that relevant requirements were met and then, subsequently, that he was
    not so satisfied.  It might perhaps  be  said  that  the  reasoning  in
    relation to the adverse finding was sufficient to enable a finding that
    the error of law, if shown, was immaterial.

5.   Mr Karim said in response that a close reading of the  decision  showed
    that equally detailed reasons were present for each of the findings.

Conclusion on Error of Law

6.   I accept Mr Karim's submission that paragraph 21 of the  decision  does
    contain reasons, clearly set out, supporting each of  the  findings  of
    fact made by  the  judge.   The  first  part  of  paragraph  21  is  an
    assessment of the evidence leading  to  the  finding  that  the  former
    spouse was economically active  in  the  United  Kingdom,  at  relevant
    times.  In that same paragraph, but  further  along,  the  judge  draws
    attention to aspects of the evidence given by the former spouse and  to
    certain features of the documentary evidence, leading in due course  to
    the adverse finding.  In summary, a sensible reading  of  paragraph  21
    does reveal contradictory findings.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing,  I
    announced my conclusion that the decision of  the  First-tier  tribunal
    must be set aside and remade.

7.   In a brief discussion of the appropriate next step, Mr Karim said  that
    he was content to resume the hearing  and  that  the  adverse  findings
    should not stand.  Evidence might be heard.  Mr  Mills  said  that  the
    contradictory findings were such that the better course was  to  remake
    the decision, having first set it aside, and that no findings  made  by
    the judge should stand.  Mr Karim said  that,  on  reflection,  he  was
    content for the decision to be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    agree that that is manifestly the appropriate venue.

8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal set aside.  The  decision  will
    be remade in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House, for a judge other
    than Judge Moore.  No findings of fact are preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside,  as  containing  a
material error of law.  It  will  be  remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
before a judge other than Judge Moore.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




ANONYMITY

No anonymity order or direction has been made  and  none  has  been  applied
for.  I make no order or direction regarding anonymity on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell
