
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03249/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2018                              |On 2 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                            tomi olalekan agboola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Din of Counsel instructed by Nathan Aaron Sols
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  28  April  1982  who
    applied for an EEA family permit on the basis that he  had  retained  a
    right of residence as the  former  spouse  of  an  EEA  national.   His
    application was refused on 8 March 2016.  The  appellant  appealed  the
    decision and his appeal came before a First-tier Judge  on  16  January
    2018.  The appellant was represented by Counsel at that hearing (not Mr
    Din).

2.   The First-tier Judge summarised the Secretary of  State's  reasons  for
    refusal as follows:

         "9.  The respondent accepted that the marriage to the EEA  national
             had been dissolved.  The respondent  also  accepted  that  the
             marriage had subsisted for three years; the EEA  national  and
             the appellant married on 13 May 2009 and divorced  on  5  June
             2015.


         10.  The appellant failed to provide sufficient  evidence  to  show
             that the EEA national resided in United Kingdom for  one  year
             whilst married to the appellant.


         11.  The appellant also failed to  provide  evidence  that  the  EU
             National was a qualified person and  that  she  therefore  was
             residing in accordance with the regulations at  the  point  of
             divorce.  The respondent considered that in order to  do  this
             the Appellant would need to have provided  evidence  that  the
             EEA national was exercising  free  movement  rights  when  the
             decree was issued.


         12.  The appellant had provided evidence of the EEA nationals self-
             employment in the form of tax returns HM RC  online  tax  year
             overviews, National  insurance  contributions  letters,  self-
             assessment statements, invoices and Santander bank statements.
              Nevertheless the respondent  considered  that  none  of  this
             supporting  evidence  covered  all  of  the  requisite  period
             including an especially the date of the divorce.


         13.   The  respondent  also  raised  the  issue  of   whether   the
             appellant's marriage  was  a  marriage  of  convenience.   The
             respondent considered  that  the  marriage  had  been  one  of
             convenience for the sole  purpose  of  his  remaining  in  the
             United Kingdom.  The respondent based this conclusion  on  the
             lack of evidence of a subsisting  relationship  prior  to  the
             force  for  example  photographs   common   shared   financial
             commitments,  travel  together,  and  meeting   each   other's
             families et cetera".

3.   The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  concluded  her
    determination as follows:

         "18. I remind myself that I must consider whether the appellant has
             demonstrated that he had resided in accordance  with  the  EEA
             regulations for a continuous five  year  period.   This  would
             mean that the EEA  national  former  spouse  was  continuously
             exercising free movement right up to the point of divorce  and
             that the appellant had been  employed,  self-employed  or  was
             self-sufficient since the divorce.   Collectively  this  would
             cover a continuous five year period to meet  the  requirements
             of regulation 15(1)(f).


         19.  The date of the divorce was 5 June  2015.   I  find  therefore
             that the five year period in question started on 26  September
             2010 and ended on 25 September 2015.


         20.  I find that there are gaps in the evidence concerning the  EEA
             national former spouse's income.  First, in the  period  April
             2010 - April 2011 (AB 96) the  EEA  national  had  no  income.
             This means that for a period within the five years that is  26
             September 2015 to 5 April 2011 the EEA  national  was  earning
             nothing and therefore not exercising her treaty rights.


         21.  I find that that omission alone is fatal  to  the  appellant's
             appeal.  Even without this difficulty, the appellant's  appeal
             faces other difficulties.   National  insurance  payments  are
             only evidenced for the year 2012 to April 2015.  In particular
             the period which would have included the date  of  divorce,  5
             June 2015 does not feature.  In addition,  receipts  allegedly
             showing payment by customers only cover September 2012-January
             2014.  I note furthermore in respect of the books of  receipts
             that the name is Angel not Angela.  There is  no  evidence  to
             support the contention that these were the  receipt  books  of
             the EEA national in her hairdressing business.


         22.  I also find that I can place little weight on the tax  returns
             for the year ending 2013 and 2014 because they are not  signed
             by  the  EEA  national.   No  reasonable  explanation  or  any
             explanation has been given for this omission.


         23.  The appellant says that he obtained tax calculations  (AB  95-
             101) from a friend of his who was also a  friend  of  the  EEA
             national.  According to the appellant, the EEA  national  gave
             her permission to this friend to access these records.  I note
             that  they  were  all  printed  in  August  2017.    This   is
             inconsistent with the  skeleton  argument  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant which states that these documents were  obtained  in
             April 2015 during the divorce proceedings (AB6 paragraph  10).
             Furthermore this casts doubt on  the  evidence  given  by  the
             appellant as to how he obtained a document at A B101  for  the
             tax year ending 2016.


         24.  Given the above findings, I find that the EEA national was not
             exercising treaty rights for part of the five year period  (26
             September 2010-5 April 2011) and I  find  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities that the documentary evidence does  not  support
             that she was working at  other  times  during  the  five  year
             period.  The appellant therefore has failed to satisfy one  of
             the key elements of the test (as set out in the applicable law
             section).


         25.  I now turn to another key element of the test which gives rise
             to the second difficulty in the appellant's appeal.   This  is
             whether the EEA national was exercising treaty rights  at  the
             date of divorce 5 June 2015.  The only document  showing  that
             the EEA national was exercising treaty rights on 5  June  2015
             is the document at AB 101.  I  can  give  no  weight  to  this
             document because as already stated I know  nothing  about  the
             circumstances in which it was printed; I  do  not  accept  the
             appellant's account.  I furthermore do not know who posted  it
             to him.  There is no other evidence in the appellant's  bundle
             capable of corroborating the authenticity of the  document  at
             AB101.  For example, there are no tax returns for the tax year
             ending 2016 and no self assessment document for that tax year.
              Accordingly I find on the balance of probabilities  that  the
             EEA national was not exercising her treaty rights  on  5  June
             2015.


         26.  In the light of the two problems identified above, I find that
             the appellant has not satisfied regulation 10(5) of  the  2006
             regulations.  As a result, I do not need to make any  findings
             about the genuineness of the appellant's marriage to  the  EEA
             national as the appellant fails for other reasons (as set  out
             above).  Consequently I make no findings about his marriage.


         27.  In view of the above and in view of a lack of evidence to  the
             contrary, I find that on my own analysis having  independently
             considered the totality of all the evidence now before  me,  I
             come to like conclusions as the Respondent.  The  Respondent's
             conclusions have not been controverted by the Appellant either
             in his grounds of appeal or evidentially.  Therefore,  I  find
             that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the   requirements   of
             Regulation 10(5) of the  EEA  Regulations.   Accordingly,  the
             Appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof to  show
             that  he  can  comply  fully  with  the  relevant  regulations
             applicable for  the  granting  of  an  EEA  family  permit  as
             confirmation of a right to reside in the UK".

4.   At the hearing  Counsel  informed  me  that  he  had  been  put  in  an
    embarrassing position in relation to ground 1 of the grounds of appeal.
     In that ground reliance had been placed on P60 documents covering  the
    period April 2010-April 2011.  Counsel had relied on this point in good
    faith on the basis of what he took  to  be  his  instructions  but  the
    appellant had candidly admitted that the P60s had not been  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Counsel referred  to  paragraph  2(d)(i)  of  the
    grounds and the submissions in the skeleton  argument  in  relation  to
    ground 1.  Ground 1 was on instructions withdrawn.   Grounds  2  and  3
    overlapped.  Material had been provided  before  the  First-tier  Judge
    covering the 2009-2016 period.  However, the judge had erred in  giving
    no weight to the document relied upon in paragraph 25 of her  decision.
    The appellant had discharged the burden on him  by  producing  relevant
    material for the relevant period.

5.   It was submitted that the judge ought  to  have  exercised  her  powers
    under  Rule  4(3)  of  the  Procedure  Rules  to   acquire   additional
    information under Section 40 of the UK Borders Act 2007 from HMRC.   He
    acknowledged that there did not appear to have been any request to  the
    judge to exercise such powers.  The  judge  had  been  inconsistent  in
    paragraph 25 in not relying on document AB101 (tax calculation for 2015-
    2016) having relied on a tax calculation for 2009-2010.   This  was  an
    inconsistent approach; both documents showed that they were printed  on
    25 May 2017.  It was submitted that the judge had erred in relation  to
    the date of divorce - the divorce had been on 5 June 2015  and  not  25
    September 2015.  I note in this connection that the judge does refer in
    paragraphs 9 and 19 to the correct date of divorce.

6.   Mr Nath acknowledged that ground 1 was not  pursued.   In  relation  to
    ground 2 Mr Nath submitted that the findings  made  by   the  judge  in
    paragraphs 23 ff were open to her.  The judge was entitled to  find  as
    she did in paragraph 24 that the EEA national was not exercising treaty
    rights from 26 September 2010 to 5 April 2011.   In  paragraph  25  the
    question of what weight to be given to  a  particular  document  was  a
    matter for the judge.  There was an absence of material  to  cover  the
    2010-2011 period.  The judge had considered the evidence at  paragraphs
    23 to 25 of the decision.  There was nothing wrong  with  the  decision
    under the EEA Regulations.  There was a difficulty from  the  start  as
    the documentary evidence had not been put in as had been conceded.   In
    reply, Counsel in relation to ground  1  submitted  that  a  number  of
    documents had not been considered but the ground was not pursued in the
    light of instructions.  Ground 3(f) included ground 1 material.  If  an
    error was made out the appeal should be remitted.

7.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the judge's decision if  it  was  flawed  in
    law.  I acknowledge that Counsel was in effect taken aback by very late
    instructions to the effect that ground 1 could no longer be  relied  on
    as documentary evidence to support the ground had not in fact been  put
    before the First-tier Judge.  I entirely accept that the point had been
    argued in good faith by Counsel on the basis of what he  understood  to
    be his instructions but the fact remains it is no  longer  pursued  and
    the judge cannot be faulted for failing to consider material  that  was
    not in fact before her.  Questions of what weight to put on aspects  of
    the evidence were matters for the judge as Mr Nath Submits. I also note
    that it was a candid admission made by the appellant that this material
    had not been put before the  judge.   The  problem  with  the  admitted
    deficiency in the evidence is that there is a  degree  of  overlap,  as
    acknowledged by Counsel, between ground 1 and other grounds. An example
    is ground 3(f), as developed in the  skeleton  argument  where  it  was
    argued that the material that the applicant sought to rely upon covered
    the period of 2009-2016. In the original grounds it was contended  that
    the judge was prejudiced in overlooking material.

8.   It does appear to me that the judge did consider  the  material  before
    her and was entitled to conclude that there were gaps in  the  evidence
    concerning the EEA national's income  for  the  reasons  she  gives  in
    paragraph 20.  In paragraph 24 I do not consider that the  judge  erred
    in law her in concluding that the documentary evidence did not  support
    that the EEA national was working at other times during the  five  year
    period and that the appellant had failed to  satisfy  one  of  the  key
    elements of the Regulations as explained.  The judge refers to a second
    difficulty with the appellant's case in paragraph 25 of  her  decision.
    It was suggested that the judge should have made  enquiries  exercising
    her powers under the Procedure Rules  to  obtain  evidence  from  HMRC.
    There is no  evidence  of  any  request  to  the  judge  to  make  such
    enquiries; the appellant was represented by Counsel  before  her.   The
    appellant had instructed solicitors to act for him.  The judge did  not
    arguably err in law  in  determining  the  appeal  on  the  documentary
    evidence provided.  It appears that the  appellant  could  have  lodged
    additional material before the First-tier Judge.  As  I  have  said,  I
    make no criticism of Counsel who was acting on what he believed  to  be
    his instructions.  Nevertheless, it appears that permission  to  appeal
    may have been granted erroneously on what was a key matter.

9.   The absence of the material and  the  withdrawal  of  ground  1  (which
    appears to have a degree of overlap with other grounds)  does  place  a
    considerable obstacle in the  appellant's  way.   The  judge  found  in
    paragraphs 20 - 21 that there were gaps in the evidence covering  2010-
    2011 and "that  that  omission  alone  was  fatal  to  the  appellant's
    appeal." Ground 1 covers the "gaps in the evidence" point and Ground  1
    has been withdrawn.

10.   I am not satisfied in the circumstances that the grounds as  qualified
    before me at the hearing raise a material error of law on the  part  of
    the First-tier Judge and I dismiss  the  appeal  and  direct  that  her
    decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.

Fee Award

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date:  2 May 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
