
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeals Number:
EA/03466/2015

                                                      EA/03468/2015



                                                      EA/03470/2015

                                                       EA/03473/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Determination issued       |
|On 2 August 2017                           |On 24 August 2017          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE-PRESIDENT
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DEANS


                                   Between



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              MRS SHAHANA ANWAR
                               MR AHMAD WALID
                               MR AHMED SALEH
                               MR ABDUL RAFEH
                                                                 Respondents



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr H Ndbuisi, Drummond Miller LLP, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweeney allowing appeals against the
      refusal of residence cards.  The appellants before the First-tier
      Tribunal are hereinafter referred to as "the claimants".




   2. The first claimant is the mother of the other three claimants.  The
      outcome for all the claimants depends upon the success of the first
      claimant in these proceedings.




   3. The first claimant is a national of Pakistan.  She applied for a
      permanent residence card on the basis of a retained right of residence
      upon her divorce from an EEA national, in terms of regulation 10 of
      the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA
      Regulations").   The marriage broke down in consequence of domestic
      violence perpetrated by the first claimant's husband against her and
      decree of divorce was granted on 14 November 2014.  In order to
      succeed under reg. 10 the first claimant had to show that both she and
      her former spouse were exercising Treaty rights on that date and, in
      respect of the first claimant, that she continued to exercise Treaty
      rights from that date until 31 March 2015. It seems to have been
      accepted that the first claimant was a worker after 31 March 2015,
      having commenced employment on 1 April.




   4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that the first claimant's
      former spouse was exercising Treaty rights on 14 November 2014 as he
      was in receipt of Jobseeker's Allowance ("JSA"), having previously
      been in employment.  As far as the first claimant herself was
      concerned, the judge found that she was in employment at the date of
      her application, 20 May 2015.  At the date of the divorce, 14 November
      2014, she was also in receipt of JSA.  The judge accepted that the
      first claimant was a worker at the relative times.  On the basis of
      this finding her appeal succeeded before the First-tier Tribunal.




   5. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the grounds
      that the judge arguably erred by accepting that the first claimant and
      her former spouse were to be regarded as workers exercising treaty
      rights at a time when they were each in receipt of JSA.  In terms of
      regs. 5 and 6 it was only in specific circumstances that a person in
      receipt of JSA was to be considered a worker.  It was arguable that
      the judge's findings were based on a material error of law in respect
      of both a misdirection as to the requirements of the EEA Regulations
      and a failure to give adequate reasons.




   6. Before us it quickly became clear that the first claimant's former
      spouse was a worker at the date of divorce in terms of reg. 6.  There
      was evidence from the Department of Work and Pensions to show that he
      was in receipt of JSA and in addition he met the requirements of reg.
      6 to continue to be treated as a worker.  Unlike the first claimant,
      he was not required to satisfy the additional requirement of reg.
      10(6).




   7. In terms of reg. 10(6)(a) of the EEA Regulations the first claimant
      had to show that from the date of the divorce she would, if she were
      an EEA national, have been a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
      sufficient person under reg.6.  In setting out the definition of a
      "qualified person" reg. 6 differentiates between a worker and a
      jobseeker.  Under reg. 6 a person who is no longer working may
      continue to be treated as a worker provided a number of conditions are
      satisfied.  These conditions include the requirement that the person
      has already been employed in the UK and either that the person entered
      the UK to seek employment or is present in the UK seeking employment
      after having a right to reside as a worker, self-employed person, self-
      sufficient person or student but not as a jobseeker.  A person who
      meets these conditions but has been employed in the UK for less than a
      year will only retain worker status for a maximum of 6 months, in
      terms of reg. 6(2A).




   8. Accordingly it was not enough for the first claimant to show that she
      was in receipt of JSA at the date of divorce.  In order to satisfy
      reg. 10(6)(a) she had also to show that she had been a worker less
      than 6 months before the date of divorce so that she retained the
      status of a worker on that date.  (There is no suggestion that the
      first claimant would have satisfied the requirement of reg. 10(6)(a)
      as a self-employed or self-sufficient person.)




   9. It should be noted out of fairness to Mr Ndbuisi that it did not
      become clear until during the course of the hearing that the outcome
      of the appeal would turn upon this precise point.  Nevertheless, the
      point was encompassed within the grounds upon which permission to
      appeal was granted and we considered it appropriate to proceed to
      address it.




  10. We therefore sought to ascertain whether there was any evidence before
      the First-tier Tribunal which would have established that the first
      claimant was in employment less than 6 months before the date of the
      divorce.  Mr Ndbuisi was unable to direct us to any such evidence.
      There was evidence of employment from April 2015 but not before this.
      Evidence from HMRC indicated that the first claimant had no earnings
      from employment in 2014-15, that is to say between 6 April 2014 and 5
      April 2015.  Accordingly it was not possible for the first claimant to
      show that she was in employment less than 6 months before the date of
      the divorce.




  11. We conclude therefore that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred
      in law by finding the first claimant was a worker at the date of
      divorce on the basis of a misdirection as to the meaning of a "worker"
      in reg. 6.  On the evidence before the Tribunal the only decision the
      judge could have reached was that the first claimant did not meet the
      requirements to show that she was a worker at the date of decision.
      On this basis the appeal should have been dismissed.




  12. We therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and re-
      make the decision by dismissing the appeals.




  13. A further issue raised before the First-tier Tribunal on behalf of the
      claimants was whether the first claimant had a derivative right of
      residence.  This was, however, not part of the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal.  The issue was not argued before us and accordingly we
      do not consider it necessary to address it.  If the first claimant
      seeks to claim a derivative right of residence this may form the
      subject of a separate application.




      Conclusions




      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.




      We set aside the decision.




      We re-make the decision by dismissing the appeals.




      Anonymity




      The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  We have
      not been asked to make such a direction and see no reason of substance
      for doing so.




      Fee Award                      (NB. This is not part of the decision)




      The First-tier Tribunal made a fee award.  As we have re-made the
      decision by dismissing the appeal, no fee award can be made.
















      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Deans
         23 August 2017









