
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03053/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January and 31 May 2019        |On 24 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     T v
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, instructed by Qualified Legal
                    Solicitors (25/01/19)
     Ms E Daykin, instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors (31/05/19
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (25/01/19)
     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (31/05/19)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam and appeals against the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appellant  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore, promulgated 30
    August 2018, dismissing her  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations") made on 3 April
    2018 refusing her application for a  derivative  residence  card  as  a
    primary carer of a British citizen.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance  as  a
    visitor in 2009.  She has remained here since 19 August  2009,  seeking
    in 2010 for leave to remain outside the Rules which was refused  on  29
    September 2010; seeking to remain on a family and private life basis on
    14 October 2013, refused on 28  November  2013;  seeking  a  derivative
    residence card pursuant to Zambrano, rejected on 24 February  2014  and
    again on 2 March 2014, refused on 30 April 2014.  A further application
    was made on this bass on 19 June 2014 giving rise to  an  appeal  which
    was dismissed, the  appellant  being  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  22
    November 2016.

 3. Further submissions were made and rejected in 2017, finding on 29  June
    2017 the appellant made an application for a derivative residence  card
    which was refused giving rise to this appeal.

 4. The appeal was heard on 11 October 2018 and dismissed.

The Appellant's Case

 5. The appellant lives with and looks after her mother who  is  a  British
    Citizen now 92 years of age.  Her mother is illiterate, does not  speak
    English and speaks only Vietnamese.  Her mother suffers from  dementia,
    impaired mobility and is no longer able, it is said, to  perform  daily
    tasks or to look after herself.  She is a culturally traditional  woman
    who eats only authentic Vietnamese food  which  she  requires  for  her
    digestive difficulties.

 6. The appellant's mother cannot imagine life  without  her  daughter  and
    refers to her as her "lifeline".  She has informed a memory nurse  that
    she would kill herself if separated.

 7. The appellant's case is that her presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    essential to her mother's  care;  that  her  mother  would  decline  in
    emotional and physical health without her presence and that,  were  she
    to move to a care home, it is likely to have a significant  detrimental
    impact on the mother who is at risk of particular isolation due to  her
    lack of English and any emotional disturbance.  It is also stated  that
    it may be difficult to find a care agency with  a  Vietnamese  speaking
    care worker and  that  there  is  no  other  family  member  who  could
    reasonably care for the mother, the son who  previously  provided  care
    having died some years ago; the other daughter is  estranged  from  her
    mother.  In reality, the appellant and her mother are dependent on each
    other, the prospect of separation causing anxiety, fright and  distress
    to both.

The Respondent's case

 8. The respondent's case is that the appellant cannot show on the  balance
    of probabilities that her departure from the UK would compel the mother
    to leave the United Kingdom.  It is noted that he has refused to engage
    with Social Services indicating that she is not in any  immediate  need
    and that the previous Tribunal considered that  she  would  not  United
    Kingdom, and rejected the claim  that  the  other  daughter  would  not
    assist her mother with her care.

 9. The respondent notes also that  the  family  had  maintained  the  same
    stance when dealing with the Home Office and Social  Services  for  the
    past six or seven years, yet at no time has  the  mother  accepted  any
    care from Social Services.

10. The respondent did not dispute the mother's age  or  the  diagnosis  of
    Alzheimer's but submits that she would be able to  engage  with  Social
    Services should she ever need it and there are other family members  in
    the UK who could assist her with treatment.  It is also noted that  the
    appellant has no formal training in dealing with persons with  dementia
    or general nursing.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

11. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence  from  the  appellant  directing
    that account needs to be taken of the First-tier Tribunal decision from
    2 September 2015.  The judge noted [18] that there had not been  not  a
    great deal of change in the mother's condition although noting this  in
    2016 she had been referred to the social care and  rehabilitation  team
    for physiotherapy.  The judge noted a letter  from  Whittington  Health
    NHS Trust that the mother had been provided with  medication,  she  had
    been accompanied by her  daughter  and  another  relative,  that  being
    apparently a friend or "niece".

12. The judge concluded [20] that he was not  satisfied  it  was  only  the
    appellant who cares for her and provides assistance  and  support  from
    her mother, the Tribunal in 2015 appearing to say as much at that  time
    and that for some appointments the mother was  accompanied  by  another
    person who may be a relative or a  friend.   He  noted  also  that  the
    mother is left at home with a friend or a relative while the  appellant
    went shopping, the person being named as L P.

13. The judge did not accept the appellant's account she is the only person
    who accompanied her mother to medical appointments given the references
    to another person who accompanied them, going on to  consider  that  as
    the appellant had worked for two hours a day until 2016, and that there
    was no evidence that during the time the mother was unable to  cope  or
    seek assistance or had to ask assistance from  another  relative  or  a
    friend, there was  no  reliable  evidence  demonstrating  that  such  a
    relative or a friend would be unable to do the same  if  the  appellant
    had to be removed to Vietnam.

14. The judge did not find it credible that the mother could not do without
    the appellant's assistance and support given that she knew that she has
    provided care for her mother and  found  it  surprising  that  she  was
    unaware of any involvement of a social worker believing  her  to  be  a
    representative for the NHS.

15. The judge found that there would be adequate care and support  for  the
    appellant's mother from the NHS and Social Services if she  was  forced
    to leave; did not accept that  she  would  have  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and accompany her daughter to Vietnam if required to leave  the
    country; and, by reference to Patel v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  2028  that
    the decision for the mother would not be one of necessity or compulsion
    but one of choice, there being no medical or care  reason  which  would
    compel the mother to leave the country.

16. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) in failing when finding that the mother could not  do  without  the
         appellant's assistance did not take into account the evidence  from
         the clinical practitioner (memory nurse)  who  confirmed  that  the
         appellant's presence is essential to  her  mother's  care  and  she
         needs to be present in the UK to provide this care;

     ii) in failing to take into  account  the  relevance  of  the  mother's
         dementia in concluding that the provision of NHS care for  her  was
         determined by choice, the judge appearing to have no regard to  the
         role played by dementia in the mother's refusal to engage with care
         provided by anyone other than her daughter.

17. On 23 November 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted permission
    on both grounds.

18. At the hearing before me on 25 January 2019 Mr Kotas submitted that the
    failure to address the evidence of the memory nurse was not material in
    the light of Patel nor was a  failure  to  engage  with  the  issue  of
    dementia relevant.

19. We consider that the judge did err in concluding that  the  appellant's
    claim that her mother could not move out of assistance was not credible
    as there is an apparent failure to take into account  the  letter  from
    the memory service that the appellant's presence is  essential  to  the
    mother's care.  That is, we consider, a significant piece  of  evidence
    which needed  to  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  this  issue.
    Further, we are satisfied that the judge did not appear to  have  taken
    into account the appellant's mother's mental health,  particularly  the
    dementia diagnosis, in considering the reason for  not  taking  up  the
    care package.  In our view it also  fails  to  take  into  account  the
    mother's subjective viewpoint which is informed by her dementia.  There
    is a significant amount of evidence showing an interdependency of  both
    on an emotional and practical level.

20. In Patel at [84] Irwin LJ said this:-

         "During the hearing, we asked the Secretary of State to consider in
         what circumstances compulsion  might  arise  in  respect  of  adult
         dependents of those without residence: if there  were  none,  might
         the regulation so interpreted be a dead letter, forcing a different
         interpretation to  preclude  redundancy?   Mr  Blundell's  response
         accepts that this category of cases might be very narrow.  However,
         he did proffer examples.  Where  the  family  share  a  rare  blood
         group, and blood transfusion or bone marrow  transplants  might  be
         required, it might be arguable that the carer  should  remain.   He
         also  instanced  a  British  adult  citizen  with  severe   autism,
         dependent for all his care on a third  country  national  relative,
         where it would be intolerable for the  identity  of  the  carer  to
         change.  It is clear Mr Blundell was  intending  to  give  examples
         rather than an exhaustive survey.  For  myself,  I  would  instance
         significant  psychological  dependence  derived  from   any   well-
         documented and recognised psychological condition,  as  a  possible
         example.  There may be  more.   The  point  is  that  the  category
         exists, and there can be no argument that the regulation must  have
         an expanded reading in order to avoid redundancy."

21. In light of  the  observations  as  to  the  significant  psychological
    dependence we were satisfied that the errors  referred  to  above  were
    material in that, had the information been taken into account  properly
    it may well have been the case that the appeal could have been allowed.



22. The matter was then adjourned for further evidence to be obtained.

23. When the  matter  came  before  us,  we  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives.  We also had before  us  an  additional  supplementary
    bundle containing correspondence between the appellant's solicitor  and
    Islington Adult Social Services, Camden NHS  Foundation  Trust  and  MS
    (Malaysia) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 580.

24. The additional material is of little assistance providing little or  no
    additional detail.  It does show that  there  has  been  little  or  no
    contact between the appellant's mother and Social Services, there being
    no current referrals.

25. In addition, the mental health nurse was unable  to  speculate  whether
    the appellant's mother would be able to cope if  she  were  in  a  home
    noting that she had said, when asked, that "she would kill herself"  if
    separated but was unable to say how serious this threat is.  She said:

         "It is likely, given the observed relationship between  them,  that
         the patient would be at risk of being isolated (given  her  limited
         English) and  emotional  effect  if  placed  in  a  care  home  and
         separated from her daughter [the appellant].  A move to a care home
         has a significant impact on  most  people,  including  people  with
         dementia."

26. The letter also states:

         "6.  Dependency between N and [the appellant]: from my  visits  and
             assessments it appears that the patient and her daughter  [the
             appelalnt] are for the most part dependent on each other.   It
             appears the patient needs [the appellant] to  provide  support
             with all activities  of  daily  living  to  provide  emotional
             support.  Neither speaks English and  they  are  dependent  on
             each other for company."

27. It is of note that the nurse is not aware of any other family  members.



28. It is relevant to consider also MS (Malaysia) at 23 to 26,

         "23. Subsequent to Patel,  the  CJEU  has  again  had  occasion  to
         consider these issues in Case C-82/16 K.A. v Belgium (8 May  2018).
         After laying out the Zambrano principle in the usual way at [51] to
         [52],  the  court  stated  the  position  in  relation   to   adult
         dependencies at [65] as follows:

             "As regards, first, [the cases where  derivative  rights  were
             claimed by adult third country nationals of whom the father or
             partner was an  EU  citizen],  it  must,  at  the  outset,  be
             emphasised that, unlike minors and a fortiori minors  who  are
             young children, such as the Union citizens  concerned  in  the
             case that gave rise to the judgment  of  8  March  2011,  Ruiz
             Zambrano (C-34/09, EU:C:2011:124), an adult is, as  a  general
             rule, capable of living an independent  existence  apart  from
             the members of his family. It follows that the  identification
             of a relationship between two adult members of the same family
             as a relationship of dependency, capable of giving rise  to  a
             derived  right  of  residence  under  Article  20   TFEU,   is
             conceivable only in exceptional cases, where, having regard to
             all the relevant circumstances, there  could  be  no  form  of
             separation of the individual concerned from the member of  his
             family on whom he is dependent."

         24.  To similar effect at [76] the court said:

             "It follows from paragraphs 64 to 75  of  this  judgment  that
             Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that:

                  - where the Union citizen is an adult, a  relationship  of
                  dependency, capable of justifying the grant to the  third-
                  country national concerned of a derived right of residence
                  under Article 20 TFEU, is conceivable only in  exceptional
                  cases,  where,  in  the  light   of   all   the   relevant
                  circumstances, any form of separation  of  the  individual
                  concerned from the member of his  family  on  whom  he  is
                  dependent is not possible ..."

         25.  It is clear,  therefore,  that  what  the  Zambrano  principle
         protects is the right to reside  in  the  Union,  as  a  matter  of
         substance and not of form. The principle  does  not  guarantee  any
         particular  quality  of  life  in  the  Union  although,   as   the
         consequences for the EU citizen increase in seriousness there  will
         come a point where they are so serious that they  will  effectively
         compel the citizen  to  leave.  Whether  the  boundary  (which  has
         impediment on the right to reside on one  side  and  compulsion  to
         leave on the other) is crossed is clearly  a  matter  of  fact  and
         degree. What is necessary in each case is to examine the  character
         and quality of the relationship of  dependency  between  the  Union
         citizen and the third country national who is refused  a  right  of
         residence, because it is that dependency which would  lead  to  the
         Union citizen being obliged, in fact, to leave the territory of the
         Union.

         26.  The test in the case of adult dependents is a  very  demanding
         one, which will be met  only  exceptionally,  but  remains  one  of
         practical compulsion such that the  EU  citizen  is  left  with  no
         practical choice but to leave the territory of the Union."

29. Also relevant is what was held at [42]:

         "42. The availability of state-funded medical and social care will,
         in many cases, make it hard for those who provide  care  for  their
         elderly relatives to bring themselves within  the  Regulation.  The
         availability of state care is not, however,  to  be  treated  as  a
         trump card in every case, irrespective of the nature and quality of
         the dependency on the  carer  which  is  relied  on.  Just  as  the
         availability of an EU citizen parent to be a carer of a minor child
         does not render unnecessary an  enquiry  into  the  nature  of  the
         dependency of the child on her non-EU parent (see  Chavez-Vilchez),
         the availability of state care does not avoid the need  to  enquire
         into the actual dependency of the EU citizen on  her  adult  carer.
         The availability of alternative care is a relevant, but not  always
         decisive factor."


30. We consider that state care would be available in this case is what  is
    whether care is available for her from NHS and/or Social Services; and,
    whether there is, (as the judge found) the  possibility  of  care  from
    another relative.

31. The evidence with regard to the latter points in different  directions.
    It is evident from the social worker report that the appellant's  other
    sister was present.  It is, however, said that  she  is  estranged  and
    that  is  confirmed  by  the  memory  nurse.   It  appears   that   the
    estrangement is not to the extent as was said by the appellant but that
    there is insufficient evidence to show that the estranged sister  would
    be prepared to provide the care  that  the  appellant's  mother  needs.
    Insofar as there is another relative or niece, involvement  appears  in
    reality to be limited to accompanying too medical  appointments.   That
    is significantly different  from  providing,  as  the  appellant  does,
    continual live in care with little respite. It may be that, in  theory,
    others may be capable of providing more assistance, but  that  they  do
    not do so; nor is it clear how they could be compelled so to do.

32. Viewing the evidence as a  whole,  we  conclude  that  the  appellant's
    mother requires significant help 24 hours a day.  It is possible to put
    together this picture from the letters from doctors,  the  social  work
    report, the report of  the  letters  from  the  memory  nurse  and  the
    observations as to her cognitive ability.  There is no suggestion  from
    any of the professionals that there are unmet needs from which  it  can
    be deduced that these needs are being met by somebody  other  than  the
    appellant.  They are satisfied that these needs are in fact  being  met
    by the appellant.

33. We accept also, given that both the appellant and her mother  lack  the
    ability to communicate in English that they are  isolated.   They  have
    become co-dependent on each other.

34. We accept that the appellant's mother does not  wish  to  receive  care
    from others or to be placed into a home.  We accept that the latter  is
    likely to have a detrimental effect on  her,  the  evidence  before  us
    suggesting that she is  dependent  emotionally  on  her  daughter.   We
    accept also that  there  is  a  significant  chance  of  her  cognitive
    abilities deteriorating as is inevitable in Alzheimer's.   We  do  not,
    however, consider that there is any reliable evidence that  the  mother
    would leave the United Kingdom.

35. That said, there is not in  this  case  any  comprehensive  psychiatric
    report or psychological report either on the appellant or  her  mother.
    The evidence is thin but on balance we are satisfied that there  is  in
    this case a physical and  emotional  dependency  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant's mother to her daughter and an emotional dependency,  albeit
    less strong, between the daughter and the mother.  We bear in mind what
    was said in MS (Malaysia) [38] and [40]:

         "38. Viewed in isolation, Mr Lewis' submissions on this  aspect  of
         the appeal have a superficial attraction. Both  sides  agreed  that
         the test for compulsion must be an  objective  one.  DK's  evidence
         that  she  would  feel  compelled  to  leave,  or  that  she  would
         definitely leave, cannot be conclusive of the issue of whether,  on
         an objective basis, she would be compelled to leave."

36. We consider that the reality of the situation in  this  case  is  that,
    were the appellant to leave the United Kingdom, her mother  would  have
    no option but to follow her in order to maintain the  relationship  but
    would not.  We find in reality that she would be placed in a care  home
    and that there is a real likelihood which  will  inevitably  cause  her
    distress  and  discomfort.   We  accept  also  that  she  suffers  from
    Alzheimer's which, together with the fact she does  not  speak  English
    and has specific cultural needs will inevitably make the situation even
    more difficult for her.

37. Taking all of these factors  into  the  round,  we  consider  that  the
    appellant has shown that if she were to leave, the mother's quality  of
    life would be so diminished as to engage Zambrano, given the extent  of
    dependency. Further, and in the alternative it needs  to  be  borne  in
    mind that in cases where children  could  not  be  compelled  to  leave
    because, for example, they can be taken into foster  care  or  adopted,
    that is seen as a  reduction  in  the  quality  of  life  so  great  as
    effectively to amount to a negation of rights. By analogy that is  what
    would happen here.

38. Accordingly, we are satisfied that removing the appellant would  be  in
    breach of  EU  law,  and  we  therefore  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations.

Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and we set it aside.

2.   We remake the decision by allowing the appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

