
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03608/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2016                          |On 2 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                mr David [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's mother has written to the Upper Tribunal  stating  that
    she would be unable to attend today to represent her  son's  interests.
    The appellant has a severe form of autism, finds it difficult to travel
    and can be disruptive in public. Her letter was not considered to be an
    application to adjourn, rather a request to proceed in the  absence  of
    the appellant. There being no prejudice to either party,  I  agreed  to
    proceed on that basis.

2.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Handley which was promulgated on 5 June 2016.  The appellant  was  born
    in 1999 and is a Dutch national  and  an  application  was  made  on  5
    February 2016 for a registration certificate under regulation 26 of the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, which was refused by the  Secretary
    of State in a letter dated 29 March 2016. The appellant appealed.

3.   The Judge noted that the sponsor who purported to be the mother of  the
    appellant but had failed to show that the appellant was related to her,
    even though both the appellant and the sponsor had provided  sufficient
    proof of their respective identities.

4.   The Judge stated at paragraph 14:

         "I also noted that the appellant suggested that a birth certificate
         and a passport had  been  submitted  with  the  notice  of  appeal.
         Attached to the notice of appeal was what appeared to  be  a  Dutch
         document.  This document had not been translated and consequently I
         have been unable to take account of it.  Also before me was part of
         the  appellant's  Dutch  passport.  Given  the   absence   of   any
         explanation regarding the significance of  this  document  I  found
         that it was of limited assistance to me".

    The Judge concluded "the sponsor and the appellant were  aware  of  the
    concerns of the respondent as stated in the notice of appeal  but  they
    had not properly addressed these issues.


5.   What was referred to as "a Dutch document" appears in copy form in  the
    documentation but there is also an original on the file which had  been
    before the Judge.  Although I have no knowledge of Dutch  it  is  self-
    evidently a birth certificate and it records the name of the sponsor as
    being the mother and the name of the appellant as being her child.  The
    date coincides with the child's birth  in  what  was  certified  as  an
    authenticated copy by  the  Dutch  authorities  in  2010.  This  was  a
    relevant and probative document which the Judge was wrong to ignore.

6.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  accepts
    that the birth certificate is genuine and amounts to  sufficient  proof
    of the familial relationship between the sponsor and the appellant.

7.   There was clearly  a  material  error  of  law  by  the  Judge  in  not
    recognising  and  appreciating  the   meaning   and   effect   of   the
    documentation before the tribunal.  In the circumstances  the  decision
    must be set aside.  In remaking the decision,  it  is  clear  that  the
    required relationship under the EEA Regulations has been proved to  the
    required standard, as is conceded on behalf of the Secretary of  State.
    The appeal therefore succeeds.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

In remaking the decision, the appeal from the  respondent's  refusal  letter
is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, and it is  declared
that the appellant is entitled to a registration certificate.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     1 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

