
[pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/03316/2015

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th January 2018                   |On 06th February 2018                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                             Mr Alam Md Zahangir

                        (No anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance

For the Respondent :   Ms Isherwood  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Alam Md Zahangir date of birth 29 October 1983, is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh. Having considered all the  circumstances,  I  do
    not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. There was no attendance by anyone on behalf of the appellant. Notice of
    hearing had been sent out on 29 December 2017 both to the appellant  at
    the address he had given for service and to his representatives.  There
    is a letter from the appellant's representatives indicating  that  they
    will not be attending because of financial constraints.

 3. According to the file on 4 January 2018 notice and directions had  been
    sent out by the Upper Tribunal, indicating that the Upper Tribunal  did
    not have a copy of the complete Home Office  bundle.  It  was  directed
    that the parties must file with the Tribunal and serve upon  all  other
    parties any documents upon which reliance  was  placed,  even  if  that
    material had previously been served.

 4. The appellant's representatives appear  to  have  responded  by  letter
    dated 9 January 2018 submitting  merely  a  copy  of  the  Home  Office
    bundle, which included  the  original  application  and  the  documents
    submitted in support thereof. No other documents had been served by the
    appellant. No appellant's bundle had  been  served  on  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. The  representative  for  the  respondent  asked  that  the  appeal  be
    adjourned pending further consideration of the legal issues  raised  in
    the case and  similar  cases  by  the  Supreme  Court.  I  refused  the
    application to adjourn.

 6. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kaler promulgated on the 28th March 2017. The  appellant
    had made an application for an EEA residence card as an extended family
    member of an EEA national, who was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom. I note that the application had to be considered  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006. The application was refused  by
    the respondent by decision dated 18 November 2015. The appellant sought
    to appeal against the decision.

 7. The appeal came before Judge Kaler on the 20th March  2017.  The  judge
    dismissed the appeal in accordance with the law as stated in  the  case
    of Sala (EFMs: Rights of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411. The  case  of  Sala
    has been overruled in the case of Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755. The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in following the case of Sala cannot be  criticised
    as he was following the  guidance  set  down  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    However in light of the case law the approach of the judge was  legally
    flawed.

 8. In the circumstances the decision to dismiss the  appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction cannot stand. I therefore set the decision aside.

 9. The directions sent out to  the  parties  in  the  present  proceedings
    included the following direction:-

         4  There is a presumption  that,  in  the  event  of  the  Tribunal
         deciding that the decision of the FtT (First-tier Tribunal)  is  to
         be set aside as erroneous in law, the remaking of the decision will
         take place at the same hearing. The fresh decision will normally be
         based on the evidence before  the  FtT  and  any  further  evidence
         admitted (see [5] below), together with the parties' arguments. The
         parties must be prepared accordingly in every case.

         5  The Tribunal is empowered to permit new or further  evidence  to
         be admitted in the remaking of the decision. In any case where this
         facility is sought the parties must comply with Rule 15 (2A)  which
         is in these terms...

10. The provisions of rule 15(2A) are set out. Other  than  submitting  the
    original  Home  Office  bundle  including  the   documents   originally
    submitted with the  application,  no  further  documentation  has  been
    submitted to the Tribunal. In that original bundle are:-

           . the application form ,

           . extracts from the appellant's passport,

           . a copy of the appellant's original visa granting entry as  the
             Tier 4 student,

           . an  identity  card  for  a  person  named  as  Ashiqur  Rahman
             identifying him  as  a  Portuguese  national  and  giving  his
             parents as Golenur Rahman and Fatema Khatun,

           . photo copy of  the  extension  of  the  student  visa  for  Md
             Zahangir Alam to 2015,

           . a birth certificate for the Md Zahangir Alam  identifying  his
             parents as Md Shahjaman Ali and Mst Nekjahan Begum,

           . birth certificate for  Mst Nekjahan Begum,

           . birth certificate for Ashiqur Rahman, with parents  identified
             as above,

           . money receipts where the receiver of the payment  was  Sultana
             Rahman.

11. No statement has been submitted from the appellant or from his sponsor.
    The letter from the appellant's representatives claims that:

      i) The application was refused on the ground that  the  appellant  did
         not provide  sufficient  evidence  of  the  relationship  with  the
         sponsor.

     ii) The issue is whether the appellant was dependent on the sponsor.

    iii) There is no dispute that the sponsor is the maternal cousin of  the
         appellant.

     iv)  The  appellant   has   provided   sufficient   evidence   of   his
         dependency/living together with  his  EEA  national  sponsor,  i.e.
         joint bank statement issued to both the appellant and  the  sponsor
         which were dated back from  June  2016,  money  transfer  receipts,
         sponsors payslips, a letter from the sponsor diagram of the  family
         tree,  which  were  sufficient  to  establish  evidence  of  living
         together or dependency on his EEA sponsor such that  the  appellant
         satisfies  the  requirements  of  Regulation  8  (1)  of  the   EEA
         Regulations 2006.

      v) The appellant is fully dependent and living with his  EEA  sponsor.
         The appellant's EEA sponsor  wrote  a  letter  in  support  of  his
         application in which the sponsor confirmed that he is providing the
         appellant's living costs and  his  support  will  be  continued  in
         future.

     vi) Unfortunately, the FTT did not make any findings on the grounds  of
         the refusal. The best course of action could be to remit the appeal
         back to the FTT  to  make  a  decision  upon  considering  all  the
         evidence.

12. The problems with regard to the  assertions  in  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's representative is that in certain respects they are  wrong.
    A careful examination of the refusal letter sets out  the  reasons  why
    the application was refused and the lack of  documentation  to  support
    aspects of the case. The relationship of the appellant to  the  sponsor
    is not accepted. Contrary to the assertion in the letter no family tree
    has been submitted. In any event a family tree is merely  an  assertion
    of a relationship.

13. Having set the decision aside there is an issue as to whether or not  I
    should deal with the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  lodged.
    Clearly this appeal like many others concerning  the  same  issue  have
    been remitted by the Upper Tribunal to be heard  afresh  as  there  has
    been no assessment of the evidence and no proper findings of fact made.



14. Whilst  the  evidence  at  the  moment  is  insufficient  to  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 8, specifically regulation  8(2),  it  is  a
    situation in which the appellant ought to be given  an  opportunity  of
    properly presenting the evidence in the case. It is necessary  for  the
    appellant to submit a full bundle of  documents  answering  the  issues
    that are raised in the letter of  refusal.  In  the  circumstances  the
    appropriate course is for this matter to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing afresh on all issues.

    Notice of Decision

15. I set aside the original decision of the First-tier Tribunal and direct
    that the case be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  hearing
    afresh.

16. I do not make an anonymity direction.


Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 29th January 2018


