
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/03942/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,   |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated       |
|London                              |                                      |
|On 25 September 2017                |On 26 September 2017                  |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                    [P U]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr McKenzie, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

       1. The appellant is  a  national  of  Poland  and  therefore  an  EEA
          citizen.  He entered the United Kingdom  in  2010  and  claims  to
          have been exercising EU Treaty rights as  a  self-employed  person
          until around 2015.  At this  time  he  is  said  to  have  stopped
          employment for reasons relating to his alcohol dependency,  mental
          illness and homelessness.


       2. In a decision contained in a IS151A (EEA) dated 23 March 2017  the
          respondent decided that the appellant ceased to have  a  right  to
          reside having been sentenced to imprisonment  for  one  month  and
          eleven days for shoplifting.

       3. At a hearing on 14 July 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese
          refused  the  appellant's  application  for  an  adjournment   and
          dismissed his appeal in a decision dated 31 July 2017.

       4. In a  decision  dated  23  August  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          granted the appellant permission to appeal observing that  it  was
          arguably:

              i)  unfair  not  to  adjourn  in  light  of  the   appellant's
                 acknowledged mental illness and lack of representation;


             ii) an error of law to fail to apply the guidance on vulnerable
                 adults;

            iii) an  error  of  law  to  fail  to  apply  the  relevant  EEA
                 Regulations to the evidence available.


Hearing

       5. At the hearing before me Mr McKenzie relied upon  his  grounds  of
          appeal and a very helpful skeleton  argument.   Mr  Melvin  relied
          upon a rule 23 notice and invited me to dismiss the appeal.


       6. After hearing from  both  representatives  I  indicated  that  the
          First-tier Tribunal decision contains an error of  law  such  that
          it must be set aside  and  remade.   Both  representatives  agreed
          that it should  be  remitted  to  and  remade  by  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.  I have had regard to para 7.2 of  the  relevant  Senior
          President's Practice Statement and the nature and  extent  of  the
          factual findings required in remaking the  decision,  and  I  have
          decided that this is an appropriate case to remit  to  the  First-
          tier Tribunal.


Error of law discussion

Adjournment

       7. I am satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted  unfairly  in
          refusing to adjourn the hearing in light  of  the  principles  set
          out in Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418.   I
          acknowledge, as did Mr McKenzie, that the appellant  probably  had
          adequate time  to  arrange  legal  representation  but  there  was
          sufficiently   clear   evidence   of   compelling    circumstances
          explaining his failure to do so.  These related to his  detention,
          mental illness,  alcohol  dependency  and  learning  difficulties.
          Fairness dictated an adjournment given the factors set out below.


              i) The appellant has an  acknowledged  mental  illness  or  as
                 described by the First-tier Tribunal at [10] "is in need of
                 medical attention".
             ii) He was unable to secure legal representation previously due
                 to a combination of reasons but had recently  secured  very
                 experienced solicitors in  the  field  who  made  a  cogent
                 adjournment application on his behalf.
            iii) The evidence  available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
                 incomplete as acknowledged by the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
                 [11].
             iv) The law underpinning the appeal is complex and difficult.

Guidance

       8. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  into  account
          and apply the Practice Direction 'First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal
          Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive  Witnesses',  dated   30
          October 2008 or the joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of
          2010.   As set out in AM (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
          1123 a failure to follow this  guidance  will  most  likely  be  a
          material error of  law.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
          circumstances  raised  a  number  of  concerns  that  he  may   be
          vulnerable and as such special  considerations  applied  including
          the  express  duty  to   consider   an   adjournment   to   secure
          representation.

EEA Regulations

       9. The First-tier Tribunal wholly failed to consider  the  appeal  by
          reference to the correct legal framework.  No attempt was made  to
          identify or apply  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  (SI
          2016/1052).  As such the First-tier Tribunal has erred in  law  in
          failing to consider whether  notwithstanding  that  the  appellant
          ceased work in 2015,:


              i) he acquired permanent residence and qualified  as  a  self-
                 employed person who ceased activity  for  the  purposes  of
                 regulation 5, or alternatively;


             ii) he was temporarily unable to work as a  result  of  illness
                 and is therefore a qualified person  for  the  purposes  of
                 regulation 6.


Decision

      10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      11. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Directions

        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           sitting in Taylor House (TE: 2.5hrs) on  the  first  date  after
           four months (to enable the appellant's solicitors who have  been
           acting pro bono to make an application for exceptional  funding.



        2) Polish interpreter necessary.





Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
25 September 2017

