
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04888/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th February 2018                         |On 16th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          mr Andrzej Dariusz Sokol
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Morgan, promulgated on 13th November 2017, following a hearing at
    Taylor House on 2nd November 2017.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Poland,  who  was  born  on  27th
    February 1973.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 10th May 2017  that  the  Appellant  was  not  exercising  treaty
    rights, before his incarceration, and  had  not  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence,  such  that  removal  directions  were  now  issued
    against him.



The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed how the Appellant had a number of  convictions,  the
    latest of which saw him receive an eight week sentence of imprisonment,
    but that the convictions were not the basis for the Respondent  seeking
    to remove the Appellant.  The basis of the  Respondent's  decision  was
    that he had not been exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 4. With respect to this particular question of  the  Appellant  exercising
    treaty rights, the judge observed how the Appellant had been working in
    the UK since he arrived in 2012, such that there was  evidence  of  his
    working for ALS, a recycling company, right  the  way  up  until  2015.
    However, in 2015 he did start working for JJ Food  Services  "where  he
    worked for nearly a year and a half" (paragraph 7).

 5. The Appellant maintained that he has "currently been offered a job with
    the recycling firm for whom he was working originally" and that he  has
    not been able to start work because he has "had some difficulty opening
    a bank account" given that he was unable "to prove his current address"
    (paragraph 9).  However, the Appellant maintained that "he  expects  to
    return to work at the recycling firm within the next few weeks once his
    bank account has been successfully opened" (paragraph 9).

 6. Accordingly, the judge concluded that the Appellant  was  a  jobseeker,
    who had a realistic prospect of employment, given that  he  had  worked
    throughout his time in the UK, and was seeking to return  to  the  very
    same recycling firm, namely ALS, for whom he had worked for three years
    following his initial arrival in the UK.

 7. The appeal was allowed.



Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application focus on a narrow point.  It is stated  that
    before the judge could conclude that the Appellant had a job  available
    to which he could return, it was incumbent on the  judge  to  ascertain
    that the Appellant was a "jobseeker".  Under  Regulation  6(2)  it  was
    clear that, "a person who is no longer  working  must  continue  to  be
    treated as a  worker  provided  that  the  person",  as  one  who  "has
    registered as a jobseeker with a relevant employment office".  This was
    not the case here.  Accordingly, the Appellant could not be treated  as
    a jobseeker.

 9. On 11th December 2017 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.





Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 28th February 2018, Mr Avery, appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State, submitted  that  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  was  a
    "jobseeker" was a significant one.  This is because the evidence in the
    Appellant's case was that he had worked from 2012 to 2015 for ALS,  the
    recycling company.  However, he had then stopped working for  them  and
    had for a period of one and a half years, worked  for  a  food  company
    (see paragraph 7).  In the circumstances, the judge  first  had  to  be
    sure that the  Appellant  was  a  "qualifying  person"  in  the  manner
    required.  The failure to apply Regulation 6 led the judge into  error.



11. For his part, Mr Sokol, who appeared  unrepresented  at  the  Tribunal,
    stated that he was currently not working and he was not registered with
    a Jobcentre either.  The reason for this, he explained, was  that  when
    he had last gone to the Jobcentre he had been told that given his  very
    limited English language capabilities, he would have to return back  so
    that a more appropriate job  could  be  considered  for  him.   He  was
    presently receiving the assistance of  the  Probation  Service.   Given
    this, he now had a meeting with them next week.

12. However, he confirmed that at the time  of  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Morgan, he had nothing in writing to confirm that he  did  have  a  job
    with ALS, with whom he had previously worked  for  three  years.   They
    could not give him anything in writing quite simply because he  had  no
    bank account.  He had no bank account because he did not have a  stable
    address.  He was hoping now in the next few weeks to be able to  remedy
    all these deficiencies.



Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

14. This is a case where there is a great deal  of  uncertainty  about  the
    Appellant's position.  Save for the fact that he had worked for ALS for
    three  years  immediately  after  his  arrival,  everything   else   is
    uncertain.  It is certainly not the case,  as  required  by  Regulation
    6(2) that he is registered as a jobseeker "with the relevant employment
    office".  Indeed, his efforts to attempt to do so have been thwarted by
    the fact that his English language capabilities had been limited and so
    he has been turned away.  The matter needed proper  determination  upon
    the evidence.

15. The Appellant also did not have a bank account  so  that  his  previous
    employers, ALS, felt reluctant in being able to give him a job  because
    they did not know where to send his salary to.

16. To all intents and purposes,  therefore,  the  more  that  the  factual
    situation has been considered,  the  more  it  would  appear  that  the
    Appellant would have struggled to meet the requirements  of  Regulation
    6(2).



Remaking the Decision

17. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.

18. I am allowing this appeal to  the  extent  only  that  this  matter  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by  a  judge
    other than Judge Morgan pursuant to practice statement  7.2(b)  because
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in
    order for the decision and the appeal to be remade is such that, having
    regard to the overriding objective in Rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.   This  has  also  been  the
    submission before me by Mr Avery appearing for the Respondent Secretary
    of State.

19. No anonymity direction is made.

20. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 14th March 2018


