

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: Ea/ 04777/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On    8 May 2019                                   |On 10 May 2019                  |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                     Carla CRENTSIL (formerly O'CONNOR)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr Umar Khurram, solicitor, KCS
For the respondent: Mr Toby Lindsay

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Daniel Sills), sitting at Birmingham on  16  March,  to
    an EEA appeal by a citizen of Jamaica, born  1972.  The  appellant  had
    arrived here in Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2002,  and  met
    an Irish citizen called Abeku Crentsil (the sponsor)  in 2009: they had
    married in 2011, and in due course she had been given an EEA  residence
    card, valid till 9 November 2016, on the basis that the sponsor  was  a
    'qualified person' by reason of his business as a plumbing  fitter  and
    decorator.

 2. On 8 November 2016 the appellant applied for permanent  residence;  but
    that was refused on 26 April 2017: the  respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the sponsor had been a  'qualified  person'  for  the  five  years
    needed,  for  lack  of  the  necessary  financial  evidence  about  his
    business.  This  decision  was  appealed,  first  by  another  firm  of
    solicitors, who requested a hearing in their notice of appeal. Later Mr
    Khurram's firm took over, and asked for the appeal to be dealt with  on
    the papers.

 3. The Home Office however did not agree to this; so the case  was  listed
    for hearing on 13 April 2018; not 16 March, as shown at the top of  the
    decision; but the  solicitors  were  told  their  attendance  would  be
    excused. On 6 April they had  sent  in  a  large  (287  pp)  bundle  of
    evidence, received on the 10th,  and  on  the  10th  they  faxed  in  a
    skeleton argument, received the same day.

 4. At the hearing the presenting officer conceded, in the absence  of  the
    appellant or any representative that, while the  documents  before  the
    decision-maker had not shown the  sponsor  was  a  'qualified  person',
    those received on the 10th had done so. However the judge  declined  to
    accept  the  concession,  for  clear  and  detailed  reasons  given  at
    paragraphs 11 - 15, dealing with the material in the  bundle  which  he
    considered relevant. There is  no  question  but  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to do this: there was no question  of  giving  notice  to  the
    appellant's side first, since they had been given no reason  to  expect
    the concession in the first place.

 5. What the judge did not do, however, was to make any  reference  to  the
    skeleton argument. This is not a particularly impressive document;  but
    it did contain the appellant's solicitors' submissions on the  material
    in the bundle. Bearing in mind what the  judge,  justifiably,  said  at
    paragraph 11 about the material in the bundle not being presented  "...
    in a particularly user friendly format",  and  the  fact  that  he  was
    deciding the case in the (permitted) absence of the  appellant's  side,
    and contrary to a concession made by the  presenting  officer,  I  have
    reluctantly reached the view that he needed,  simply  as  a  matter  of
    being seen to be fair, to deal with the skeleton argument, such  as  it
    was, before deciding the case as he did.

 6. The result is that there will have to be a fresh hearing before another
    first-tier judge. Mr Lindsay once again did not consent to  a  disposal
    on the papers, and also withdrew  the  concession  made  at  the  first
    hearing. Given the view taken by the judge on the merits of  the  case,
    there was good reason for that withdrawal, and no reason for me not  to
    allow it: see NR (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ 856, paragraph 12. This time
    the appellant would be well advised to be present  and  represented  at
    the hearing.

Appeal :: first-tier decision set aside
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham, not before Judge Sills
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                  Date 8
                                   May 2019
