
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04999/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams Video Link |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 May 2021                            |On 10 June 2021                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                             mr Ibrahim Muritala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 11 September 2019 to refuse to issue him with a residence card
    as confirmation of his right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    spouse of Anna Eriksson, a Swedish citizen exercising treaty rights  in
    the United Kingdom.  His appeal against that decision to the First-tier
    Tribunal was dismissed for the reasons set out in the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Head  promulgated  on  25  November  2019.   That
    decision was set aside for the reasons set out in  my  decision  of  14
    December 2020, a copy of which was annexed to this decision.

 2. The appellant's case is that he met his wife  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    They were married by a double proxy, that is, that neither of them were
    present but that the ceremony was conducted according to customary  law
    by those appointed to do so in Nigeria.  That marriage took place on 11
    August 2018.

 3. The appellant obtained a certificate from  that  and  submitted  it  as
    application for a residence card.  That was rejected by  the  Secretary
    of State on the basis that the certificate supplied was a civil, rather
    than a customary marriage certificate and thus was incorrect.

 4. The appellant did not appeal the decision but  contacted  the  registry
    who, he says, admitted to issuing the wrong certificate and then issued
    the correct, customary marriage certificate and the letter attesting to
    its validity.

 5. The appellant made a fresh application for the residence  card  on  the
    basis of the customary marriage certificate but, on 11 September  2019,
    the respondent refused that application on the basis that:-

      1) the documents  were  insufficient  evidence  of  a  proxy  marriage
         without  the  evidence  of  an  affidavit  signed  by  the   family
         representatives and signed by a recognised official;

      2) the appellant had supplied a civil marriage certificate and a proxy
         marriage certificate, only one of  which  could  be  valid  thereby
         casting doubts over the validity of all certificates and  documents
         relating to the marriage.

 6. At the hearing before  me,  no  oral  evidence  was  called.   I  heard
    submissions from Mr Muritala and Mr Kandola having raised as  an  issue
    that there did not appear to be  anywhere  evidence  showing  that  the
    affidavits in support of the marriage were necessary for  it  to  be  a
    valid marriage in Nigeria.

 7. Mr Tampuri submitted that the customary certificate was valid, had been
    issued by a competent authority and was supported by a letter from  the
    president of the customary court.  He submitted that the  Secretary  of
    State had not taken any steps to check authenticity.  He submitted that
    the certificate  was  validly  issued  and  was  valid  under  Nigerian
    customary law.

 8. Mr Tampuri said that the initial civil certificate had been  issued  in
    error but he could not give explain why it appeared that the  witnesses
    and parties had signed it, only that it had been  acknowledged  and  it
    was a mistake and rectified.

 9. Mr Kandola submitted that the issue of the civil certificate undermined
    the validity of all the documents and that the issue was not one of the
    affidavits, but it was for the appellant to show that the marriage  was
    valid under the Nigerian law.  He submitted that  there  was  no  valid
    explanation for the errors with regard to the civil certificate.

10. In reply, Mr Tampuri said it was unfortunate there was no evidence from
    the authorities as  to  what  had  occurred.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellant had provided all the necessary information for it to be shown
    the certificate was valid.

The Law

11. It is not in dispute that Miss Eriksson is an EEA national nor that she
    is in full-time employment.  The issue is whether he the appellant  and
    Miss Eriksson are validly married as, otherwise, he  is  not  a  family
    member of an EEA national  as  defined  in  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

12. In Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178 at [23] the Court of Appeal held:

         "The law of England and Wales recognises proxy marriage is valid by
         the lex  loci  celebrationis.   Accordingly,  a  spouse  of  an  EU
         national who has concluded such a marriage will qualify as a family
         member within  Article  2  of  the  Directive.   A  certificate  of
         marriage is simply evidence, albeit  usually  compelling  evidence,
         that the ceremony took place."

13. The Secretary of State has not shown even on a prima facie  basis  that
    the affidavits referred to are necessary as a  formal  requirement  for
    the marriage to have been valid under  Nigerian  law.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that proxy marriages are valid under  Nigerian  customary  law.
    The issue in this appeal is, however, whether the fact of the  marriage
    taking place, is reliable as it is for the appellant  to  show  that  a
    valid marriage took place.

14. The initial, civil marriage certificate on which the appellant's  first
    application was based, has been produced to me, albeit as a  photocopy.
    It is not in the form of a copy extract  from  a  register,  rather  it
    purports to be a copy of the original certificate and bears  manuscript
    signatures purporting to be those of the witnesses to the marriage and,
    importantly, the parties to the  marriage.   There  is  no  explanation
    forthcoming  from  the  relevant  Nigerian  authorities  as  to  how  a
    certificate such as this bearing, apparently,  the  signatures  of  the
    parties, and the seal of  the  person  before  whom  the  marriage  was
    solemnised could have come into being.  I  am  not  satisfied,  in  the
    circumstances, that any a clerical error could have occurred such  that
    what purports to be signatures of the parties to the marriage  appeared
    on the certificate.   I  discount  the  possibility  canvassed  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal at  [6]  that  the  certificate
    could possibly have been sent to the United Kingdom for the parties  to
    sign  and  return;  there  is  simply  no  evidence  to  support   that
    submission.

15. The appellant has chosen not to give evidence on this occasion, nor has
    Ms Eriksson.  His witness statement of 23 October 2019 at [3] refers to
    the civil marriage certificate, saying:

         "[T]he Home office pointed out that the certificate I provided  was
         an ordinance marriage certificate and so was not acceptable.

         4. I decided to contact the registry for  verification.  The  Local
         authority after investigating my concerns issued a  proxy  marriage
         certificate".

16. Ms Eriksson refers to the certificate  also  in  her  statement  of  23
    October 2019, but again provides no proper explanation.

17. That does not adequately explain how there are two certificates or  how
    the fundamental error arose. It is odd, also, that neither Ms  Eriksson
    nor the appellant noticed that the civil certificate purported to  show
    (a) that they had been present and (b) bear their signatures.

18. I note that the appellant and Ms Eriksson state that the  marriage  did
    take place by proxy but, by definition, they were not  present  and  so
    are reliant on other evidence to show that it did take place. There are
    not proper statements from the proxies to that effect, or other  direct
    evidence of the ceremony having taken place beyond the  impugned  proxy
    certificate and letters confirming its authenticity which are, in turn,
    reliant on information provided to the authors of the various  letters.
    Who the witnesses who signed the certificate of customary marriage  are
    is not clear; their signatures are unreadable.

19. I consider that, in the circumstances, viewing the evidence as a whole,
    that the civil marriage certificate is wholly  unreliable.  I  consider
    that its coming into being and use requires  explanation.   If,  as  is
    claimed, the marriage was conducted by proxy, no proper explanation has
    been given as to how there could have been such a  confusion  over  the
    certificate.  No proper explanation is given as  to  how  the  document
    could have been  created  with  signatures  from  the  parties  to  the
    marriage on it, giving the impression that the parties to the  marriage
    had been present to sign the register and that is the opposite of  what
    is said to have happened.

20. How then does this reflect on the certificate  relating  to  the  proxy
    marriage?  These two certificates are mutually  incompatible  (presence
    of the parties as opposed to absence) yet purport to deal with the same
    event, a marriage between the appellant and Miss Eriksson.

21. In the absence of any proper explanation for the civil  certificate  on
    which the appellant sought to rely and for which  he  has  provided  no
    proper explanation, casts doubt on the reliability of the evidence  and
    I consider, viewing the evidence as a whole that the documents relating
    to the proxy marriage are not documents on which I can rely  and  thus,
    that the appellant has not demonstrated that  he  is  married  to  Miss
    Eriksson.

22. In reaching that conclusion I note the submission that the Secretary of
    State has not taken steps to verify the documents.  With respect, it is
    not for the Secretary of State to prove the appellant's case  for  him.
    It was for him to show that the documents on which he seeks to rely are
    reliable and that he is properly married.  Further,  my  conclusion  is
    not based on the absence of affidavits as  documents  necessary  for  a
    marriage to be valid, but on the lack of reliable evidence  as  to  the
    marriage having taken place.

23. Accordingly, for these reasons, I find that the appellant has not shown
    that he is married to Miss Eriksson.  He has therefore failed  to  show
    that he is a family member of Miss Eriksson  and  thus  I  dismiss  the
    appeal under the 2016 Regulations.

24. Mr Tampuri made no submission to  me  that,  in  the  alternative,  the
    couple are in a durable relationship akin to marriage.  In  any  event,
    neither the appellant nor Ms Eriksson gave evidence before me, and I am
    not  accordingly  satisfied  that  they  are  currently  in  a  durable
    relationship.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2) I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

 3) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 26 May 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04999/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 27 November 2020                  |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              IBRAHIM MURITALA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Head promulgated on 25 November 2019 in  which  she
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  made  on  11
    September 201  to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse
    of  Anna Eriksson, a Swedish citizen exercising Treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is that he was married to his  spouse  by  way  of
    double proxy, that is, neither party being present.  The respondent did
    not accept that the marriage was valid, although as she satisfied  that
    Ms Eriksson was employed as claimed and exercising Treaty rights.

 3.  The  judge  heard  evidence  and  submissions,  noting  [8]  that  the
    respondent's  representatives  had  submitted  that  there  were   real
    concerns as to whether the relationship was genuine and  therefore  the
    appeal ought to be dismissed on that basis, even if the  marriage  were
    valid.

 4. The judge noted [22] that concerns had been raised as the appellant had
    provided a civil marriage certificate and  then,  when  that  had  been
    challenged, provided a customary marriage certificate, the  explanation
    from the appellant being that the issue of the  civil  certificate  had
    been an error and that when  this  had  been  discovered  the  correct,
    customary marriage certificate had been issued.

 5. The judge found that the appellant and Ms Eriksson were not married as:

      a)  There  were  serious  concerns  about  the   civil   certificate's
         reliability as it purported to have been signed  by  both  parties,
         yet they were both in the United Kingdom, and thus their signatures
         could be on it only if it had been signed in the UK; and, if so, it
         was not a certificate issued in Nigeria which  both  spouses  would
         have known[24];

      b) The certificate of customary marriage was unreliable, given that it
         and the letter of  attestation  state  that  Ms  Eriksson's  father
         consented to the marriage yet Ms Eriksson's evidence was  that  her
         father knew nothing about the marriage,  and  so,  could  not  have
         consented to it;

 6. The judge also concluded that in any event, the couple were  not  in  a
    genuine relationship, finding the evidence of  the  appellant  and  his
    spouse to be contradictory and unreliable [33], the attempted use of an
    invalid proxy marriage certificate being intentional and indicative  of
    a propensity to deceive, the appellant not  being  a  credible  witness
    [36].

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred

      a) In her approach to the signing of the marriage certificate;

      b) In concluding that the respondent had shown reasonable  grounds  of
         suspicion about the marriage, that not having been raised  by  her,
         but instead being a matter raised by the judge;

      c) In thus depriving  the  appellant  of  an  opportunity  to  address
         suspicion as to the genuineness of their marriage;

      d) In making findings of fraud against the appellant when that had not
         been alleged by the respondent; and,

      e) In failing to make proper  findings  as  to  the  validity  of  the
         customary marriage certificate.

 8. On 17 April 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted  permission  to
    appeal on all grounds.

 9. Subsequent to the grant of permission,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Frances
    made directions in this case, issued on 31 July 2020 and which provided
    amongst other matters:

          1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the  light  of  the
             present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-
             19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the  Procedure
             Rules[1], I have reached the provisional view,  that it  would
             in  this  case  be  appropriate  to  determine  the  following
             questions without a hearing:

          a) whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
             involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

          b) whether that decision should be set aside.

          2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:

               i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of
                  the assertion of an error of  law,  and  on  the  question
                  whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set
                  aside if error of law is found, to be filed and served  on
                  all other parties no later than 14 days after this  notice
                  is sent out (the date of sending is on the covering letter
                  or covering email);

              ii)  Any  other  party  may  file  and  serve  submissions  in
                  response, no later than 21 days after this notice is  sent
                  out;

             iii) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph  (ii)
                  above the party who sought permission to appeal  may  file
                  and serve a reply no later than 28 days after this  notice
                  is sent out.

              iv) All submissions that rely on any document  not  previously
                  provided to all other parties in electronic form  must  be
                  accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.

          3. Any party who considers that despite the foregoing  directions
             a hearing is necessary to consider the questions  set  out  in
             paragraph 1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons  for
             that view no later than 21 days after this notice is sent  out
             and they will be taken into  account  by  the  Tribunal.   The
             directions in paragraph 2 above must be complied with in every
             case.

10. There was no response from the appellant but  in  submissions  dated  7
    August 2020,  the  respondent  stated  that  she  did  not  oppose  the
    application for permission to appeal, inviting the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal at a fresh hearing

11. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  The  appellant  is  legally  represented.
    Given that no objection to there not being a haring  has  been  raised,
    given that the appellant is legally represented,  and  given  that  the
    respondent has (as is set out below) conceded that the decision of  the
    First- tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error  of  law;  and,
    bearing in mind the overriding  objective  in  Rule  2  to  enable  the
    Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly, I am satisfied  that  in
    the particular circumstances of this case, that it would  be  right  to
    reach a decision in the absence of a hearing, having had due regard  to
    the decision of Fordham J in JCWI v The President of the Upper Tribunal
    [2020] EWHC 3103.

12. In the light of the  concise  and  sensible  concessions  made  by  the
    respondent, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    did involve the making of an error of law in the errors  identified  in
    the grounds. It was unfair to raise at  the  hearing  as  a  new  issue
    whether the marriage, if it existed, was genuine or not.  Equally,  the
    respondent has in effect conceded that the findings with regard to  the
    marriage certificates are flawed.

13. For these reasons, the decision involved the making of an error of  law
    as claimed and I set it aside. I consider that in all the circumstances
    of this case, the appropriate course of action is for the  decision  to
    be remade in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  parties  are  to  prepare
    accordingly. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal that there was  no
    valid marriage and that in  any  event  the  relationship  was  one  of
    convenience are set aside.



Notice of Decision & Directions

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. The appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal on  a  date  to  be
         fixed



DIRECTIONS

      1. Having regard  to  the  Pilot  Practice  Direction  and  the  UTIAC
         Guidance Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally  of
         the view that the forthcoming hearing in this appeal can and should
         be held remotely, by Skype for Business  on  a  date  to  be  fixed
         within the period 31 October 2020 to 1 December 2020

      2. No later than 7 days after these directions are sent by  the  Upper
         Tribunal:

         (a)  the parties shall file and serve by email any objection to the
         hearing being a remote hearing at all/by  the  proposed  means;  in
         either case giving reasons; and

         (b)  without prejudice to the Tribunal's consideration of any  such
         objections, the parties shall also file and serve:

             (i)  contact/join-in details, were  the  hearing  is  to  take
             place remotely by the means currently proposed; and

             (ii) in that event, dates to avoid in the period specified.

      3. The Tribunal will then give further directions, which  will  either
         be:

         (i)  to list the date and time of the  remote  hearing,  confirming
         the join-in details etc and directing  the  electronic  filing  and
         service of documents in connection with the hearing; or

         (ii) to give directions with respect to a face-to-face hearing.

         (iii)    give a timetable within which skeleton arguments are to be
         raised.

      4. The respondent must notify the appellant and the Upper Tribunal  in
         writing, at least 28 days before the hearing,  if  she  intends  to
         submit that the marriage between the appellant and Ms Eriksson  is,
         if valid, nonetheless a marriage of convenience.

      5. Any additional material must be served on  the  Upper  Tribunal  at
         least 10 working days before the hearing.


Signed   Date 27 November 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


    -----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

