
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/04531/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 February 2018                        |On 27 April 2018                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          MS SIVASUTHARNA SIVARAJAH
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss C Physsas of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 24th of  August  1989.
      She appeals against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Turquet sitting at Hatton Cross on 29th of  June  2017  which  was  to
      dismiss the Appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the  Respondent
      dated 15th of March 2016.  That decision was to refuse  to  grant  the
      Appellant a family permit to join her aunt a German citizen exercising
      treaty rights in this country.


   2.  The  applications  were  refused  by  the  Respondent   pursuant   to
      Regulations 7 (family members) and 8 (extended family members) of  the
      2006 EEA  Regulations.  The  Respondent  indicated  that  he  was  not
      satisfied that the Appellant and  her  EEA  Sponsor  were  related  as
      claimed. The Respondent was particularly  concerned  about  two  birth
      certificates supplied by the Appellant in support of her application.


   3. On appeal the Judge held that there was no right of appeal against the
      Respondent's decision following the Upper Tribunal authority  of  Sala
      [2016] UKUT 411. That decision held that where an applicant was making
      an application for a residence card under  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006 as an extended family member the Regulations did  not
      give a right of appeal because there was no entitlement to a residence
      card by an applicant  under  Regulation  8,  it  was  a  discretionary
      provision.


 4. Subsequently that decision was overturned by the Court of Appeal in the
    case of Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755. The Court of Appeal  found  that  on
    their true construction the 2006 Regulations did provide for a right of
    appeal for those claiming under Regulation 8. Although the judgement in
    Khan was handed down on 9th of November 2017 some five months after the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing in this case because the  decision  was  to
    find that the 2006 Regulations had  always  provided  for  a  right  of
    appeal  the  First-tier  decision  in  this  case  was  retrospectively
    invalidated.


 5. Following the dismissal of her appeal  for  want  of  jurisdiction  the
    Appellant had appealed that dismissal  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Foudy on 20th  of  December
    2017 on the basis of the clarification  of  the  meaning  of  the  2006
    Regulations in Khan. The Respondent replied to the  grant  pursuant  to
    Rule 24 arguing that there should be a stay on proceedings because  she
    is appealing Khan to the Supreme Court. I disagree that there should be
    a stay. The Court of Appeal did not stay the effect of their decision.


 6. When the matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  there  was  a
    material error  of  law  in  the  determination,  I  indicated  that  I
    considered there was. There are two points to be made. Because  of  the
    decision in Khan the Judge's decision could not stand and neither party
    disputed that. The second point is that the Appellant's application was
    considered by the Respondent under Regulation 7 as well as 8 and it was
    never in doubt that a right of  appeal  attached  to  a  refusal  under
    Regulation 7. Regulation 7 however is confined for  these  purposes  to
    direct descendants whereas the Appellant  claims  the  relationship  of
    aunt  and  niece.  The  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision did not raise Regulation 7.


 7. Both parties agreed that the correct course of action was to remit this
    appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings  preserved  for
    the matter to be re-determined. I therefore set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds of material error of law  and  I
    remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  reheard  with  no
    findings preserved. I do not consider that any specific directions  are
    required but the Appellant and her advisers may wish to  consider  what
    evidence she wishes to adduce to support the existence of  the  claimed
    relationship  and  any  dependency  (the  grounds  refer  to  financial
    dependency). Such evidence should be filed and served at least 14  days
    before the First-tier rehearing.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside. I remit  the  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be reheard by any Judge other than Judge Turquet.

Appellant's appeal allowed to the extent stated

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 6th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I set aside the decision not to make a fee award in this  case.  That  issue
will also have to be re-determined by the First-tier.


Signed this 6th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge







