
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04623/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th September 2020               |On 5th October 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MS ROBINA BEGUM
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Janjua, Morden Solicitors


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

   1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Ms
      Robina Begum.  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this
      decision I adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I
      refer to Ms Begum as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the
      respondent.


   2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  Her application for a family
      permit to join her son, Suleman Chaudry in the United Kingdom as a
      dependent direct relative in the ascending line, was refused by the
      respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 6th August 2019.
      The decision was maintained following review by an Entry Clearance
      Manager on 31st December 2019.  The appellant's appeal against that
      decision was allowed for reasons set out in a decision promulgated by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Louveaux on 24th March 2020.


   3. The respondent claims Judge Louveaux failed to provide adequate
      reasons for the findings on material matters, and in particular, how,
      in the absence of requisite evidence the EEA sponsor can adequately
      support and accommodate the appellant financially. It is said the
      judge acknowledged the low income of the sponsor but made no
      assessment of the sponsor's ability to maintain and support the
      appellant, given that there is clearly already financial strain on the
      sponsor and his family.  The respondent claims it was incumbent upon
      the judge to identify the evidence to  demonstrate that the sponsor
      would be able to support the appellant financially and otherwise in
      this country, when the current financial remittances to the appellant,
      which are not substantial, are already a strain on the sponsor and his
      family.


   4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on
      15th June 2020.  He considered it arguable that the judge gave
      inadequate reasons for finding that the EEA sponsor could support and
      accommodate the appellant.


   5. The hearing before me on 29th September 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  At the
      outset, I was informed by Mr Janjua that neither the appellant nor the
      sponsor intended to join the hearing. Mr Janjua confirmed the
      appellant is happy for the hearing to proceed in her absence. I sat at
      the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and building
      were open to the public. The hearing was publicly listed, and I was
      addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I would
      have been, if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I was
      satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the
      open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been
      prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
      right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
      was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in
      accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote
      hearing because of the present need to take precautions against the
      spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote
      hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a
      way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


   6. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mrs Aboni, quite properly in
      my judgement, acknowledged that the grounds of appeal are not
      particularly well drafted and in any event, as the appeal arises from
      the refusal of an EEA family permit under the Immigration (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2016, there is no maintenance and
      accommodation requirement.


   7. Ms Aboni submits Judge Louveaux properly noted at paragraph [12] of
      the decision that the appellant did not provide any evidence regarding
      her own financial circumstances so as to satisfy the respondent that
      the support provided by the sponsor, was necessary in order to meet
      her essential needs in Pakistan. Mrs Aboni submits there was an
      absence of evidence before the FtT regarding the appellant's own
      financial circumstances which was required to establish that any
      support provided by the EEA sponsor was required to meet her essential
      needs in Pakistan. She submits the reasons given by Judge Louveaux for
      the conclusion that the appellant is dependent on the sponsor, are
      inadequate.


   8. Judge Louveaux noted the appellant is a 67-year-old divorcee who
      suffers from various health issues.  He heard evidence from the
      sponsor, and as set out at paragraph [16] of the decision, he found
      the sponsor to be a wholly credible witness.  Judge Louveaux was
      satisfied that the appellant has proven, on the balance of
      probabilities, that she is dependent on the sponsor, i.e. that she
      needs the material support of the sponsor in order to meet her
      essential needs. At paragraphs [17] to [23] of his decision Judge
      Louveaux sets out his reasons for the finding that the appellant is
      dependent on the sponsor.  In reaching that decision, Judge Louveaux
      had regard to the documentary evidence showing continuous monthly
      payments from the sponsor to the appellant between May 2017 and
      February 2020, and in addition, a large number of additional money
      transfers dating back to 2010.  He accepted the evidence that the
      appellant lives as a lodger with another family and that she pays them
      in cash every month in exchange for board and lodging. He accepted the
      appellant has no bank account and picks up money sent by the sponsor
      every month from Western Union branches in cash.  The judge was
      satisfied that the money sent by the sponsor to the appellant every
      month covers all of the appellants outgoings, including the cost of
      her treatment and medication. In reaching his decision, the Judge
      noted, at paragraph [22], that the sponsor has a limited income and at
      paragraph [23], he was satisfied that the sponsor is of limited means
      and that the payments that he has been making to the appellant
      represent a significant financial sacrifice given that he has his own
      family to support.


   9. It is in my judgement clear that in reaching his decision, Judge
      Louveaux had regard to the evidence before him and it was open to him
      to find that the appellant is dependent on the sponsor in order to
      meet her essential needs, for the reasons set out in the decision.


  10. In my judgment, in reaching his decision, the judge clearly applied
      the correct test.  Where a judge applies the correct test, and that
      results in an arguably generous conclusion, it does not mean that it
      was erroneous in law.  As the Court of Appeal said at [18] of Herrera
      v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  412, it is necessary to guard against the
      temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in truth no more
      than disagreements about the weight to be given to different factors,
      particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the advantage of
      hearing oral evidence. The assessment of such a claim is always a
      highly fact sensitive task.  The FtT judge was required to consider
      the evidence as a whole and he plainly did so, giving adequate reasons
      for his decision.  The findings and conclusions reached by the judge
      are neither irrational nor unreasonable.  The decision was one that
      was open to the judge on the evidence before him and the findings
      made.


  11. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Decision


  12. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Louveaux promulgated on 24th March 2020 shall stand.


  13. Judge Louveaux declined to make a fee award because the appeal had
      been allowed on the basis of information that was in large part not
      before the respondent at the date of the decision. The decision not to
      make a fee award stands.





Signed   V. Mandalia                Date; 29th September 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



