
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04031/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2017                         |On 9 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                 Naveed Riaz
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Not represented
For the respondent:    Mr J Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Shergill  promulgated  4.1.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  11.12.15,  to
    refuse his application made on 17.6.15 for an EEA Residence Card.   The
    Judge heard the appeal on 14.12.16.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    4.9.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 8.11.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. There was no attendance by or on behalf of the appellant. The case file
    indicates that he is no longer legally  represented.  I  was  satisfied
    that notice of the hearing had been sent out by post well in advance of
    today's date to the same address given by him in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal and as recorded on the case file itself. There was
    no  explanation  for  his  non-attendance.  In  the  circumstances,   I
    considered it in the public interest and consistent with the overriding
    objective to deal with cases  fairly  and  justly  to  proceed  in  the
    appellant's absence. I note that  he  did  not  attend  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing either.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Shergill should be set aside.

 6. The marriage between the appellant  and  Timea  Keselova,  a  Slovakian
    national, took place on 3.2.14. The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application for a residence card on the basis that the marriage was one
    of convenience. A previous application made on the same basis had  also
    been refused on  grounds  that  the  relationship  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience and the subsequent appeal dismissed (IA/28218/2014).

 7. It is asserted by the Secretary of State that when  the  appellant  and
    his Slovakian sponsor attended a  marriage  interview  on  13.6.14,  it
    became apparent that the language barrier between them was too great to
    be able to communicate sufficiently  to  sustain  a  genuine  marriage.
    Further, in the marriage questionnaire, the appellant stated  that  his
    spouse spoke Bulgarian, when in fact she is Slovakian. At the  marriage
    interview she asked for a Hungarian interpreter. Given that they  claim
    to have been living together since 11.12.13,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered it highly unlikely that a person in a  genuine  relationship
    would not know the language his sponsor spoke.

 8. In the circumstances, the Secretary of State  was  not  satisfied  that
    this was a genuine and subsisting marriage, concluding that it  is  was
    one of convenience and thus  not  protected  by  regulation  2  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 9. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Simpson referenced  the  recent
    decision of the Supreme Court in Sadovska & Anon v Secretary  of  State
    [2017] UKSC 54, which confirmed that it is for the Secretary  of  State
    to demonstrate that the marriage is one of convenience.

10. Judge Simpson went on to consider it arguable that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was absence the requisite robust assessment of  the
    respondent's evidence, which did not include the marriage questionnaire
    referred to in the RFR, and relied on a marriage  interview  which  did
    not proceed, because  the  respondent's  representative  "pre-emptively
    determined following carrying out a 'language test' that neither of the
    parties could sufficiently understand each other."

11. Judge Simpson concluded it was arguable that the  decision,  "disclosed
    an all-round inadequacy of robust reasoning concerning the respondent's
    evidence,' and "an inadequate application of the requisite  burden  and
    standard of proof."

12. I note that the grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  make
    generalised assertions to the effect that the marriage is  genuine  and
    do  not  address  the  specific  reasons  given  for  refusal  of   the
    application. The appellant did  not  attend  and  was  not  represented
    before the First-tier Tribunal, even though it was listed for  an  oral
    hearing. Neither did he submit any evidence or other documentation. The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had only the generalised  grounds  of  appeal
    and those documents in the respondent's bundle on  which  to  make  the
    decision on the appeal.

13. In seeking permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  grounds
    merely assert that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  against
    the weight of evidence and re-assert that the marriage is  not  one  of
    convenience. It is also asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  "applied
    very high standard of evidence." No other ground of appeal was raised.

14. The only evidence actually before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that
    submitted by the respondent. The appellant  and  his  sponsor  did  not
    attend the hearing to  give  evidence  or  to  counter  in  person  the
    assertion that theirs was a marriage of convenience.

15. There is no indication in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that
    there was any error of law as to the standard or burden of  proof.  The
    judge recognised that the legal burden lay on the  Secretary  of  State
    and not the appellant, contrary  to  the  approach  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that lead to the Supreme Court decision in Sadovska &  Anon  v
    Secretary of State [2017] UKSC 54.   At [16] the  judge  was  satisfied
    that Secretary of State had adduced sufficient  evidence  to  discharge
    the evidential burden raising suspicion that the marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.  The  judge  relied  on  the  previous  adverse   Tribunal
    decision, applying Devaseelan, and accepted the assertion that  at  the
    marriage interview the appellant was unable  to  communicate  with  the
    sponsor at a basic level.

16. Having considered the record of the marriage  interview,  it  is  clear
    that attempts  were  made  to  have  the  appellant  communicate  basic
    information to his wife, and vice versa, but they were unable to do so.
    I also note that his wife also said that she doubted she would be  able
    to complete a language test, but was urged to at least try.

17. Other than the bare assertion in the generalised grounds of appeal that
    the marriage was genuine,  there  was  no  evidence  at  all  from  the
    appellant to contradict  the  reasonable  suspicion  that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience. The Tribunal adequately investigated  all  the
    evidence that  was  before  the  tribunal.  Even  though  some  of  the
    documents relied  on  were  apparently  absent  from  the  respondent's
    bundle, I note that the appellant had not asserted that the account  of
    the marriage interview set out in the RFR was in any way inaccurate. He
    did not address at all the alleged inability of he and his  sponsor  to
    communicate at even a basic level, or his mistake as  to  the  language
    she spoke.

18. In all the circumstances, the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal was
    fully open on the limited evidence, which went entirely  one  way.  The
    judge did not misapply the burden and standard of proof.

Conclusion & Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  of  the
                    First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and  the  appeal   remains
                    dismissed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

