
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04104/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 November 2017                        |On 27 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                zeeshan anwar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Zeeshan Anwar, was born on 30 September 1988  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Pickup) against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  16
    March 2016 to refuse to grant him a residence card as confirmation of a
    right to reside in the United Kingdom pursuant to the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2016 (as amended).  The First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The parties agree that those grounds of appeal which concern Article  8
    ECHR will not be argued.  The appeal was made in-country and there  was
    no decision by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  remove  this  appellant.
    Article  8  ECHR  and  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 do not arise.

 3. Secondly, I do not accept that the judge has erred in  respect  of  the
    burden of proof in this instance.  The appeal turned on whether or  not
    the appellant was a party to a marriage of  convenience.   Having  read
    the decision carefully, I cannot see that the judge has  done  anything
    other than  determine  this  appeal  on  the  clear  finding  that  the
    respondent has discharged the burden of proof upon  her.   The  grounds
    complain that the judge failed to attach proper weight to the  evidence
    of a close relationship between the appellant and the sponsor  and  her
    two daughters.   Indeed,  at  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  Mr  Ahmed
    referring me to [30] of Judge Pickup's decision, submitted  that  those
    facts found by the judge in that paragraph should have led to the judge
    concluding on a balance of probabilities that the marriage was not  one
    of convenience.  At [30], the judge wrote:

         I have taken into account the numerous documents in the appellant's
         bundle none of which are challenged.  I am satisfied they currently
         live together at the same address.  However this is not  conclusive
         of their relationship being genuine as opposed  to  a  marriage  of
         convenience.  It is known the persons are prepared to  cohabit  for
         ulterior purposes.  I also bear in mind they live with her children
         and that he may play  a  role  in  the  household  caring  for  the
         children.   However,  I  am  satisfied  the   appellant's   primary
         motivation has been to remain in the UK and that he has  previously
         attempted to do this with a different EEA member state sponsor.  It
         appears that when that failed  to  produce  the  desired  residence
         certificate he quickly  moved  on  to  finding  another  person  to
         sponsor a new application.

 4. I acknowledge that the appellant's circumstances as found by the  judge
    are somewhat unusual.  However, I do not agree with Mr Ahmed the  facts
    as found by the judge should inevitably have led him to  conclude  that
    the marriage was genuine.  Mr Ahmed  submits  that  to  find  otherwise
    would be perverse.  The  judge  has  gone  to  great  lengths  [26]  to
    consider the excuses given  by  the  appellant  for  not  attending  an
    interview with the respondent's officers.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had failed  to  attend  two  interviews  without  giving  any
    adequate reason  that  he  had  also  failed  to  complete  a  marriage
    questionnaire disclosing that his former wife had been  found  to  have
    been already married to another person at the time when  the  appellant
    was seeking an EEA residence card.  Not  surprisingly  [28]  the  judge
    concluded that "All of this was and  remains  highly  relevant  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's current claim for an EEA residence  card
    on the basis of his current marriage."  The judge was entitled to  take
    into account that evidence and, indeed, all  the  evidence  before  him
    before  deciding   whether   or   not   the   marriage   was   genuine.
    Notwithstanding the fact that the appellant and sponsor live  together,
    it remained open to the judge, provided that he gave  adequate  reasons
    for so finding, to conclude that the marriage was not genuine.  That is
    exactly what he has done in this case.  This is not a case of the judge
    having a mere suspicion that the marriage was not genuine;  as  I  have
    noted, he has given very detailed reasons for so finding.  In the light
    of that reasoning,  his  decision  cannot  be  described  as  perverse.
    Another Tribunal may have reached a  different  decision  on  the  same
    evidence; however, that is not the point.  I  can  identify  no  reason
    arising from the grounds  or  from  Mr  Ahmed's  submissions  on  those
    grounds which would lead me to interfere with the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






