
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/04030/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 January 2018                          |  On 20 February 2018            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                               ms NAIMA NABTI
                          (no ANONYMITY ORDER made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Syed-Ali, Repesentative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   F-tTJ Mailer ( the Judge) dismissed the appeal  of  the  Appellant,  an
    extended family member, against an adverse decision by  the  Respondent
    dated 1 April 2016 under Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration  (  European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  on the basis of  there being no right
    of appeal reliant on the decision  in  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 00411. The judge did not consider the merits of the appeal.
    F-tTJ Cruthers on 14 November 2017 granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision.

2.   Mr Kotas sought an adjournment of the  error  of  law  hearing  on  the
    basis that the Court of Appeal decision in MY Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755
    was stayed and subject to an  application  to  appeal  to  the  Supreme
    Court.  On that basis I agreed to the adjournment.

3.   I have further considered the terms of the Court of Appeal Order  of  9
    November 2017.  I conclude the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  is
    binding on the Upper Tribunal and that part of the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision overturning the decision in Sala  has  not  been  stayed.  The
    appeal was allowed on the Sala point, (EFM Rights of Appeal)  and  that
    decision stands. Accordingly the stay was not a good reason for  me  to
    adjourn the hearing. I therefore found there was an error of law, there
    being no purpose in having a further hearing on the error of law; which
    is in the Respondent's favour. The Appellant's  position  is  protected
    and the merits of the claim will be dealt with by a judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal (IAC) in due course.

4.   Accordingly, I find the Judge made  an  error  of  law.  There  was  no
    finding made on whether the Appellant had adduced evidence that the EEA
    family member was exercising Treaty Rights and making regular insurance
    contributions  or  that  they  were  currently  (  in  the   sense   of
    economically) active in the UK.

5.   For the avoidance of doubt the Order of 9  November  2017  in  MY  Khan
    should be read as:-

         "5.  The Respondent's application for a stay of paragraphs 3 and  4
             [pending  the  determination  of  a  renewed  application  for
             permission to  appeal  and,  if  permission  is  granted,  the
             determination of the appeal] is granted." (My parentheses.)

6.   In the circumstances the correct course is as follows, and I decide:

    (a)  The error of law issue in the appeal should not be adjourned;


    (b)  The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand; and


    (c)  The appeal is to be decided in accordance  with  the  law  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal (IAC);


    (d)  Any costs issues shall be for the First-tier Tribunal (IAC).

7.   No anonymity order was sought.


Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter is to be  determined  in
accordance
with the Law in the First-tier Tribunal (IAC).


Signed                                  Date 25 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



