
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04801/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Considered on the papers             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2020                   |On 4 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     EKG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  F
    Anthony, promulgated on 15 November  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on 1 April 2020.

Anonymity

 2. Such  a  direction  is  now  made  owing  to  the  appellant's  medical
    conditions.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  during  2013  and  thereafter
    made a series of unsuccessful applications  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of residence under European  Community  law  as
    the sibling of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in  the  United
    Kingdom. The last decision refusing the appellant a residence card  was
    made on 20 August 2019 and is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The basis of the appellant's claim to a residence card is that he is an
    extended family member of his sibling,  with  reference  to  regulation
    8(3). Well-drafted submissions made on  the  appellant's  behalf  by  a
    trainee solicitor and which were sent to the respondent by email on  29
    May 2019 in the form of a pre-action protocol letter explained that the
    appellant was seriously ill and required his sister's care and  support
    to function. Reference was made  to  a  DNA  report  which  proved  the
    relationship as  well  as  medical  evidence  that  the  appellant  was
    suffering from cancer, was HIV+ and symptomatic. In her response  dated
    30 May 2019, the respondent withdrew an earlier decision  letter  dated
    19 March 2019 and undertook to reconsider the application, "taking into
    account the information already available. "

 5. That reconsideration led to the decision of 20 August 2019 to refuse  a
    residence card. The reasons for refusal were that the appellant had not
    provided adequate evidence that he was dependent upon or residing  with
    his sponsor prior to entering the UK or that he had been dependent upon
    or resided with her since entering the UK. It suffices to say that  the
    decision made no reference to regulation 8(3).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the focus  of  the  case
    was clearly on regulation 8(2) as  is  apparent  from  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument, the judge's record of proceedings and  the  decision
    and reasons. The judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  no  prior
    membership of his sister's  household  and  no  prior  dependency.  She
    concluded that the appellant could not succeed to be "recognised as  an
    extended family member pursuant to regulation 8."

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal identified that the relevant regulation  in  this
    case was 8(3) on account of the appellant's poor health  and  need  for
    personal care, as set out in a report from  his  consultant  physician.
    Criticism was made  of  the  failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    distinguish the alternative conditions available  under  Regulation  8.
    Secondly, it  was  argued  that  the  judge  relied  upon  an  apparent
    inconsistency in the documentary evidence which had not been in dispute
    during the hearing. Lastly, it was said that there was evidence  before
    the judge of the appellant and his sister living in the same  household
    and that there was a lack of clear credibility findings in relation  to
    this.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  judge  arguably
    erred in focusing entirely on regulation 8(2).

The procedural history

 9. On 13 July 2020, the parties were sent directions which  expressed  the
    provisional  view  that  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    involved an error of law and whether it should be set aside,  could  be
    determined without a hearing.  The  parties  were  invited  to  provide
    submissions and respond to the proposal to consider the matter  without
    a hearing.

10. The respondent provided submissions under cover of an  email  dated  22
    July 2020. It was not contended that a further hearing  was  necessary.
    The Upper Tribunal was invited  to  dismiss  the  appeal,  taking  into
    account the submissions of Mr Kotas.

11. There is no response from the appellant on file. Given  the  time  that
    has elapsed since the grant of permission as well as the Upper Tribunal
    directions, I consider that it is in the interests of justice that this
    appeal be progressed. In  the  absence  of  any  submissions  from  the
    appellant, objections from the respondent nor any other apparent reason
    to consider this matter at an oral hearing, I have resolved  to  decide
    the relevant issues on the papers.

Decision on error of law

12.  While  BWF  Solicitors  carefully  prepared  the  appellant's  bundle,
    ensuring that the basis of the case was  apparent  from  the  extensive
    medical evidence and  witness  statements,  the  appellant  was  poorly
    served by all at his appeal hearing. It  is  apparent  from  a  cursory
    glance at the slight  respondent's  bundle,  that  his  representatives
    clearly presented his application for a residence card as being one  to
    be considered with reference to  regulation  8(3).  Despite  this,  the
    decision letter made  no  reference  to  this  regulation  nor  to  the
    detailed submissions provided in the pre-action protocol email. This is
    despite the Secretary of State undertaking to  take  those  submissions
    into account upon reconsideration. Mr Kotas was correct  to  note  that
    the skeleton argument of Adeel Malik made no mention of regulation 8(3)
    and this is regrettable. Furthermore,  the  focus  of  the  appeal  was
    wrongly on regulation 8(2) and all professionals at the  hearing  share
    the blame for this. In view  of  the  documentary  evidence,  the  oral
    evidence and the basis of the application to the respondent,  it  ought
    to have been obvious that regulation 8(3)  was  relevant.  Indeed,  the
    appellant's witness statement could not have made  it  clearer,  at  5.
    "Based on serious health grounds as I have  stated  above,  I  strictly
    require the personal care of my sister to function."

13. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to identify  the  basis  of  the
    case is a material error of law,  without  which  a  different  outcome
    might have been achieved. Accordingly, I set aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in its entirety with no findings preserved.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is to be transferred to Taylor House for the convenience  of  the
appellant and representatives, neither of whom are based in Birmingham.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge F Anthony.

Directions

The respondent is directed to reconsider the  appellant's  claim  to  be  an
extended family member with reference to Regulation 8(3),  within  3  months
of receipt of this decision.

Should the respondent wish to maintain the decision to  refuse  a  residence
card, a supplementary decision letter must be provided.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date 18 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

