
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04199/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2016                            |On 3 January 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                            miss amarachi okezie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born on 10 September 1992 is a citizen of Nigeria.   She
    applied on 11 September 2015 for a residence card as confirmation of  a
    right to reside in the United Kingdom as the extended family member  of
    an EEA national.  That application was refused on 25 February  2016  as
    it was not accepted that the appellant was in  a  durable  relationship
    with the EEA national.   The  appellant  appealed  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 4 July 2016, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Monaghan
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

Right of Appeal

 2. Although permission was granted on 7 November 2016  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the basis that there was an arguable  error  of  law,
    that  the  Tribunal  did  not  appear  to  have  considered  additional
    documents submitted by the appellant (whose case  was  decided  on  the
    papers), the judge who granted permission did not consider the case  of
    Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411  (IAC).   This  provides
    that there is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State not to grant a residence card to a  person  claiming
    to be an extended family member.

Hearing

 3. There was no appearance before me by, or on behalf, of Ms  Okezie,  nor
    any explanation for that non-appearance.   I  was  satisfied  that  the
    Notice of Hearing had been properly issued to  the  appellant  and  her
    representatives, Judith Maurice Solicitors.  I considered the  relevant
    Procedure Rules, the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
    including the overriding objective at Rule 2 and Rule 28, hearing in  a
    party's absence.  As I  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  been
    notified of the hearing and/or that reasonable steps had been taken  to
    so notify the appellant and I consider, in the absence of any  adequate
    information from the appellant, that it was in the interests of justice
    in proceeding, I proceeded to consider the case.  Mr Staunton  for  the
    respondent relied on his Rule 24 that although it  was  submitted  that
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  directed  himself  appropriately,
    primarily the respondent maintained that there was no right  of  appeal
    for an extended family member.

Decision

 4. The guidance in Sala is clear.  In the absence of  any  submissions  or
    representations to the contrary on behalf  of  the  appellant,  I  have
    applied that guidance.  The appellant claimed to be an extended  family
    member of an EEA national.  As such  the  appellant  has  no  right  of
    appeal.  The First-tier  Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    appeal.  It erred in law in  doing  so.   I  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appeal   and
    substitute a decision that there was not  a  valid  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction was requested or is appropriate in this case.


Signed                                  Date:  30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT

There is no valid appeal and therefore I make no fee award.




Signed        Date:  30 December 2016


M. M. Hutchinson
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

