

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04343/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th October 2018               |On 20th November 2018              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                  ALEX [A]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Ofei-Kwaja, of Counsel, instructed by BWF
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGill, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 18th September  1969.  He
       made an application for a permanent residence card as the husband  of
       an  EEA  national  under  Regulation  15  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006. The appellant was, at that time,  married  to  [GA]
       who is a citizen of the Netherlands,  henceforth  the  sponsor.  This
       application was refused by the respondent  on  6th  April  2016.  His
       appeal against the decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge AK Hussain in a determination promulgated on the  6th  December
       2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  on
       13th July 2018 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier
       judge had erred. I found an error of law for the reasons set  out  at
       Annex A of this decision, and adjourned the remaking hearing.

    3. The matter now comes before me to remake the appeal.  The  issues  in
       this appeal are firstly whether the marriage is  one  of  convenience
       and secondly whether the sponsor has permanent  residence,  it  being
       accepted by the appellant's representative that she is not  currently
       otherwise a qualified person under the EEA Regulations.

    Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    4. The appellant attended the hearing and gave evidence  through  a  Twi
       interpreter. He adopted his statement  as  his  evidence,  confirming
       that it was true and correct. His oral and written evidence  amounts,
       in summary, to the following.

    5. The appellant divorced from the sponsor on 25th September  2018,  and
       he showed a copy of the divorce certificate to the Tribunal. He  also
       provided a copy of her air travel itinerary showing she was  away  in
       Ghana from 4th October 2018 to 1st November 2018. He said he was only
       told by  his  solicitors  that  she  should  attend  the  hearing  on
       Thursday, but this clearly was not possible in the circumstances. The
       appellant also produced a copy  of  his  original  Italian  residence
       permit which showed that he had indefinite leave to remain  based  on
       work granted in 2005, having entered Italy as a worker in 1997.

    6. In his statement he says that the sponsor gave discrepant answers  at
       their marriage interview  on  15th  February  2016  not  because  the
       marriage is  one  of  convenience  but  because  the  sponsor  became
       medically unwell and  was  stressed,  and  because  the  interviewing
       officer  was  physically  intimidating.  The  sponsor  is  a  type  2
       diabetic, has  high  cholesterol  and  is  asthmatic.  Following  the
       interview he says that the sponsor became  depressed.  The  appellant
       says that he would not have a motive to have married the sponsor  for
       immigration reasons as he has a 7 year old Dutch son born on 8th July
       2011 conceived outside of his marriage with whom he has contact  with
       in the UK and on whom he could rely to remain in the UK, and  because
       he had indefinite leave to remain in Italy before marrying.

    7. He says he met the sponsor on a visit to his cousin in the UK in 2006
       when he travelled from Italy where he was living at that  time.  They
       met at church and exchanged phone numbers. They  then  spoke  on  the
       phone, and the conversations gradually became romantic. They began  a
       relationship in December  2007,  and  at  this  he  time  spent  time
       together in the UK visiting the sponsor. On  20th  December  2009  he
       proposed to her on her birthday when he came to the UK on a visit.  A
       meeting was held between the families and a dowry and  marriage  date
       fixed. On 12th February 2010  the  sponsor  went  to  Ghana  for  the
       marriage whilst he remained in  Italy.  On  20th  February  2010  the
       customary marriage took place with the appellant being represented by
       his parents and other family members due to his work  commitments  in
       Italy which meant he  could  not  travel.  His  wife  wanted  him  to
       relocate to the UK after their marriage, so he gave his  work  notice
       in March 2010 and came to join her in  the  UK  in  June  2010.   The
       appellant was issued with a residence card valid from  November  2010
       to November 2015 based on his marriage.

    8.  The  appellant  accepts  that  there  were   difficulties   in   the
       relationship. The sponsor held against him the fact that he had had a
       child with another Dutch citizen in the UK, and she  disagreed  about
       his remittances to support this child. At the point of the  statement
       the appellant maintained that they made up afterwards when they  fell
       out and loved each other, and as a  result  on  16th  July  2015  the
       sponsor supported his application for a permanent residence card.

    9. In the reasons for refusal letter the  respondent  accepts  that  the
       sponsor was employed with Daisy Chain Pre School from April  2007  to
       April 2011 due to the P60s and a letter from HMRC, but not that there
       is a period of 5 years continuous employment entitling the sponsor to
       permanent residence. The respondent does not accept that the  sponsor
       is currently exercising Treaty rights by working or claiming benefits
       as a work seeker. As such the position of the respondent is that  the
       sponsor is not currently a qualified person.

   10. The respondent submits that the marriage is one of convenience due to
       the answers given by the sponsor and appellant at interview which are
       viewed as discrepant, a  fact  that  the  appellant  accepts  in  his
       statement. It is also said that there  is  a  lack  of  knowledge  of
       important aspects of matters which should affect their  mutual  lives
       as a genuinely married couple. The medical evidence provided is  said
       not to support the contention that  the  sponsor's  medical  problems
       specifically affected the sponsor's  performance  at  interview.  The
       appeal should therefore be dismissed.

   11. Ms Ofei-Kwaja, for the appellant, submits that I should consider  the
       witness statement from the sponsor even though she did not attend the
       hearing, particularly as it has been shown she is in Ghana.  In  this
       document she says that she felt weak at  the  interview  due  to  her
       sugar levels dropping as she is diabetic and due to issues  with  her
       cholesterol medication, and thus for this  reason  could  not  answer
       questions properly, and that she  also  struggled  because  she  felt
       physically intimidated by the interviewing officer.

   12. Ms Ofei-Kwaja submitted that the interview record shows the interview
       with the sponsor starting  at  10.15am  and  finishing  at  1pm.  The
       sponsor was asked over 300 questions over a period  of  nearly  three
       hours. It is clear from question 180 that she began to feel confused.
       At question 206 the interviewing officer asked her if she  needed  to
       check her bloods, and issues of a break and calling  at  first  aider
       are recorded at questions 214 and 217. The sponsor was given  a  food
       break at question 219, but it seems the questioning continued despite
       the sponsor having indicated that she did not  feel  well  enough  to
       continue at question 223, and  a  further  interruption  happened  at
       question 229. The interviewing  officer  herself  comments  that  the
       sponsor had "an episode" at the end of the interview in the  box  for
       such comments; and there is no signature for the  sponsor  confirming
       she (or indeed the appellant) was happy with  the  interview  despite
       there being a section of the form  for  this  to  be  completed,  and
       despite the sponsor having signed that she had been read the  initial
       declaration  at  the  beginning  of  the  interview.   The  appellant
       therefore submits that there is evidence that the interview  was  not
       conducted  fairly  and  appropriately,  and  that  the  sponsor   was
       physically unwell during the interview. It is argued that as a result
       this is not fair evidence  showing  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
       convenience.

   13. Further the respondent takes points about  the  sponsor  not  knowing
       details about the appellant's Dutch child conceived  outside  of  the
       marriage, but this was clearly something she only wanted  an  apology
       for from the witness statement. It was just a  linguistic  difference
       when the sponsor said the appellant was living in the UK at the  time
       of the proposal and when they married  whereas  he  said  (correctly)
       that his permanent residence was Italy at that time. What  she  meant
       was he was physically there visiting at the time of the proposal  and
       came on regular visits up until he joined her after the wedding.

   14. The appellant also argues  that  there  are  many  details  that  the
       appellant and sponsor are not  discrepant  about  at  interview,  for
       instance the number of smoke detectors in the  home,  the  number  of
       televisions, the names of  family  members  and  the  fact  that  the
       sponsor's son lived with them.

   15. It is also argued by Ms Ofei-Kwaja that the appellant had  no  motive
       to enter a marriage of convenience. He had indefinite leave to remain
       in Italy; he has a Dutch child in the UK with whom he has contact and
       on whom he could base an application  to  remain  in  the  UK  if  he
       needed; and because the relationship with the sponsor  is  clearly  a
       long and complex one which would be unnecessary and  unlikely  if  it
       were just a relationship of convenience.

   16. The appellant argues that the sponsor acquired  indefinite  leave  to
       remain as a result of working continuously for five years from  April
       2007 to April 2012. Mr McGill confirmed for the  respondent  that  it
       was accepted that the sponsor had four  years  continuous  employment
       from April 2007 to April 2011. The HMRC letter sets out  evidence  of
       work  from  April  2011  to  September  2011  for  Amey  Service  and
       overlapping work from July 2011 to June 2012 for Ocean Contract,  and
       as such the sponsor clearly obtained indefinite leave  to  remain  in
       April 2012 as she has shown continuous work also from April  2011  to
       June 2012. Thus, the sponsor was  residing  in  accordance  with  the
       Regulations, initially as a worker and then as someone who  qualified
       for permanent residence under Regulation 15(1)(a) for the  five  plus
       years of the marriage with the appellant.  The  appellant,  in  turn,
       therefore met the requirements of 15(1)(b)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
       2006, and is entitled to permanent residence as the sponsor's spouse.



    Conclusions - Remaking

   17. The burden of proof of showing the marriage is one of convenience  is
       on the respondent, see Sadovska & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2017] UKSC. This must be shown to be the case on the
       ordinary civil standard of the balance of probabilities.

   18. The  evidence  of  the  respondent  that  there  was  a  marriage  of
       convenience derives from the marriage  interview  conducted  on  15th
       February 2016. I have considered  the  full  transcript.  I  was  not
       assisted by the fact that  the  respondent  did  not  indicate  which
       questions  were  being  relied  upon  when   making   assertions   of
       discrepancies, but I have done my best to analysis the evidence as is
       set out below.

   19. It is clearly the case that the sponsor became unwell at the marriage
       interview. From  question  176  it  is  clear  that  the  interviewer
       realises that things are going  wrong,  and  says  that  "you're  not
       making sense here". Up until that point the sponsor has answered  all
       the questions without problem. After this point the  interpreter  has
       to repeat the questions and there are other  clear  issues  with  her
       health. The only discrepancy issues identified that arise before this
       are issues that the appellant does not  know  the  sponsor  has  some
       scars on her leg and hand; that she did not know about a pierced  ear
       that the appellant says he has. It is of course possible  that  these
       scars and piercings are not very visible as there is no evidence they
       are prominent, and thus I find they are not strong  evidence  of  the
       marriage being a sham. It is also held against the sponsor  that  she
       does not know about the appellant's son out of marriage, which arises
       in questioning prior to the point when she becomes  unwell,  but  she
       makes it plain that she does know his name but does not want to  know
       more about this child, and further the  appellant  says  she  has  no
       contact with his son at all in his interview, and as such I find that
       this is not evidence of the marriage not being genuine.

   20. From question 176 in the interview I find that there is  evidence  of
       unreasonable questioning of the sponsor, which seems likely  to  have
       arisen from the sponsor becoming unable to cope  with  the  interview
       and finding the questions hard to follow and the interviewing officer
       then becoming impatient. At question 188 the sponsor is told she does
       not know enough for her marriage to be genuine because  she  did  not
       know why or how often the appellant came to the UK prior  and  around
       the time of their romantic relationship developing. The sponsor, when
       she understands the issue says, reasonably at question  192  that  it
       was about ten years previously and she does not  remember  how  often
       the appellant came to the UK at that time. Similarly at question  200
       the interviewer demands to know how often they spoke on the phone  in
       the period 2006 to 2008 when a relationship developed saying:  "Which
       was what? Was it weekly?  Was  it  daily?  Was  it  fortnightly?  How
       regular's regular to you?" (The answer from the  sponsor  is  weekly,
       but  it  would  be  understandable  to  have  found  this  style   of
       questioning intimidating.) At question 206 the  interviewing  officer
       seeming realises that the sponsor is unwell and asks her if she needs
       to check her bloods, and she says she thinks she does. There is  then
       a pause, and it  seems  the  appellant  is  eating  something  as  at
       question 207 as she says her mouth is full so she cannot  answer.  It
       is in this context that the sponsor does not make it clear  when  the
       appellant came to live permanently in the UK, but I  find  that  this
       questioning and her answers cannot be properly relied upon due to her
       physical and mental state.

   21. It is only at question 210, after the appellant is unwell,  that  the
       questions about the marriage  proposal  are  put  starting  with  the
       question about where the appellant was  living  at  that  time  being
       interrupted by her being so unwell that the interviewer asks  if  she
       needs a first aider and indicating she believes  that  she  might  be
       sick and asking if she needs to go to the toilet (see  questions  214
       and 215). The reply of the sponsor is that she does not  want  to  be
       alone in case anything happens, indicating she is in a real state  of
       fear about her health. There is then a break at  questions  218  -223
       where  apparently  the  interviewer  seeks  a  first  aider  and  the
       appellant eats something and says she needs the food to settle in her
       stomach. The interview however  continues  at  question  224  without
       apparently giving the sponsor time to digest her food. [The  note  in
       the interview summary sheet indicates that the sponsor had  forgotten
       to take her morning medication and that she also took  this  at  this
       time and that a first aider did attend. It is also clear from medical
       documents in the bundle that the sponsor is a diabetic.] The  sponsor
       says that the appellant was visiting her, and she did not know  where
       he was living at the time of the proposal at question 230,  but  then
       implies he had been in the UK for a year or six  months  at  question
       232. At question 233 the interviewer asks a  long  multiple  question
       about the proposal, and the interpreter says that the sponsor is  not
       answering and he has  to  repeat  the  question.   I  find  that  any
       discrepancy about the appellant's residence based on the  questioning
       at this point is not one on which weight can  be  given  due  to  the
       sponsor's acknowledged ill health  and  the  inappropriate  style  of
       questioning. I also do not find  it  of  any  significance  that  the
       appellant initially said the proposal with in the bedroom,  and  then
       changed this to the living room - the answer the appellant  gave.  He
       did not know what the appellant had said in interview at  that  point
       and could not be said to be altering his evidence to fit what she had
       said rather than correcting his account from his own recollection.

   22. I also do not find it of any significance that the sponsor  says  she
       would ask the lawyer to appeal if the application is refused, and the
       appellant says they had not discussed what they  would  do  in  these
       circumstances  as  these  are  not  mutually  incompatible   answers.
       Likewise, I do not find it significant that the sponsor did not  know
       the appellant was staying with a cousin on the  very  first  occasion
       she met him and assumed he was staying in a hotel particularly as  he
       says in his interview he had never told her  about  this  cousin.   I
       cannot find any reference to  the  sponsor  meeting  the  appellant's
       parents in Ghana in 2015, the only reference to this visit  to  Ghana
       seems to be at questions 207 to 209 when she says she went for herbal
       treatment and the evidence of the appellant in  his  interview  about
       this visit appears to be the same. I do not find  the  answers  about
       the  sponsor's  son  [C]'s  whereabouts  on  the  last   Sunday   are
       significantly different: both said he was home, but the sponsor  adds
       he then went  out  later.  Again,  I  do  not  find  that  it  is  of
       significance that the appellant did not  know  why  the  sponsor  had
       moved to the Netherlands in the 1980 or precisely when she went there
       as this was a very long time  prior  to  the  commencement  of  their
       relationship.

   23. With respect to the wedding it is clear that  there  were  issues  of
       inaccuracy on the wedding certificate as she was not spinster  but  a
       divorcee; with the sponsor's and appellant's understanding about  the
       time the marriage was registered, which was 10 days later not 3,  and
       because it stated she lived in Italy on the marriage certificate  not
       in the UK.  However,  before  me  the  respondent  accepts  that  the
       appellant and sponsor were lawfully married by the proxy marriage and
       these are not ultimately issues which I find go to the genuineness of
       the marriage.

   24. The only issue arising from the interview that I find can properly go
       to whether the marriage is genuine is the fact that the appellant did
       not know the name of the  church/  street  in  which  the  church  is
       situated where he met the sponsor and where they continue to worship.
       I do not find however that the  appellant  has  significantly  stated
       that her involvement is different from that of the sponsor as he says
       that he does not know if she goes to any  midweek  church  activities
       and just says she is able to teach bible classes but  does  not  know
       about them. I also note that there is an  original  letter  from  the
       particular Methodist Church before the Upper Tribunal which  confirms
       the appellant and sponsor have attended since 2006 and that they  are
       both valued and respected members of  the  congregation.  I  conclude
       that the appellant simply forgot the name/street of the church in the
       interview.

   25. Against the respondent's contentions I balance information  from  the
       interview which gives a broadly consistent account of a  relationship
       which developed from a meeting in 2006 and then a pattern  of  visits
       becoming a romantic relationship with a proposal in  2009,  which  is
       described in very similar terms, and with  the  appellant  moving  in
       after the proxy wedding in Ghana in 2010, with  both  parties  giving
       similar reasons for choosing this type of wedding. They both know the
       names of each other's family members; the two  addresses  they  lived
       at; the practical details of the current property such as the  number
       of bedrooms, council tax, bins, smoke alarms,  electricity  supplier,
       the fact that the sponsor receives no benefits and  is  not  working,
       the description of the sponsors' work uniform and hours; the  details
       of the sponsor's last trip to Ghana in 2015 for medical matters;  and
       the description of what they did last Sunday which included attending
       church, watching television, the food they ate and  the  presence  of
       the sponsor's son [C].

   26. From a consideration of the evidence of the appellant before me,  the
       church letter and medical letters in the  bundle  and  the  interview
       transcript I am satisfied that the respondent has not shown that  the
       marriage is a sham or one of convenience to the required standard  of
       proof.

   27. I am also satisfied that the appellant has shown on  the  balance  of
       probabilities that the sponsor acquired permanent residence in  April
       2012 as she has shown five years of continuous work from  April  2007
       to April 2012, the first four years being conceded by the  respondent
       and the final one from April 2011 to April 2012  being  evidenced  by
       the HMRC letter as set out above by Ms Ofei-Kwaja.

   28. I therefore concluded that the appellant  is  entitled  to  permanent
       residence  under  Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
       Regulations 2006 as he has resided in the UK for more than five  year
       with his wife (from June 2010 until their decree nisi in the  divorce
       in August 2018), and his wife was residing  in  accordance  with  the
       Regulations for this period as initially,  from  June  2010  she  was
       present as a worker and then after April  2012  she  was  present  in
       accordance with the Regulations as a person who had acquired a  right
       permanently to reside under Regulation 15(1)(a)  of  the  Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2006.

    Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.


    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.


    3. I remaking  the  appeal  allowing  it  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                   Date:  29th October 2018


Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 18th September  1969.  He
       made an application for a permanent residence card as the husband  of
       an  EEA  national  under  Regulation  15  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006, henceforth the 2006 EEA Regulations. The  appellant
       is married to  [GA]  who  is  a  citizen  of  the  Netherlands.  This
       application was refused by the respondent  on  6th  April  2016.  His
       appeal against the decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge AK Hussain in a determination promulgated on the  6th  December
       2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  on
       13th July 2018 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier
       judge had erred in the assessment of the  sponsor's  employment,  and
       thus in the assessment as to whether the appellant  was  entitled  to
       permanent residence.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

    Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The appellant submits that Regulation 15 of the 2006 EEA  Regulations
       does not require the EEA sponsor to have worked for 5 years from  the
       date her marriage to the appellant. It is argued that the appellant's
       spouse acquired permanent  residence  in  2011,  as  she  has  worked
       continuously from 2006 to 2015 in the UK. The appellant and his  wife
       were married on 20th February 2010, and he came to live in the UK  in
       June 2010. The First-tier Tribunal erred, it is contended, by finding
       that it was necessary for the sponsor to be in continuous  employment
       from the date the appellant and sponsor started to reside together in
       June 2010 and not finding that  he  could  rely  upon  her  permanent
       residence from the point it was obtained. This, it is  contended,  is
       not a correct application of Regulations 15(1) of the EEA Regulations
       2006.

    5. Mr Kotas noted that the decision also failed to deal with  the  issue
       of whether the marriage was one of convenience which  was  raised  in
       the reasons for refusal letter and which  was  not  conceded  by  the
       respondent at the hearing. He reserved his  position  as  to  whether
       Regulation 15(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations 2006 could be met  by  the
       sponsor having a period of work followed by  a  period  of  permanent
       residence, as he felt it was the case that the sponsor would have had
       to continue to work or otherwise be a qualified person for the  whole
       five year period, but could not cite an authority for this point.

    6. I informed the parties that I found that the First-tier Tribunal  had
       erred in law and would set aside the decision in  its  entirety;  and
       would set out my reasons in writing. It was agreed  by  both  parties
       that the remaking hearing should be adjourned as  the  appellant  had
       had no notice that the remaking hearing would also need to deal  with
       the issue of the marriage being one of convenience, as there  was  no
       Rule 24 notice from the respondent raising this  point,  and  further
       the appellant's wife had not attended. The appellant and his wife are
       in the process of divorcing  but  it  was  possible  that  she  would
       provide a further witness statement and attend the Upper Tribunal  to
       give evidence on her work history, as well as their relationship, and
       if not it was desirable that the appellant set out his  understanding
       of his wife's full work history in a witness statement in writing.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. The First-tier Tribunal errs in law as there is a failure  to  engage
       with the materials in the bundle and to establish whether the sponsor
       had acquired permanent residence under Regulation 15(1)(a) of the EEA
       Regulations 2006, and  if  so  when  it  was  acquired.  It  was  not
       sufficient to simply observe that she had not applied  for  permanent
       residence, as is done at paragraph 13 of the decision, as this is not
       a relevant consideration.  From the point that permanent residence is
       acquired  then  the  only  requirement  is  that  the  appellant  was
       physically present with the EEA spouse to satisfy Regulation 15(1)(b)
       of the  EEA  Regulations  2006  as  any  time  spent  with  permanent
       residence will be residence in accordance with  the  Regulations.  It
       was therefore an error to require in addition that  the  sponsor  was
       also  present  as  a  worker  after  acquiring  permanent  residence.
       Evidence of the sponsor being as a worker would only be  relevant  to
       qualify the appellant under Regulation 15(1)(b) for a period prior to
       permanent residence being acquired by the sponsor.

    8. Further the First-tier Tribunal  also  materially  erred  in  law  by
       failing to decide whether the  marriage  between  the  appellant  and
       sponsor was one of convenience as contended by the respondent in  the
       refusal letter and failing to give consideration to the evidence  put
       forward by the appellant that this was not the case.

    Directions

    1. The appellant should lodge any further witness statements or updating
       evidence 10 days prior to the date of the remaking hearing.



    Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.


    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.


    3. I adjourn the remaking hearing.






Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   11th  September
2018




