
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04564/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2019                           |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     mb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hanlon, promulgated on 28 November 2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 28 December 2018.

Anonymity

   2. An anonymity direction was made previously at the appellant's request,
      and this is reiterated below for the same reasons.

Background

 3. On 10 April 2018, the appellant sought a permanent  residence  card  to
    confirm that he was  the  family  member  of  his  Irish  spouse.  That
    application was refused by the respondent on 21 June  2018  because  it
    was determined that the  appellant  had  not  provided  any  employment
    documents on behalf of his EEA sponsor  and  the  respondent  had  been
    unable to confirm whether she had exercised Treaty rights in the United
    Kingdom as a worker for a period of five consecutive years.

 4. In his grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    stated that his spouse had  been  living  and  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over 10 years; he was not  aware  that  he  had  to  submit
    evidence that his wife was working in the United Kingdom  and  that  he
    had enclosed the relevant document with the notice of appeal.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appeal was considered on the papers, at  the  appellant's  request.
    The judge concluded that the  evidence  before  showed  only  that  the
    sponsor was employed between 15 September 2012 and 31 July  2014,  that
    she took a career break between May 2016 and May 2017  and  that  there
    was no evidence whether she returned to work or  was  working   at  the
    date of the hearing.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of  appeal  argued  that  the  sponsor  was  in  continuous
    employment from 2012 to  2017  and  this  was  shown  in  the  payslips
    provided. It was also said that the sponsor  took  maternity  leave  in
    February 2015 and started a career break in May 2016  but  remained  an
    employee throughout. The appellant argued that the qualifying period of
    his application was from July 2012 to June 2017 and his wife  continued
    to be employed  until  October  2017.  At  this  point,  the  appellant
    supported the family from his salary.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

The hearing

 8. The sponsor attended the hearing however, he had little  he  needed  to
    say because Mr Bramble indicated that he was  "home  and  dry"  on  the
    evidence of his wife's employment, provided that this was the  evidence
    which was before the judge.

 9. At the end of the hearing, I advised the parties that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was set aside owing to the failure to  consider
    the evidence before it.  I  then  remade  the  decision,  allowing  the
    appeal.

Decision on error of law

10. The appellant provided evidence showing his wife's employment from July
    2012 until October 2017 in advance of the hearing  of  his  appeal.  He
    lodged his appeal on 25 June 2018 and on 3 July 2018 he  sent  a  large
    bundle of documentary evidence by email, using the online coversheet to
    ensure that his documents were linked to  his  casefile.  All  of  that
    evidence was before the First-tier Tribunal judge. Indeed, some of that
    evidence was referred to. As rightly conceded by Mr Bramble, there  was
    a complete record of the employment history  of  the  appellant's  wife
    over a continuous five-year period. The judge states at [14] that there
    were only payslips from 15 September 2012  until  31  July  2014.  This
    finding is manifestly incorrect and takes no account of the form  P60's
    which were provided covering the years April 2012 until April  2016  as
    well as the evidence of maternity and parental leave.   Therefore,  the
    judge erred in failing to take into consideration material evidence and
    his findings were unsafe. His decision is set aside.

11. I remake the decision, allowing the appeal based on my consideration of
    the same evidence which was before the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  Mr
    Bramble accepted amounted to evidence that the appellant's wife  was  a
    qualified person for a continuous period of five years.  The  appellant
    is therefore entitled to a permanent residence card.

Conclusions


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made.

I substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

Notice of decision

The appeal is allowed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 08 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for the following reason. The appellant accepts on page 13 of his notice  of
appeal that he mistakenly sent only his own evidence of  employment  to  the
Secretary of State with his application for permanent residence, whereas  he
ought to have enclosed evidence relating to his wife.








Signed                                  Date: 08 April 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

