
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04682/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2018                             |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                               Mr Milan Mandal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - WARSAW
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Bartram, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh,  born  in  1982  who,  on  27
    January 2017 applied for an EEA family permit as the spouse of  an  EEA
    national, a Romanian citizen.

 2. That application was refused in a decision dated 11 April 2017  on  the
    basis that the appellant's marriage was one of convenience.  His appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg ("the FtJ") on 9  July  2018.
    She dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal  against  her  decision
    having been granted, the appeal came before me.

 3. At the hearing before the FtJ, evidence was given  by  the  appellant's
    wife, Renata-Elisabeta Mandal, and  her  sister.   The  FtJ's  decision
    includes a detailed summary of their evidence.   It  is  not  suggested
    that that summary of the oral evidence and of aspects  of  the  witness
    statements is in any way inaccurate.

 4. In her conclusions she referred to the fact that an earlier application
    for an EEA residence card made by the appellant whilst he was in the UK
    was refused on the basis that the marriage between him and his wife was
    one of convenience.  She referred at [10] to the  refusal  decision  in
    this case, noting that the appellant and his wife were  interviewed  by
    the Home Office in connection with that earlier  application  following
    which it was decided that the marriage was  one  of  convenience.   She
    also noted that the appellant had not appealed that decision, and  that
    he had been detained on 21 November 2014 and removed from  the  UK  the
    following month.

 5. In the same paragraph she referred to a copy of  the  interview  record
    that took place in connection  with  that  earlier  application  for  a
    residence card.  She noted that the  appellant's  legal  representative
    did not ask for an adjournment of the hearing (as a result of the  late
    service of the interview record).  She noted  the  submission  made  on
    behalf of the appellant to the effect that  events  had  now  moved  on
    since that interview.

 6. At [14] the FtJ said that the discrepancies in the answers given by the
    appellant and his wife  in  that  interview  were  highlighted  in  the
    interview transcript and referred to in the  instant  refusal  and  the
    Entry Clearance Manager's review.  She found that  those  discrepancies
    discharged the initial burden of proof on  the  respondent  (justifying
    the reasonable suspicion that the marriage was one of convenience).

 7. At [15] the FtJ said that she took into account that the appellant  and
    his wife now have a child born in 2016 and the refusal decision did not
    challenge paternity.  She noted the evidence that the appellant's  wife
    stayed for three months in Bangladesh with the appellant and his family
    and that following that visit she returned to Romania to live and  work
    there.  The appellant joined her in August 2015 and  according  to  the
    evidence has remained living in Romania since then.   She  referred  to
    the fact that the appellant's wife returned to the UK a week before the
    hearing to attend the hearing itself, and that it  was  said  that  she
    would return to live in Romania after the hearing.

 8. As to the issue of the discrepancies in the interviews,  she  noted  at
    [16] that the appellant's wife in her witness statement said  that  the
    answers she gave in the marriage interview  "may  have  been  incorrect
    because the couple did not get engaged until a year later and that they
    were 'in the early days of knowing each other'".   In  fact,  what  the
    appellant's wife said in her witness statement in that context  was  in
    relation to the  "early  days"  of  their  relationship,  before  their
    marriage.

 9. The FtJ went on to refer to an answer given by the appellant's  sister,
    recorded at [8] of her decision.  That evidence was to the effect  that
    the appellant told her (the sister) that he  was  at  college  but  the
    college had been suspended and he then told her that "they will need to
    apply like a married couple".  The FtJ said at [17]  that  that  answer
    alluded to the appellant's intention to  make  a  marriage  application
    with an EEA national to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  because  his
    college had been suspended and he was in  this  country  on  a  student
    visa.

10. She also said that she bore in mind that the appellant did  not  appeal
    the earlier Home Office decision (which concluded that the marriage was
    one of convenience), and she  said  that  she  took  into  account  the
    appellant's wife's explanation for the discrepancies as set out in  her
    witness statement.  However, she then concluded that on  a  balance  of
    probabilities and "taking the evidence as a whole" she found  that  the
    marriage between the appellant  and  his  wife  "at  the  date  of  the
    marriage" was a marriage of convenience.

11. Immediately after  expressing  that  conclusion  she  referred  to  the
    appellant having been removed from the UK and his wife  having  visited
    him in Bangladesh, that the appellant went to Romania to live with  his
    wife in 2015 and  that  they  have  a  child  together.   In  the  next
    paragraph she said as follows:

         "I find that  a  marriage  which  started  off  as  a  marriage  of
         convenience and later became a genuine  marriage  cannot  meet  the
         Rules (sic)".

    She then referred to the decision in Rosa v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14 to the effect that  in  relation  to
    the marriage of convenience issue the focus should be on the  intention
    of the parties at the time the marriage  was  entered  into.   She  had
    quoted from that decision earlier.

12. Then, referring to reg 2 of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations"), she said  that  even  if  she
    accepted that the marriage was now genuine, it could not meet reg 2.

13. Lastly, with reference to reg 12(a) she said that the appellant's  wife
    did not give evidence that she intended to travel to the  UK  with  the
    appellant within six months of the date of the application or that  she
    would join him in the UK and that she would thus  be  an  EEA  national
    residing in the UK in accordance with the EEA Regulations  on  arrival.
    She went on to state that even if she  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    wife intended to travel to the UK within six months of the date of  the
    application with the appellant,  for  the  reasons  already  given  the
    appellant did not meet the EEA Regulations.

    The Grounds and Submissions

14. The grounds only raise two issues.  Firstly, complaint  is  made  about
    the FtJ's assessment of the comment made by the appellant's  sister-in-
    law about needing to apply (to remain) as a  married  couple  following
    the suspension of his college's licence.  It is argued  that  that  was
    not a sufficient basis from which to conclude that the marriage was one
    of convenience.  It is said in the grounds that there are many  factors
    that may affect the timing of a marriage in  a  relationship  and  that
    taken at face value the appellant's sister-in-law's evidence  does  not
    go so far as to demonstrate a marriage of convenience.

15. The second issue raised in the grounds is in terms of  the  FtJ  having
    said that even if the marriage was a genuine one, if it started off  as
    a marriage of convenience it could not meet the EEA  Regulations.   The
    grounds contend that the decision in Rosa which the FtJ relied  on  for
    that conclusion, does not actually say as much.

16. I should point out that neither the grounds nor submissions  before  me
    raised any issue in relation to the FtJ's consideration of  the  burden
    of proof and similarly no submissions were  made  in  reliance  on  the
    decision in Sadovska v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 54.

17. In his submissions, Mr Bartram relied on the grounds, submitting that a
    marriage  of  convenience  is  where  the  sole  purpose  is  to  avoid
    immigration control.  A circumstance  where,  for  example,  a  college
    closes down, is simply a situation that may bring a  marriage  forward.
    It was reiterated that the appellant's wife went to Bangladesh with him
    and they have a child together.  It was submitted that the  only  issue
    was the  comment  made  by  the  appellant's  sister-in-law  about  the
    appellant having said that they needed to apply like a married  couple.
    That was not sufficient to establish  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

18. In response to an enquiry from me, Mr Bartram  further  submitted  that
    the FtJ did (in effect) find that the marriage  between  the  appellant
    and his wife was presently a genuine and subsisting one.

19. In his submissions Mr Tarlow indicated that he had some  sympathy  with
    the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant.  However, he had  no
    instructions from the Entry Clearance Officer and thus had  no  further
    submissions to make, other than to invite me to dismiss the appeal.

    Assessment and Conclusions

20. I have considered the FtJ's decision very carefully.  Having done so, I
    do not agree that the only issue,  or  reason  given  by  the  FtJ  for
    concluding that the marriage was  (at  its  inception)  a  marriage  of
    convenience was because of the remark made by the appellant's sister-in-
    law concerning what the appellant had told her about needing to make  a
    marriage application because his college had closed  down.   Certainly,
    that was one feature of the FtJ's assessment but not the only  feature.



21. She referred to the fact that the previous application for a  residence
    card was refused on the basis that it was at that  time  assessed  that
    the marriage was one of convenience.  She also  referred  to  the  fact
    that there were discrepancies in the interviews that  took  place  with
    the appellant and  his  wife.   According  to  the  appellant's  wife's
    witness statement that interview was in November 2014.  They married on
    28 July 2014.  In any event, it is clear from the FtJ's  decision  that
    she took into account the discrepancies between them but also said that
    she took into account the  appellant's  wife's  explanation  for  those
    discrepancies.  Furthermore, she noted that there was no appeal against
    that decision.  Although she did not  refer  in  her  decision  to  the
    appellant's wife's explanation  in  her  witness  statement  for  there
    having been no appeal (she did not know that they could appeal), it  is
    a matter that the  FtJ  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  in  her
    assessment of whether the marriage was "when it  was  entered  into"  a
    marriage of convenience.

22. It is not suggested on behalf of  the  appellant  that  there  was  any
    evidence that the FtJ failed to take into account; the argument  simply
    being that it was not sufficient for  the  FtJ  to  conclude  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience solely on the basis of the  appellant's
    sister-in-law's comment (to which I have referred).  As I say  however,
    that was not the only basis upon which the FtJ made her decision.   For
    completeness, I should say that  I  have  for  myself  considered  the
    interviews of the  appellant  and  his  wife  that  were  conducted  in
    November 2014 and it is clear that there are significant  discrepancies
    in their answers.  It was not submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    either before the FtJ or before me that the decision at that time  that
    the marriage was one of convenience was not justified on the  basis  of
    what was said in the interview.  I note that in submissions before  the
    FtJ it was said on behalf of the appellant that events had  "now  moved
    on" since that interview.

23. In relation to the issue of whether a marriage that started  off  as  a
    marriage of convenience but later became a genuine marriage, falls foul
    of reg 2, I am satisfied that the FtJ  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    decision in Rosa to support her conclusion that such circumstances  are
    caught by reg 2.  In Rosa at [41] the Court said as follows:

         "41. I accept that the tribunal's language was  loose.  It  may  be
             useful to contrast a marriage of convenience with a  "genuine"
             marriage (indeed, Underhill LJ treated  them  as  antonyms  at
             paragraph 6 of  his  judgment  in  Agho),  but  the  focus  in
             relation to  a  marriage  of  convenience  should  be  on  the
             intention of the parties at the time the marriage was  entered
             into, whereas the question whether a marriage is  "subsisting"
             looks to whether the marital relationship is a continuing one.
             I am satisfied, however, that the tribunal understood that the
             ultimate  question  was  whether  it   was   a   marriage   of
             convenience, not whether the marriage was subsisting, and that
             its findings provided a proper basis  for  the  conclusion  it
             reached that the marriage was one of convenience. The tribunal
             was  correct  to  look  at   the   evidence   concerning   the
             relationship between the appellant and her husband  after  the
             marriage itself (both before, during and after  the  husband's
             period of imprisonment), since that  was  capable  of  casting
             light on the intention of the  parties  at  the  time  of  the
             marriage. The tribunal's finding that "it  is  a  marriage  of
             convenience and always has been" (paragraph  26)  covered  the
             position at the time of the  marriage.  The  wording  suggests
             that the tribunal had in mind the possibility that a  marriage
             of convenience might turn  into  a  genuine  marriage  in  the
             course of time, but the finding that  it  had  always  been  a
             marriage of convenience makes it unnecessary to consider  that
             potentially interesting issue in the present case."

24. There, the court clearly took the view that the focus in relation to  a
    marriage of convenience should be on the intention of  the  parties  at
    the time the marriage was entered into.  That was  different  from  the
    question of whether the marriage was "subsisting".  Although  it  could
    be said that that view was obiter because of what the court said in the
    last sentence of [41], I would respectfully agree with  the  conclusion
    that the focus should be on the parties' intentions  at  the  time  the
    marriage was entered into.  This, it seems to me,  is  consistent  with
    the EEA Regulations at reg 2 that states that a spouse does not include
    a party to a marriage of convenience.  Earlier in reg 2 it states that:



         "'Marriage of convenience' includes a marriage entered into for the
         purpose of using these Regulations, or any other right conferred by
         the EU Treaties, as a means to circumvent -

         (a)  immigration rules applying to non-EEA nationals (such  as  any
             applicable requirement under the 1971 Act  to  have  leave  to
             enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or

         (b)   any  other  criteria  that  the  party  to  the  marriage  of
             convenience would otherwise have to meet in order to  enjoy  a
             right to reside under these Regulations or the  EU  Treaties".



25. Thus, the phrase 'marriage of convenience' is  stated  as  including  a
    marriage that was entered into for certain purposes.   The  phraseology
    makes it plain that it is the time that the marriage was  entered  into
    which is relevant.  Reg 2 is not expressed in the present  tense,  such
    as for example stating that a  marriage  of  convenience  is  one  that
    'exists' to circumvent Immigration Rules, or such  like.   It  was  not
    suggested on behalf of the appellant before me, or  indeed  before  the
    FtJ, that the  EEA  Regulations  in  this  respect  do  not  accurately
    transpose the Citizens' Directive (2004/38/EC).  Furthermore, no  other
    authority was referred to on behalf of the appellant which suggests  an
    alternative conclusion. Sadovska does not deal with that issue.

26. In these circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any  error  of
    law in the  FtJ's  conclusion  that  the  marriage  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience (per reg 2).

27. I agree with Mr Bartram that the FtJ did, implicitly at  least,  accept
    that the relationship was now a genuine and subsisting one.   It  seems
    to me that that is evident from her having said at [18] that a marriage
    which started off as a marriage  of  convenience  and  later  became  a
    genuine marriage could not meet the EEA Regulations.  Otherwise,  there
    would have been no need for her  to  consider  the  decision  in  Rosa.
    Furthermore, the evidence before her could be said to have supported  a
    conclusion that the marriage was now a genuine and subsisting  one.   I
    do not consider that there is any significance in the FtJ  saying  that
    the appellant's wife said in evidence that the appellant lived alone in
    one room, apparently in Romania, when the other oral evidence from  her
    and her sister was to the effect that they were  now  living  together.
    It seems likely that this was an error in the  FtJ's  understanding  of
    the evidence and certainly  she  did  not  suggest  that  the  evidence
    indicated anything other than that they were living together,  and  not
    that the appellant was living alone.

28. Nevertheless, for the reasons I have given, even though the  FtJ  found
    that the marriage was presently a genuine and subsisting one,  she  was
    correct to conclude that the appellant's marriage fell foul of reg 2.

29. I note what is said in the grounds about it being a  matter  of  common
    sense that it could not be said that for the couple  to  succeed  under
    the EEA Regulations in these circumstances they would have to terminate
    the marriage by divorce and then remarry.

30. However, it  is  plain  that  reg  2,  consistent  with  the  Citizens'
    Directive in this respect, is concerned to avoid abuse of rights.  If a
    marriage was one of convenience, thus entered  into,  for  example,  to
    avoid compliance with Immigration Rules, the answer for  the  appellant
    in  circumstances  such  as  these  would  be  to  make  a  Rules-based
    application and/or to rely on Article 8 in an  application.  Article  8
    was not relied on either before the FtJ or before me.

31. It was not raised as an issue in submissions before me, although I  did
    canvass the matter with Mr Bartram, the fact that the FtJ said that the
    appellant could not otherwise meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  in
    terms of reg 12(a) because there was no evidence that  the  appellant's
    wife intended to travel to the UK within six months of the date of  the
    application.  In this however, it seems to me that  she  erred  because
    she did not make reference to the appellant's application form in which
    it was clear from the answers to questions 20 and 21 that he planned to
    arrive in the UK on 1 March 2017.   The  application  was  made  on  27
    January 2017.  In answer to question 54 of the application he said that
    his spouse would be travelling with him, as he did at question 129  and
    142.  There is evidence therefore, of the intention of the  appellant's
    spouse to travel to the UK  within  six  months  of  the  date  of  the
    application and that she would reside in the UK in accordance with  the
    Regulations.  The FtJ referred to her witness statement saying that she
    would obtain part-time work.  However, the error in this respect is not
    material because it does not relate to the FtJ's primary  finding  that
    the marriage was one of convenience.

32. Accordingly, there  being  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  FtJ's
    decision, her decision to dismiss the appeal must therefore stand.

    Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law.  Its decision to dismiss  the  appeal  therefore
    stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            19/11/18
