
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/04450/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2019                 |On 31st October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                          MONISOLA OLUTOYIN OKULAJA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbola, of Counsel, instructed by DF
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who wishes to remain in the UK on
    the basis of an EEA residence card. She says that she is the wife,  and
    therefore family member, of a Portuguese citizen, Mr Alexandere  Manuel
    Coutinho Queiros. Her application was refused in a decision  dated  5th
    June 2018. Her appeal against the decision was dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert in a determination promulgated on the 20th March
    2019.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  on
    17th September 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  First-
    tier judge had erred in law in requiring an  expert  opinion  that  the
    proxy marriage was recognised under Portuguese law which  was  arguably
    not compatible with the decision of the Court of Appeal in Awuku v SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 178.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions -Error of Law

 4. The grant of permission was made on a basis that  it  was  acknowledged
    was not advanced in the grounds, but was found to be compliant with the
    principles in AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) [2018] UKUT
    00245. Ms Everett accepted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in
    law on the basis identified by Judge Sheridan.

 5. The grounds, which are drafted by an  appellant  who  acts  in  person,
    argue that the marriage is not one of  convenience  as  there  was  not
    proper evidence to support such a contention as she did not attend  the
    interviews at the Home Office due to panic attacks  and  mental  health
    problems, and further that the marriage  is  recognised  in  Portuguese
    law.

 6. I asked the parties to consider whether it was also  an  error  of  law
    that the First-tier Tribunal had not considered the decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Wyman promulgated on 21st April 2016,  which
    found that the appellant and Mr Coutinho Queiros were in a genuine  and
    subsisting durable relationship, but which was set aside by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, with hindsight wrongly, on Sala grounds on the basis that the
    First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction. Both representatives submitted
    that this was an error of law, as although the decision of Judge  Wyman
    was not a  starting  point,  as  Devaseelan  was  not  applicable,  the
    findings and evidence in that decision were relevant considerations.

 7. I then asked Ms Akinbola to show me why the errors were  material  when
    the appeal had been dismissed not only  because  there  was  no  expert
    evidence that the marriage was recognised in Portugal  and  because  it
    was one of convenience, both of these  conclusions  being  infected  by
    error of law, but also because there was no evidence that  the  sponsor
    was exercising EU Treaty rights at the date  of  hearing.  Ms  Akinbola
    accepted that the  evidence,  in  the  form  of  payslips  and  a  bank
    statement Mr Coutinho Queiros, was not recent at the time of appeal and
    that as a result it could not be shown that the errors were material as
    the appeal fell properly to be dismissed on this basis.

Conclusions - Error of Law

 8. As the Court of Appeal held in Awuku, the question of  formal  validity
    of a marriage in the law of England and Wales is governed by the law of
    the country where the marriage was celebrated, and  thus  the  question
    should have been whether the marriage  was  valid  in  Nigeria,  as  is
    correctly set out in the decision under challenge at pages 141  to  142
    of the bundle. It was therefore an error  of  law  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to have held at paragraph 20 of the decision that  the  appeal
    fell to be dismissed due to a lack of evidence that  the  marriage  was
    valid in Portugal.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal also erred in law by failing  to  consider  the
    weight to be given  to  the  decision  of  Judge  Wyman  which,  whilst
    overturned by the Upper  Tribunal  on  Sala  grounds,  found  that  the
    appellant and Mr Coutinho Queiros were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    durable relationship.

10. However, the appeal was dismissed for another reason:  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence that Mr Coutinho Querios  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK. Neither he nor the  appellant  attended  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and the appellant and his unsigned  and
    undated statements do not state unequivocally that he was in employment
    at that time, although they do state that the evidence he had submitted
    relating to this issue  was  genuine.   The  evidence  of  Mr  Coutinho
    Queiros being a qualifying person before the First-tier Tribunal was  7
    payslips from an unknown organisation, the  last  of  which  was  dated
    March 2018 and a Lloyds bank statement for the period November 2017  to
    May 2018. The Lloyds bank statement does not include  the  payments  by
    BACS as recorded on the payslips with the  possible  exception  of  the
    29th January 2018 amount, but does include a different payment of wages
    from Ronald & Partners on 2nd May 2018. I find that as the most  recent
    of this evidence related to ten months prior to the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal it could not, even if  accepted  as  genuine,  have
    shown on the balance of probabilities  that  Mr  Coutinho  Queiros  was
    exercising Treaty rights at that time.

11. As a result. I find that the errors of law were  not  material  as  the
    appeal fell in any case to be lawfully dismissed on the basis  outlined
    above.

    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of errors on a point of law.

      2. I uphold the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
         appeal as the errors were not ultimately material as the appeal was
         also rightly dismissed on the basis set out at paragraph 10  above.




Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    29th  October
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
