
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04931/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th June 2019                     |On 24th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                  MR MAHMOUD ATTIA SAAD HASSAN ABOUELHASAAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Georget, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt. On 18 February 2018, he married  a
    national of Eire, Miss F.  On 20 March 2018, he applied for a residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in  the
    United  Kingdom  under  Regulation  18(1)  of  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052) ("hereinafter referred to as  the  2016
    Regulations").

 2.  On 5th July 2018, the Secretary of State refused that  application  on
    the basis that the appellant was a party to a "marriage of convenience"
    and so was not a "spouse" of an EEA national.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. In  a  determination
    promulgated on 28 March 2018, Judge Bennett dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal. He concluded that  the  appellant  was  indeed  a  party  to  a
    "marriage of convenience".

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal. Permission  was  granted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes) on the 23rd April 2019.

The decision of the FtTJ:

 5. At the hearing before the FtTJ the respondent was not represented.  The
    appellant was represented by his legal representative and the appellant
    and his wife both  gave  oral  evidence.  Whilst  there  was  no  cross
    examination on behalf of the respondent, the FtTJ must have asked  some
    questions to have reached the findings that he did, although  there  is
    no record of what questions were asked in the  body  of  the  decision.
    Additionally, there was a bundle of documentation filed  on  behalf  of
    the appellant.

 6. In his decision the FtTJ set out the relevant history of the  appellant
    and his wife. The appellant unlawfully entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    2011. On 5 October 2015, he made a claim for asylum on the  basis  that
    he was a national of Palestine and that his name was Abuzaid,  however,
    on 16 November 2015  that  application  was  withdrawn.  The  appellant
    remained in the United Kingdom.

 7. The parties  first  met  on  12  March  2017  at  a  coffee  shop.  The
    relationship began in or about July 2017 and they decided to  marry  in
    or about November 2017.

 8. The parties married in Cairo, Egypt on 18 February 2018  by  way  of  a
    proxy marriage. The appellant was present in the  United  Kingdom,  but
    Miss F was present at the ceremony in person. There is no issue  raised
    that Miss F was  not  exercising  Treaty  rights  and  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 2 (b) of the FtTJ she was in permanent employment.

 9. On the 20 March 2018  he  made  an  application  for  the  issue  of  a
    residence card on the basis that  he  was  the  spouse  of  Miss  F,  a
    national of Eire. On 27  June  2018  the  appellant  and  Miss  F  were
    interviewed by  immigration  officers.  At  paragraph  3  of  the  FtTJ
    decision, he summarises the discrepancies/credibility issues  which  it
    was stated had come to light  following  their  respective  interviews.
    They are split into  six  different  areas;  Miss  F's  recent  medical
    problems, her education, the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom,
    the proposal to  marry,  the  wedding  and  Miss  F's  employment.  The
    conclusion of the report was that the appellant  and  Miss  F  "clearly
    know each other, to some degree, and may even be living together."  The
    judge noted that whilst both the appellant and Miss F said  that  there
    had been "issues" with Miss F's parents as a result of the relationship
    and that they had both been consistent  about  that,  the  other  areas
    listed in the body of the report and  summarised  were  thought  to  be
    significant  and  indicative  of  the   relationship   being   one   of
    convenience. This was the respondent's case.

10. On 5 July 2018, the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application
    stating that he was of the opinion that there were "reasonable  grounds
    to suspect" that the appellant's marriage to Miss F on the 18  February
    2018 was "one of convenience; the  sole  purpose  of  enabling  him  to
    obtain an immigration advantage." The basis of that  consideration  was
    that the respondent relied upon the apparent discrepancies between what
    the appellant and Miss F stated in the course  of  the  interviews  and
    their respective answers. Those points were:

      i) the appellant appeared not to have known that Miss F  had  suffered
         from particular problems and that if the appellant been involved in
         a genuine relationship with Miss F, he would have  known  of  those
         things.

     ii) His apparent lack of knowledge of her education cast doubt  on  the
         proposition that there was a genuine relationship between them.

    iii) The respondent was adversely impressed by the fact that Miss F  did
         not know that he had entered the  United  Kingdom  using  the  name
         Abuzaid and put forward a claim on the basis that he was a national
         of Palestine and that if it had been a  genuine  relationship,  the
         appellant would have discussed that with her.

     iv) It was said that the appellant's account and  that  of  Miss  F  of
         where they had been when he proposed marriage differed.

      v) It was stated that Miss F was not able to give the  date  on  which
         she became Mr A's wife and the spread of dates (18, 19/23) did  not
         accord with the date given  by  the  appellant  (17th  of  February
         2018).

11. As the Secretary of State was of the opinion that the marriage was  one
    of "convenience", consistent with Regulation 2 of the 2016 Regulations,
    the appellant should not be treated as Miss F's spouse therefore it was
    not accepted by the respondent that the appellant was a "family member"
    within Regulation 7 of the 2016 Regulations or that  he  qualified  for
    the right to reside in the United Kingdom as her  family  member.  Thus
    the Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 18 (1) of the 2016 Regulations were fulfilled.

12. The FtTJ set out the relevant law at paragraphs 11 - 15 and  then  went
    on to set out the evidence and the analysis of that  evidence  and  his
    conclusion as to  what  constituted  a  "marriage  of  convenience"  by
    reference to his own analysis at paragraph 14.

13. The FtTJ sets out at length the evidence and his findings at paragraphs
    16 - 24. At paragraph 16 the judge summarised the  appellant's  witness
    statement and at paragraph 17, summarised the evidence of Miss F.

14. He made the following findings:

      i) the appellant was the father of AA born on the  2nd  February  2019
         (at [19]).

     ii) The parties were married in Egypt on 18 February 2018 (at [20]).

    iii) Miss F met the appellant in March 2017 when she was  17  years  and
         four months old whilst working as a waitress. She had been studying
         for A-levels but dropped out because the results been poor and  she
         wanted to have a family and that her parents had been  opposed  the
         relationship and that she would have to choose between  her  family
         and the appellant and that she married him out of genuine love  and
         affection (at [21]).

     iv) The judge gave five reasons why he reached the conclusion that  she
         had married him out of genuine love and  affection-  there  was  no
         evidential basis for concluding that there was any other reason why
         she married him or that he was in  a  position  to  offer  her  any
         financial inducements or any funds. There was nothing improbable in
         the proposition that she would have married him out of genuine love
         and affection and that the photographs  submitted  were  consistent
         with  having  a  loving  relationship   and   that   the   apparent
         discrepancies as recorded in the interview and the points raised by
         the respondent did not impinge significantly on her credibility  or
         suggest any reason why she would have married the appellant for any
         other reason other than out of genuine love and affection.

      v) In respect of the appellant, the judge stated that the position was
         "substantially different". At paragraph 23 is set out the following
         matters in relation to the appellant:

           . He entered the United Kingdom unlawfully  and  put  forward  a
             false claim for asylum and that  even  though  the  claim  was
             withdrawn in a short space of time it was still a false claim.

           . Whilst he withdrew the claim, he did not  wish  to  return  to
             Egypt, and he had no right or entitlement to remain under  the
             Immigration Rules.

           . The judge stated that it was difficult to  see  how  he  could
             have achieved that objective other than marrying a young woman
             who was an EEA national.

           . Miss F was an EEA national and when he met, she  was  only  17
             years and four months old, she had not completed her education
             and wanted to start a family her own. He was nine years  older
             than her. There was no basis for concluding that they had  the
             interests in common.

           . He did not tell Miss F about the  circumstances  in  which  it
             come to the United Kingdom because he thought that that  might
             "disturb" their relationship.

     vi) Against those points (in favour of the appellant) the FtTJ found:

           . At the date that he met Miss F in March 2017 and the  date  of
             the marriage in 2018, he was  of  an  age  when  he  could  be
             expected to be thinking of marriage.

           . Miss F was an attractive young woman  and  there  was  nothing
             inherently improbable in the proposition  that  the  appellant
             should wish to marry her and that he would have married out of
             genuine love and affection.

           . The apparent discrepancies and the other matters relied on  by
             the Secretary of State were not, in the main,  of  substantial
             weight and did not (for the most part) cast substantial  doubt
             on the proposition that he married out  of  genuine  love  and
             affection.  The FtTJ  expressly  found  that  the  failure  to
             mention her medical problems was not  made  out;  he  was  not
             satisfied that there was any significance in the fact that the
             appellant did not know whether she been attending high  school
             college or whether she wore uniform.  He  did  not  find  that
             there was a discrepancy as to where the parties were when  the
             proposal to marry was  put  forward  nor  did  he  accept  the
             apparent discrepancy over the dates given by the appellant and
             Miss F. The judge also  rejected  the  apparent  discrepancies
             relating to Miss F's employment.

    vii) The only points that the FtTJ found adverse to the appellant  (from
         the interview) was  that  his  omission  to  tell  Miss  F  of  the
         circumstances in which he came to the  United  Kingdom  was  "in  a
         different  category  and  shows  that  he  was  less  than  frank."
         Furthermore, his failure to mention that she used  an  inhaler  and
         was taking vitamin supplements showed a lack  of  interest  in  her
         condition.

15. As set out above, the judge was satisfied that the appellant and Miss F
    had a child born on 2 February 2019. He did  not  find  that  to  be  a
    substantial factor pointing against the marriage  having  been  one  of
    convenience because at the date of the marriage, the child had not been
    born and was not pregnant and applying the guidance in Rosa, the  focus
    of  attention must be "on the intention of the parties at the time  the
    marriage was entered into," rather than whether, at  the  time  of  the
    hearing, the marriage is "subsisting".

16.  The  judge  did  take  into  account  that  evidence  concerning   the
    relationship after the date of the  marriage  may  cast  light  on  the
    intention of the parties at the time of the marriage but the  FtTJ  did
    not accept that it applied here. His reasoning is set out at  paragraph
    23(f) (3):

         "it is difficult, in the circumstances of this appeal, to see,  and
         I do not accept, the birth  of  their  child,  points  against  the
         appellant's "predominant purpose" having been to procure the  right
         to remain in the United Kingdom because

          i) it was, I am satisfied, Miss F's wish to have a child  at  the
             earliest possible date, and

         ii) if Mr A's predominant purpose was  to  procure  the  right  to
             remain in the United Kingdom by marrying Miss F, he could only
             realistically achieve his purpose,  if  he  ensured  that  his
             relationship with her was maintained and  that  this  required
             that they should have a child at the earliest possible dates."

17. Following that analysis, the judge returned to  the  relevant  law.  At
    paragraph 25, he stated that the decisions that  he  had  referred  to,
    were all decisions taken under the  2006  Regulations,  which  did  not
    contain a definition of "marriage of  convenience"  corresponding  with
    that in Regulation 2 of the 2016 Regulations. He further stated that it
    was important bearing mind that the test of "predominant purpose" which
    came from the guidance given in Sadovska was not the  test  applied  in
    any of those decisions.

18. The judge then made reference to the decision of Rosa at paragraph 10:

         "it was difficult to improve on  the  definition  (which  the  SSHD
         accepted in that case as apposite) in article 1 of the  EC  Council
         resolution 97/C 382/01 of 4 December 1997 on measures to be adopted
         on the combating of marriages of convenience. That article  defines
         a marriage of  convenience  as  "a  marriage  concluded  between  a
         national of a member  state  or  third-  country  national  legally
         resident in a member state and third- country  national,  with  the
         sole aim of circumventing the rules on entry and residence of third
         country nationals and obtaining for the third  country  national  a
         residence permit or authority to reside in a member state."

19. He then stated;

         "But the Supreme Court in Sadovska preferred the statement  in  the
         Commission's 2014 handbook that

             "the notion  of  "sole  purpose"  should  not  be  interpreted
             literally (as being unique or exclusive purpose) but rather as
             meaning that the objective to obtain the right  of  entry  and
             residence must be  the  predominant  purpose  of  the  abusive
             conduct."

20. His final analysis is set out at paragraphs 26 - 27.

21. At paragraph 26 the FtTJ stated that the move from  "sole  purpose"  to
    "predominant  purpose"  was  of  "substantial  significance".  He  then
    returned to his example of the "roguery" that he had  set  out  earlier
    observing that when the test was that of "sole purpose", a "marriage of
    convenience", when the EEA national is entirely genuine but the conduct
    of the non-EEA national involved roguery. But where the question is one
    of "predominant purpose", he stated that he did not  accept  that  that
    was necessarily so or that genuine love and affection could not coexist
    with an intention to procure a right to enter or remain.

22. The FtTJ stated that he had taken into  account  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court at paragraph 24 that a marriage cannot be considered as a
    "marriage of convenience"  simply  because  it  brings  an  immigration
    advantage, or indeed any other advantage but finally stated:

         "but  the  crucial  question  is  whether  the  obtaining  of   the
         "immigration  advantage"  is,   in   the   particular   case,   the
         "predominant purpose" of the marriage - or whether the "predominant
         purpose"  is  "love  and  affection"  and  the  obtaining  of   the
         immigration advantage a subsidiary or ancillary purpose. Once it is
         recognised that the test  is  of  "predominant  purpose"  and  that
         genuine love and affection can coexist with the desire  to  procure
         an immigration advantage, the categorisation or description of  the
         "marriage of convenience" is not  being  "genuine"  should,  it  is
         suggested, be avoided as misleading. The focus  of  attention  must
         simply be on what the "predominant purpose" was.

23. With that in mind, the FtTJ concluded that he was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's "predominant purpose" in marrying Miss F was to procure the
    right to remain in work in the United Kingdom.

24. His reasons for reaching that can be summarised as follows:

      i) the adverse points raised in paragraph 23 applied.  Whilst  he  had
         set out points to the contrary at paragraph 24, those  points  went
         no further than to establish that love and  affection  for  Miss  F
         were subsidiary and/or ancillary reasons for the appellant to marry
         Miss F. The crucial reason was to  enable  him  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom to work and to provide himself and therefore it  was
         necessary for him to marry in EEA national.

     ii) The adverse points paragraph 23 justified the  inference  that  the
         appellant's predominant purpose in  marrying  was  to  procure  the
         right to remain in to work that that was consistent  with  Agho  to
         cause the "evidential burden" to shift to the appellant.

    iii) The appellant's evidence and issues raised at paragraph 24 were not
         of  "sufficient  strength  or  weight"  to  undermine   the   above
         inference, taking into account he made a  false  asylum  claim,  he
         remained in the United Kingdom with no right to do so and  did  not
         tell Miss F of the circumstances in which she came  to  be  in  the
         United Kingdom.  He  considered  that  those  points  impaired  the
         appellant's credibility and that the other matters in paragraph  23
         "speak for themselves".

     iv) The appellant's evidence as to his  reasons  for  marrying  F  were
         "skeletal" and lacking in detail  and  came  to  no  more  than  an
         assertion that having spoken to her on a number  of  occasions  and
         that he had fallen in love with her. He gave no explanation of what
         it was that attracted him to her or to dispel  the  inference  from
         the points made paragraph 23 namely that his reason  for  selecting
         her as a potential spouse marrying her  was  predominantly  because
         she was  in  EEA  national.  The  judge  took  into  account  their
         respective ages and that whilst at the time the marriage she was 18
         years of age, the appellant gave no explanation of having chosen to
         pay court to a woman who was nine years younger than him.

      v) No friends attended the hearing

     vi) whilst they had been living together for 18 months, because Miss  F
         was only just over 18 at  the  date  when  she  and  the  appellant
         married and is now only just over 19, he placed "very less  weight"
         on their cohabitation than he would have done in a case of an older
         and more experienced young woman. The judge stated that "over  such
         a period, it is to be expected that, at least in  the  case  of  an
         older and more experienced young woman, if the position  were  that
         the predominant purpose of her husband in marrying her had been  to
         secure the right to remain in working  United  Kingdom,  she  would
         have observed signs in the husband's  behaviour  to  indicate  that
         that was or might be the case.  But  as  Miss  F  is  comparatively
         young, only 19 years and three months old, it cannot so readily  be
         expected that she would have observed or recognise any  such  signs
         in the appellant or, if she'd observed and/or recognise them,  have
         repudiated the  marriage  (if  she  had  observed  them  after  the
         marriage), or the relationship (if she had observed them before the
         marriage)."

25. The FtTJ therefore concluded that  he  was  satisfied  the  appellant's
    predominant purpose in marrying Miss F was  to  procure  the  right  to
    remain in working United Kingdom and therefore the marriage is properly
    categorised as a "marriage of convenience". He therefore dismissed  the
    appeal.

26. The appellant sought permission to appeal. Permission  was  granted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes) on the 23rd April 2019.

27. At the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Georget,  who  did  not
    appear before the FtT appeared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer appeared on behalf of the
    respondent.

28. I am grateful for the submissions heard from Mr Georget and  Mr  Clarke
    on the issues that arise in the  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. I confirm  that  I  have  considered  those  submissions  in
    accordance with the skeleton argument produced and  the  grounds  which
    had been filed before the Upper Tribunal. I further confirm that I have
    given full consideration to those submissions which I have heard, and I
    intend to incorporate those submissions into my analysis of the grounds
    relied upon by the appellant.

Decision on the error of law:

29. The principal issue before the judge was whether the  appellant  was  a
    "spouse" for the purposes of the EEA  Regulations  2016  and  so  could
    establish a right of residence as a family member of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights by virtue of Reg 18(1).

30. As a practical matter, that turned upon whether  the  respondent  could
    establish that the appellant's marriage was a "marriage of convenience"
    (see Sadovska and Another v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54 at [28]).

31. Although the 2016 Regulations define a marriage of convenience this was
    not the position  under  the  2006  Regulations.  The  definition  was,
    however, considered in cases such as Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage
    of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC)  (Blake  J)  in  which  the
    Tribunal held that "Although neither the Directive nor the  Regulations
    define it, as a matter of ordinary parlance and the past experience  of
    the UK's Immigration Rules and case law, a marriage of  convenience  in
    this context is a marriage contracted for the sole or decisive  purpose
    of gaining admission  to  the  host  state.  A  durable  marriage  with
    children  and  co-habitation  is  quite  inconsistent   with   such   a
    definition".

32. I have considered  the  submission  made  in  the  written  grounds  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 and relied upon in the oral  submissions  made  that
    the FtTJ erred in its  application  of  the  burden  of  proof  to  the
    evidence.

33. Mr Georget submits that the FtTJ did set out the applicable law but  on
    the evidence before the Tribunal and the findings made,  he  could  not
    have found that the evidential burden was met for a case to be answered
    on behalf of  the  appellant.  This  was  because  nearly  all  of  the
    criticisms relied upon by the Secretary of State were rejected  by  the
    judge. At paragraph 24 (a) and (b) the judge recorded that at the  date
    he met Miss F and at the date that they had married, the appellant  was
    an age when he reasonably could be expected of thinking of marriage and
    that there was nothing "inherently improbable in the  proposition  that
    the appellant would have wished to marry her and that  he  should  have
    married her out of genuine love and affection." It  is  submitted  that
    the judge had to apply the burden of proof and had to see  whether  the
    evidential burden had been discharged by the Secretary of  State  based
    on  the  respondent's  case.  This  required  a  consideration  of  the
    appellant's answers and explanation (and that of his partner)  as  part
    of the balance of probabilities. He submitted that whilst  the  Supreme
    Court did not breakdown the  burden  of  proof  in  this  way,  it  was
    consistent with the decision in Agho and it is  consistent  with  fraud
    type cases. However, the judge did not apply this in the light  of  the
    findings made. At paragraph 23, the  judge  relied  upon  his  previous
    immigration history. However paragraph 23 (c)  was  not  based  on  any
    evidence. At paragraph 24, the judge  went  through  the  discrepancies
    relied upon by the respondent but rejected them for the  reasons  given
    at  paragraph  24  (c)  (1-5).  Consequently  the  respondent  had  not
    discharged the "reasonable inference" as required.

34. Mr Clarke submits that the FtTJ correctly directed himself  in  law  at
    paragraph 12 where he set out the relevant decisions in Papajorgi, Agho
      and Rosa.  He reminded himself that the burden was on  the  Secretary
    of State  to  establish  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  "an
    otherwise valid marriage is a  marriage  of  convenience".  He  further
    submitted that the judge also recognised that the  Secretary  of  State
    could not discharge the burden  by  demonstrating  only  a  "reasonable
    suspicion". Therefore, it could not be established that  he  misapplied
    or misstated the legal test. He further submitted that in light of  the
    findings of fact, he was entitled to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    evidential burden had been established.

35. It is in this context that it is submitted that as the  judge  rejected
    the respondent's criticisms of the marriage interview, and as there was
    no other evidence relied upon to demonstrate that this was a  "marriage
    of convenience  "it  was  not  open  to  the  FtTJ  to  find  that  the
    "evidential burden" on the respondent had been  met,  if  that  is  the
    correct approach to the burden of proof.

36. I have considered the parties respective submissions in  the  light  of
    the relevant case law. In relation to the burden standard of proof,  in
    Rosa it was held that the legal burden was on the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department to prove that an otherwise valid marriage was a
    marriage of convenience so as to justify the  refusal  of  a  residence
    card under the EEA Regulations. The legal burden of proof  in  relation
    to marriage lay on the Secretary of State, but if she adduced  evidence
    capable of pointing to the conclusion that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience, the evidential burden shifted to the applicant (paras 24 -
    27).

37. In Agho v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    1198 it was held that where an applicant sought an EEA  residence  card
    on the basis that he was married to an EEA national, he simply  had  to
    produce his marriage certificate and his spouse's passport. As a matter
    of principle, a spouse established a prima facie case that he  was  the
    family member of an EEA national by providing the marriage  certificate
    and his sponsor's passport. The legal burden was on  the  Secretary  of
    State to  show  that  any  marriage  thus  proved  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience and that  burden  was  not  discharged  merely  by  showing
    'reasonable suspicion'.  The  evidential  burden  might  shift  to  the
    applicant by proof of facts  that  justified  the  inference  that  the
    marriage was not genuine.  The  facts  giving  rise  to  the  inference
    included a failure to answer a request for  documentary  proof  of  the
    genuineness of the  marriage  where  grounds  for  suspicion  had  been
    raised: Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  [2012]  UKUT
    38 (IAC) considered (para 13).

38. That the burden of proof is on the respondent is now put  beyond  doubt
    by Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54 .

39. I would accept that the FtTJ did direct himself to the appropriate case
    law and as Mr Georget  submitted,  he  did  not  mis-  state  the  law.
    However, the issue arises as to whether the evidence relied upon by the
    respondent and the assessment of that evidence then shifted the  burden
    to the applicant in the light of the assessment made  of  the  parties'
    respective interviews.

40. The respondent applied the wrong test in the decision letter of 5  July
    2018 stating that there were "reasonable grounds to  suspect  "for  the
    sole purpose  of  enabling  the  appellant  to  obtain  an  immigration
    advantage. The judge appropriately recognised that in his  footnote  at
    page 6. However, the content of the decision letter in support of  this
    claim relied upon the discrepancies between what the appellant and Miss
    F said  in  the  course  of  their  respective  interviews.  They  were
    summarised by the FtTJ as relating to Miss F's recent medical problems,
    her education, his arrival in  the  UK,  his  proposal  to  marry,  the
    wedding, and her employment.

41. It is plain from considering the findings of fact made by the FtTJ  and
    set out at paragraph 24 (c ) that the apparent discrepancies and  other
    matters relied upon by the Secretary of State were not found to  be  of
    substantial weight and did not (for the  most  part)  cast  substantial
    doubt on the proposition that he married her out of  genuine  love  and
    affection. The judge set out his reasoning at paragraph 24 (c  )  (1-5)
    and made reference to her medical problems, her the issue  relating  to
    the significance of his knowledge of her education, the discrepancy  of
    where they were when they propose to marry and the dates upon which the
    marriage took place.  The  judge  also  did  not  accept  the  asserted
    discrepancies relating to her employment (see subparagraph  five).  The
    judge also made a similar finding in relation to Miss F at paragraph 22
    ( (d) in which he stated "the apparent discrepancies between what Mr  A
    and Miss F recorded as having stated at interview and the points  which
    the Secretary  of State  raised in relation to  those  matters  do  not
    impinge significantly on Miss F's credibility or suggest any reason why
    she should have married Mr A for any reason other than out  of  genuine
    love and affection. "

42. Mr Clarke submits that whilst it is right that the judge did not accept
    all of the matters referred to in the decision letter,  the  judge  did
    make some adverse findings; that he had failed to tell Miss  F  of  the
    circumstances in which it came to the United Kingdom and that  is  lack
    of interest in her medical condition was relied upon  (  see  paragraph
    24; page 19 of the decision).

43. I prefer the submission made by Mr Georget. Given the rejection of  the
    respondent's case in substance, and when seen in the light of the other
    evidence that the judge placed weight upon, which included the evidence
    of Miss F which he accepted (paragraph 21), the photographs which  were
    consistent with her having a loving relationship with him, the duration
    of the parties cohabitation and the birth of their child, it could  not
    be reasonably said that the respondent had  discharged  the  evidential
    burden. The appellant had given a reason why he had failed to tell  her
    of the circumstances which he came to the United Kingdom which was that
    he feared that such a disclosure would disturb their relationship  (see
    paragraph 16 (c). Even if the appellant was "less than frank" as stated
    by the FtTJ, it is difficult to see how that evidence when set  against
    the other evidence identified above, demonstrates that this  gave  rise
    to the view that this was a "marriage of convenience".

44. I am therefore satisfied that the grounds are made out in that respect.
    However, if I am wrong in that analysis I have  gone  on  consider  the
    principal submission set  out  at  paragraph  2  (b)  of  the  skeleton
    argument produced on behalf of the  appellant,  which  relates  to  the
    consideration of whether there had been a "deceit "on the part  of  the
    appellant, in the context of whether the legal burden was discharged to
    demonstrate that this was properly  characterised  as  a  "marriage  of
    convenience."

45. I have therefore carefully considered the competing submissions of  the
    advocates. Mr Georget directed the Tribunal's attention to paragraph 29
    of the decision in Sadovska where  it  was  stated  that  "furthermore,
    except in cases of deceit by  a  non-EU  national,  this  must  be  the
    purpose of them both. Clearly, a non-EU national may be guilty of abuse
    when the EU national is not, because she believes that it is a  genuine
    relationship."  He submitted that this was the heart of the  issue  and
    that the purpose  (whether  sole  or  predominant)  must  be  a  shared
    intention except in  cases  of  deceit  and  that  this  introduces  an
    additional test. He submitted that there was no guidance  or  case  law
    concerning what would constitute a deceit,  but  when  considering  the
    handbook at page 12 and in particular the footnote, and a "marriage  by
    deception" this would normally involve a false representation or in the
    marriage context potentially to the issue of consent  or  lack  of  it.
    When applied to  the  FtTJ's  reasoning,  the  judge  was  required  to
    establish not only that his sole (or predominant) purpose  in  marrying
    was to secure an immigration advantage but that he  did  not  have  any
    genuine belief that there would be such a marriage and  that  he  would
    have to deceive his unknowing spouse. Here, the findings were  specific
    that Miss F married him out of genuine  love  and  affection  and  that
    there was no evidence of any deceit practised  upon  the  EU  national.
    Furthermore, on the findings made, the judge also accepted that he  had
    genuine love and affection for Miss F.

46. In his oral submissions, Mr Georget submitted that the relevant events,
    including those which take place after the marriage can throw light  on
    the predominant purpose test and that when  considering  whether  there
    has been a deceit practised, those other events take on  an  additional
    importance. When applied to the factual circumstances of the  appellant
    and Miss F, the judge accepted a lengthy  period  of  residence  of  18
    months and that they had a child together  in  2019.  Therefore,  those
    factors are relevant to the issue  of  deceit.  He  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 14 of the FtTJ's decision, he quoted paragraph 29 of Sadovska
    but failed to apply the exception in cases of deceit and that this  was
    therefore an error in law.

47. When looking at the decision, he submitted that  at  paragraph  24  the
    FtTJ made reference to the appellant's omission to tell Miss F  of  the
    circumstances in which he came to the United Kingdom  or  that  he  put
    forward a false claim to asylum. However, if this was the  deceit,  the
    details of a previous asylum claim could not  evidence  the  deceit  or
    have any effect upon Miss F, nor had it been  explained  how  that  had
    operated.

48. Mr Clarke referred the Tribunal to paragraph 29 of Sadovska,  and  that
    the Supreme Court had made reference to the 2014 Handbook suggesting  a
    more flexible approach. He further submitted that  where  it  was  said
    that the purpose must be the "purpose of them both" that did not  apply
    in cases of deceit by the non-EU national. In this context he  referred
    to "deceit" as defined as an abuse of EU rights. He submitted that  the
    FtTJ set out a sustainable consideration of the minds of  each  of  the
    parties and made findings consistent with the appellant's intent at the
    date of the marriage which was to obtain an immigration  advantage  and
    that this was an abuse of EU rights.

49. He made reference to paragraph 22 of the FtTJ  decision  where  he  had
    found that Miss F had married the appellant "out of  genuine  love  and
    affection". However, the FtTJ's findings at paragraph 23 made it  plain
    that the position  in  respect  of  the  appellant  was  "substantially
    different". Mr Clarke therefore submitted that  the  relevant  "deceit"
    was that referred to at the subparagraphs (a) - (c)- that he  had  made
    false asylum claim, he did not wish to return to Egypt and therefore he
    could only do so by otherwise marrying a younger woman who was  an  EEA
    national. Furthermore at (e) the judge set out how  they  had  met  but
    that the appellant did not tell her that he had made a false claim.  Mr
    Clarke therefore submitted that this was the deceit and that the  judge
    had found at the time they had met she  was  vulnerable  and  that  the
    inference drawn from those findings is that the  appellant  capitalised
    on this and hoodwinked her into  marriage.  Therefore  his  predominant
    purpose was to procure the right to remain and in light of  the  FtTJ's
    assessment, it could be characterised as a finding of deceit.

50. The 2016 Regulations (reg 2) now  define  a  marriage  of  convenience:
    "marriage of convenience" includes a  marriage  entered  into  for  the
    purpose of using these Regulations, or any other right conferred by the
    EU treaties, as a means to circumvent - (a) immigration rules  applying
    to non-EEA nationals (such as any applicable requirement under the 1971
    Act to have leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or (b) any
    other criteria that the party to  the  marriage  of  convenience  would
    otherwise have to meet in order to enjoy a right to reside under  these
    Regulations or the EU treaties."

51. In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 it was held that the focus in relation to  a
    marriage of convenience ought to be on the intention of the parties  at
    the time the marriage was entered into, whereas the question of whether
    a marriage was subsisting looked to whether  the  marital  relationship
    was a continuing one. However,  evidence  concerning  the  relationship
    might cast light on the intention of the parties at  the  time  of  the
    marriage.

52. The FtTJ set out his analysis of the law at paragraphs 12 - 15  stating
    as follows:

         "12.  Consistently  with  the  decisions  (made  under   the   2006
         Regulations) of the Upper Tribunal  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
         marriage of convenience) Greece [2012) UK  you  38  (IAC)  and  the
         Court of Appeal in Agho v Secretary of State [2015) EWCA  Civ  1198
         and Rosa v Secretary of State [2016) EWCA Civ 14,  it  is  for  the
         Secretary of State to establish, on the balance  of  probabilities,
         that "an otherwise valid marriage is a  marriage  of  convenience."
         The secretary of state does not  discharge  the  burden  simply  by
         demonstrating "reasonable suspicion". But the  "evidential  burden"
         may shift to an appellant (see Agho at paragraph 13)

             "by proof of the facts  [by  the  Secretary  of  State]  which
             justify the inference that the marriage is not genuine."

         The focus of attention, in relation to a marriage  of  convenience,
         should [see Rosa at paragraph 41] be

             "on the intent of the parties at the  time  the  marriage  was
             entered into"

         rather than whether, at the time of the hearing,  the  marriage  is
         "subsisting" albeit that evidence concerning the relationship might
         cast light on the intention of the  parties  at  the  time  of  the
         marriage. The ultimate question is therefore (see paragraph  39  of
         the determination in Papajorgi)

             "in the light of the totality of the information before me, am
             I satisfied that it is  more  probable  than  not  this  is  a
             marriage of convenience?"

         In the light of the subsequent decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
         Rosa, the word "was"  shall  be  substituted  for  the  word  "is",
         immediately before the words "a marriage of convenience."

         13.  At paragraph 30 of the determination in Papajorgi,  an  appeal
         against refusal to grant a family  permit  (permitting  entry,  the
         Upper Tribunal wrote (paragraph 30) as follows:

             "Although neither the directive nor the Regulations define it,
             ... A marriage of convenience and his context  is  a  marriage
             contracted for  the  sole  or  decisive  purpose  of  granting
             admission to the host state. Durable marriage of children  and
             cohabitation is quite inconsistent with such a definition".

         In the light of the guidance given by the Court of Appeal  in  Rosa
         (above), namely that the focus of the attention should  be  on  the
         intention of the parties at the time the marriage was entered into,
         the second sentence of  the  above  guidance  given  in  the  above
         extract from the determination in Papajorgi must  be  treated  with
         caution."

53. In a footnote, the FtTJ added the following:

         "" sole or decisive" is no longer, see  below,  paragraph  14,  the
         correct test. From which it follows that the next sentence  in  the
         above extract is not,  with  the  greatest  of  respect  the  Upper
         Tribunal, accurate.  Nor  was  what  was  stated  in  the  sentence
         necessary for the Upper Tribunal decision. It does not form part of
         the ratio decidendi".

54. At paragraph 14 of  the  decision,  the  FtTJ  made  reference  to  the
    decision in Papajorgi but set out that the Upper Tribunal did not state
    whether both the parties to the marriage must have the sole or decisive
    purpose of either granting admission to the host state or enabling  the
    non-EEA national spouse to remain (if the marriage is  to  fall  within
    the category of "marriage of convenience") or whether it was sufficient
    if that purpose is only that of the non-EEA national.

55. The FtTJ considered that the answer  to  that  question  was  that  the
    purpose is only that of  the  non-EEA  national.  In  support  of  that
    conclusion, he  made  reference  to  an  example  of  where  a  non-EEA
    national, a "rogue", who deceives an EEA national as to his  intentions
    towards her and thereby fraudulently induces  her  to  marry  him,  his
    purpose being to procure entry or to enable him to remain. The  example
    went on further to assume that the EEA  national  is  deceived  by  the
    rogue and marries him having genuine feelings  towards  and  having  no
    idea of his two reasons or his "roguery". The judge concluded  that  if
    that scenario was not treated as a marriage of convenience, because the
    EEA national's intentions were genuine, it would  enable  a  "rogue  to
    profit from his roguery." The FtTJ went on to state that "the rogue  in
    the example I have  given  has  plainly  committed  fraud  on  the  EEA
    national." The judgement on to state that the conclusion  that  he  had
    reached was in accordance with the guidance given by the Supreme  Court
    in Sadovska at paragraph 29. He concluded that "the  crucial  question,
    consistently  with  the  analysis  of  the  Supreme  Court  is  whether
    obtaining the "immigration benefit" was the predominant purpose of  the
    marriage. And the burden  of  establishing  that  (on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, is with the Secretary of State."

56. There is no dispute on the FtTJ's analysis that he was  satisfied  that
    the appellant's wife had married him out of genuine love and affection,
    notwithstanding the judge's subsequent view of  her  age.  However,  he
    found that the appellant had married his wife to enable him  to  remain
    in the UK and to be able to work. We therefore found one party to be  a
    party to a marriage of convenience but not the  other.  As  Mr  Georget
    submits, it is an unusual scenario in practice. In  a  vast  number  of
    cases it can properly be said that it is the common purpose between the
    two parties contracting the marriage. Furthermore, in a case of  duress
    or exploitation both parties are still clearly aware that it is  not  a
    genuine marriage. However, as I have stated  in  this  case  the  judge
    found the  appellant's  wife  married  him  out  of  genuine  love  and
    affection and conversely that there was nothing  improbable  about  the
    appellant should have married her out of  genuine  love  and  affection
    (see paragraph 24(a) -(c)).

57. Mr Georget on behalf of the appellant accepts that it is not  a  strict
    necessity in law that both parties have a common  purpose  and  further
    agrees with Mr Clarke on behalf of the respondent, that as a matter  of
    principle, it is sufficient if that purpose is only that of the non-EEA
    national. I would respectfully agree with that  approach  and  that  is
    consistent with the decision of Sadovska.

58. However, I am satisfied that the judge misdirected himself in  law  and
    in his analysis of the issue at paragraph 14. In the  context  of  this
    particular factual matrix, it is not solely a question of what the sole
    or predominant purpose was but whether there had  been  a  deceit,  and
    this is plain from paragraph 29 of the decision in Sadovska and another
    (Appellants) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Respondent)
    (Scotland) [2017] UKSC 54 which set out as follows:

         29.  For this purpose, "marriage of convenience" is a term of  art.
         Although it is defined in the Directive and the 2009  Communication
         as a marriage the sole purpose of which is to gain rights of  entry
         to and residence in the European Union, the 2014 Handbook  suggests
         a more flexible approach, in which this  must  be  the  predominant
         purpose. It is not enough that the marriage  may  bring  incidental
         immigration and other benefits  if  this  is  not  its  predominant
         purpose. Furthermore, except in  cases  of  deceit  by  the  non-EU
         national, this must be the purpose of them both. Clearly, a  non-EU
         national may be guilty of  abuse  when  the  EU  national  is  not,
         because she believes that it is a genuine relationship."

59. I have not been directed to any authority or case report in  which  the
    issue of what constitutes a  "deceit"  in  the  context  of  the  above
    paragraph. Mr Georget has directed my attention to the  handbook  where
    reference is made to a specific category which it labels a "marriage by
    deception".

60. At p.12 the handbook continues: -

         Marriages of convenience

         Marriages of convenience can be  subdivided  into  several  groups,
         depending on the mode in which they have  been  set  up.  The  list
         below should not be considered to be exhaustive.

         "Standard" marriage of convenience

         Probably the most common modus operandi  related  to  marriages  of
         convenience  is  a  marriage  where  both   spouses   are   willing
         accomplices,  freely  consenting  to  enter  into  a   relationship
         designed to abuse EU law. By no means is this the exclusive way  in
         which a marriage of convenience can be contracted.  The  degree  to
         which the EU citizens freely consent to enter into  a  marriage  of
         convenience can significantly differ.

         Marriage by deception

         A marriage by deception arises when the EU spouse  is  deceived  by
         the non-EU spouse to genuinely believe that the couple will lead  a
         genuine and lasting marital life such marriage  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience and should be tackled accordingly, with due  regard  to
         the innocence of the EU spouse. In such marriages, the  EU  citizen
         is not a willing accomplice, but  a  victim  guilty  only  of  good
         faith, such marriages typically,  but  not  necessarily,  follow  a
         short relationship on the Internet, or after the EU citizen has met
         the non-EU spouse in  a  foreign  country  on  holidays.  They  may
         involve violence and threatening behaviour, particularly if the  EU
         spouse has started to have concerns and is unwilling to participate
         in the immigration process."

61. As set out above, what  is  described  as  the  "standard  marriage  of
    convenience" is the type which commonly appears  before  the  Tribunal.
    This case falls outside that.

62. Having considered the meaning of the word "deceit" and in  the  context
    of the handbook as set out above, in the  context  of  a  marriage  the
    issue of such a "deceit" is relevant to the issue of consent,  or  lack
    of consent. I agree with the submission made by Mr Georget that in such
    a case something more is required if such a deceit is to be relied upon
    to demonstrate that this a "marriage of convenience".  When applied  to
    the instant appeal, whilst the FtTJ cites paragraph 29 of Sadovska,  he
    makes no reference to the issue of deceit and it is on that basis  that
    I am satisfied that the analysis of the FtTJ discloses  a  misdirection
    in law.

63. Furthermore, whilst he considered that the predominant purpose  was  to
    secure an immigration advantage by the  appellant  and  that  this  was
    sufficient to satisfy the definition of a "marriage of convenience"  he
    did not point to any deceit  upon  the  appellant's  wife.  To  put  it
    another  way,  it  was  necessary  to  establish  not  only  that   the
    appellant's sole (or predominant) purpose in marrying was to secure  an
    immigration  advantage  (which  the  judge  found  to  be  a  right  of
    residence/work) but also that he did not have any genuine  belief  that
    it would be a genuine and lasting marital life. The judge would have to
    have found that the appellant  would  have  deceived  his  spouse  into
    thinking that he shared her belief  that  they  were  entering  into  a
    genuine relationship when he had no such belief.

64. This was not met on the facts of this case. That is because  the  judge
    clearly  found  that  there  was  an  element  of  genuineness  in  his
    intentions towards Miss F. The judge expressly found at the  date  that
    he met Miss F in March 2017 and the date of the marriage  in  2018,  he
    was of an age when he could be expected to be thinking of marriage.  He
    set out that "Miss F was an attractive young woman  nothing  inherently
    improbable in the proposition that the appellant should wish  to  marry
    her and that he would have married out of genuine love and  affection".
    As to the  apparent  discrepancies  from  their  interviews  and  other
    matters relied on by the Secretary of State, the FtTJ did not find them
    to be  in the main of any substantial weight and did not (for the  most
    part) to cast substantial doubt on the proposition that he married Miss
    F out of genuine love and affection.  The FtTJ expressly found that the
    failure to mention her medical problems was not made out;  he  was  not
    satisfied that  there  was  any  significance  in  the  fact  that  the
    appellant did not know whether she been attending high  school  college
    or whether she  wore  uniform.  He  did  not  find  that  there  was  a
    discrepancy as to where the parties were when the proposal to marry was
    put forward nor did he accept the apparent discrepancy over  the  dates
    given by the appellant and Miss F. The judge also rejected the apparent
    discrepancies relating to Miss F's employment.

65. Whilst Mr Clarke submitted that  the  FtTJ  made  a  finding  that  the
    appellant's omission to tell Miss F of the circumstances  in  which  he
    came to the United Kingdom was "in a different category and shows  that
    he was less than frank" and that his failure to mention that  she  used
    an inhaler and was taking vitamin supplements showed a lack of interest
    in her condition, this does not in my judgment cancel out or  undermine
    the earlier substantial findings in which the FtTJ  accepted  Miss  F's
    evidence and where he rejected the main  evidential  assertions  relied
    upon by the respondent or the favourable points made in the appellant's
    favour.

66. Looking at the decision of the FtTJ,  there  is  no  reference  or  any
    proper evidential basis to conclude that  there  had  been  any  deceit
    practised. I cannot accept the submission made by Mr  Clarke  that  the
    deceit practised was that he failed to tell her of the circumstances in
    which he came to the United Kingdom, that the judge had found Miss F to
    be vulnerable and that the inference raised is that the  appellant  had
    hoodwinked Miss F into marrying him. I can see no evidential basis  for
    that inference and at no point can it be said that  Miss  F's  evidence
    was to that effect.

67. I also accept the submission made by Mr Georget that in considering the
    issue, other considerations and factors which emerge after the date  of
    the marriage are equally relevant. At paragraph 27 (e) the judge  makes
    reference to the length of cohabitation between the parties but that in
    view of her age (just over 19 years) he placed "very significantly less
    weight" on their cohabitation for 18 months than he would have done "in
    the case of an older and more experienced young woman".  His  reasoning
    is that over such a period in the  case  of  an  older  woman,  if  the
    position was that the predominant purpose of a husband in marrying  her
    was to secure the right to remain, such  an  older  person  would  have
    observed signs in his behaviour but as Miss F was comparatively  young,
    it could not so readily be expected that she  would  have  observed  or
    recognised such signs. That seems to be the only reference made but  it
    is in an entirely different context. In any  event,  it  has  not  been
    demonstrated that such a conclusion or analysis was  supported  by  any
    evidential foundation other than a generalisation.

68. In Sadovska v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 54
    it was found that the objective  to  obtain  the  right  of  entry  and
    residence must be the predominant purpose for the marriage to be one of
    convenience and a marriage could not be considered to be a marriage  of
    convenience simply because it brought an immigration advantage. "Should
    the Tribunal conclude that  Mr  Malik  was  delighted  to  find  an  EU
    national with whom he could form a relationship and who was willing  to
    marry him, that does not necessarily mean that  their  marriage  was  a
    "marriage of convenience" still less that Ms Sadovska was  abusing  her
    rights in entering into it".

69. That seems to me to apply equally to the present facts of this appeal.

70. As the Supreme Court acknowledged in Sadovska, that requires proof that
    both parties contracted the marriage with the  predominant  purpose  to
    gain rights of entry to and residence in the European Union (see [29]).



71. I am also satisfied that there is a further misdirection in law as  set
    out at paragraph  6  of  the  written  grounds.   The  judge  correctly
    directed himself to the issue relating  to  the  "contracting"  of  the
    marriage, rather than with  its  continued  "subsistence".  The  focus,
    therefore, in time is upon the parties' motivation  when  they  entered
    into the marriage. However, evidence relating to  the  genuineness  and
    subsistence of the marriage subsequently may reflect  back  upon  their
    motivations when they married. But it is always the latter which is the
    issue when the respondent alleges that the marriage is a  "marriage  of
    convenience".

72. In reaching a finding on that issue, bearing in mind that the burden of
    proof is upon the respondent,  a  judge  must  take  into  account  all
    relevant evidence which may include evidence concerning the genuineness
    and subsistence of the marriage over time.

73. Whilst the FtTJ made reference to paragraph 28 of Sadovska, the FtT did
    not attribute any weight to the evidence  concerning  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his wife after the marriage itself,  although
    that was capable of casting light on their intention  at  the  time  of
    marriage. That evidence included the birth of their child  in  February
    2019 and that  they  had  continued  to  reside  together  since  their
    marriage in February 2018, a period of 18 months. The analysis  of  the
    judge at paragraph 27( e) where he sought to attribute little weight to
    her length of cohabitation on the basis of her age( just over 19 years)
    as compared with an older woman who would have observed  or  recognised
    any adverse signs, has no evidential basis for the reasons I  have  set
    out earlier. There was no evidence before  the  FtTJ  to  support  that
    finding by reference to her level of maturity or otherwise and  can  be
    properly considered to be a generalisation.

74. As to the birth of their child, the FtTJ did not  find  this  to  be  a
    substantial factor pointing against the marriage  having  been  one  of
    convenience because at the date of the marriage the child had not  been
    born. This was because the FtTJ considered that the focus of  attention
    was on the intention of the  parties  at  the  time  the  marriage  was
    entered into rather than whether, the time of the hearing, the marriage
    is subsisting  (see  paragraph  23(f)  (2)).  Whilst  at  (3)  he  made
    reference to evidence concerning the relationship after the date of the
    marriage may cast light on intention, it is plain that he rejected  the
    evidence of the child's birth because he stated that  Miss F wanted  to
    have a child at the earliest  possible  date  and  if  the  appellant's
    "predominant purpose" was to procure the right to remain he could  only
    achieve this by ensuring that the relationship was maintained and  that
    they should have a child at the earliest possible date. I  can  see  no
    evidential foundation for that latter finding  either.  I  can  see  no
    evidence to support such a finding that it was at his  insistence  that
    they should have a child at the earliest possible date  to  secure  his
    right to remain.

75. A further point was raised on behalf of the  appellant  which  was  the
    interpretation of the "sole purpose "test. Given  my  analysis  of  the
    other two points raised on behalf of the appellant, it is not necessary
    to reach any view on that particular ground  as  I  am  satisfied  that
    those errors go to the heart of the decision under challenge whether it
    is the " sole purpose" or the predominant purpose".

76. For those reasons I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of
    the appellant are made out  and  that  the  decision  demonstrates  the
    making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision.

77. As to the remaking of the decision,  in  the  light  of  the  preceding
    analysis, when the evidence is considered as a whole, the legal  burden
    upon the respondent does not establish  that  this  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience. The FtTJ was satisfied that  Miss  F  had  given  credible
    evidence had married the appellant out of genuine  love  and  affection
    for the reasons that he  set  out  at  paragraphs  21  and  22  of  his
    decision. The FtTJ also did not find that it was inherently  improbable
    that the appellant should wish to  have  married  her  and  would  have
    married out of genuine love and affection (paragraph 24 (a)  -(c).  The
    discrepancies in the marriage interviews,  which  forms  the  principal
    evidence on behalf of the respondent to demonstrate  that  this  was  a
    "marriage of convenience" were not found to be of "substantial weight".
    The judge's finding that those discrepancies did not cast  "substantial
    doubt on the proposition that  he  married  out  of  genuine  love  and
    affection" (see paragraphs 24 (a)-(c)). There is  no  evidential  basis
    that any omission to tell Miss F that he had made a false asylum  claim
    cast doubt on his reasons for marrying Miss F  and  it  does  not  been
    established either that that failure or lack of frankness was  such  to
    constitute any form of deceit upon Miss F. The focus  must  be  on  the
    intention of the parties that the  time  the  marriages  entered  into,
    evidence concerning the relationship is capable of casting light on the
    intention of the parties at the time of the marriage. It  is  therefore
    important to consider the  totality  of  the  information.  This  would
    include the lengthy period of cohabitation that has accrued between the
    parties since the date of their marriage and the appeal both before the
    FtTJ and this  Tribunal  and  that  the  parties  have  a  young  child
    together. There is no evidence to support any view that the appellant's
    sole purpose or predominant purpose was to procure the right to  remain
    by ensuring that he maintained the relationship to  require  that  they
    had a child at the earliest possible date. A more reasonable  inference
    raised from the birth of their child their  continued  cohabitation  is
    that this is not a marriage of convenience.

78. It is not for the appellant to establish that the  relationship  was  a
    genuine and lasting one but for the respondent to establish that it was
    indeed a marriage of convenience. As the  legal  burden  has  not  been
    discharged in this  respect,  the  appellant  has  established  on  the
    balance of probabilities that he is Miss F's  spouse,  who  is  an  EEA
    national and therefore his appeal succeeds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision  is  set  aside,  and  decision  is  remade  as
follows: the appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds  Date: 17/7/19

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
