
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04398/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2018                   |On 14 November 2018                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               Osman Bash Taqi
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     In person
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse him a residence card as the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
   exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

2. This appeal was unfortunately caught up among those  to  which  the  now-
   discredited Sala decision applied.  The effect of that decision was  that
   (until it was overturned) extended family members had no right of  appeal
   and were obliged to challenge refusal of a  residence  card  by  judicial
   review.

Background

3. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone and is the  unmarried  partner
   of an Italian national, with whom he has been  living  since  1998.  They
   have three children together.

4. The only issue in this appeal is the appellant's inability to  produce  a
   valid national passport to support his EEA Regulations application.   The
   appellant cannot do so.  His previous Sierra Leonean passport has expired
   and is in the possession of the Home Office.

5. The appellant has tried to obtain a new passport from the Sierra  Leonean
   Embassy and sought to rely on the copy passport held by the Home  Office.
   He has not provided alternative evidence of nationality.  The  respondent
   was able to obtain an ETD for the appellant in 2010.

6. The respondent's case is  that  the  appellant  still  has  no  right  of
   appeal, as he cannot meet the requirements of Regulation  26(2A)  of  the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, which  require  an
   extended  family  member  applicant  to  produce  a  passport  with   the
   application for leave to remain on the basis of  a  durable  relationship
   with an EEA national.

First-tier Tribunal decision

7. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's  appeal,  finding  that
   he could not meet the requirements  of  Regulation  26(2A)  of  the  2006
   Regulations, because he cannot produce a passport.

8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal. The appellant's grounds  of
   appeal were settled by the Joint Council for the Welfare  of  Immigrants,
   but they ceased to act for him with  effect  from  1  November  2018  and
   confirmed the termination of their retainer in  a  letter  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  First-tier  Judge
   had arguably erred in her interpretation of  Regulation  26  of  the  EEA
   Regulations, which regulates whether there is a right of  appeal  to  the
   Immigration Tribunals against a decision to refuse a residence card.

Rule 24 Reply

10. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf of the respondent.

11. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

12. The appellant explained at the hearing  that  he  was  still  unable  to
   obtain a Sierra Leonean passport. He  had  been  liaising  with  passport
   control in the United Kingdom, but the difficulty was that there had been
   a change of government in Sierra Leone and that all  consular  staff  had
   been dismissed by  the  new  government,  following  the  discovery  that
   800,000 genuine blank passports had been stolen.

13. Mr Lindsay provided the appellant with a document from the  Home  Office
   explaining how to get back his expired passport to improve his chances of
   replacing it with a valid current passport.

Analysis

14. The appellant still does not have a right of appeal,  despite  the  Sala
   correction. Regulation 26(2A) is in very plain terms:

         "26. ...(2A)  If a person claims to be in  a  durable  relationship
         with an EEA national he may  not  appeal  under  these  Regulations
         unless he produces-
         (a)  a passport; and
         (b)  either-
             (i) an EEA family permit; or
             (ii) sufficient evidence to satisfy  the  Secretary  of  State
             that he is in a relationship with that EEA national."

15. The appellant has not been able  to  produce  a  passport,  although  it
   seems he  has  satisfied  the  Secretary  of  State  that   he  is  in  a
   relationship with the EEA national.   Given the  vast  number  of  stolen
   passports, the respondent  has  not  accepted  the  expired  passport  as
   evidence of present Sierra Leonean nationality.

16. The respondent has made no removal  directions  in  this  case  and  the
   appellant is not currently required to leave the United Kingdom.

17.  The  Upper  Tribunal  is  a  statutory  Tribunal  and  where  the  2006
   Regulations state that there is no right of appeal, it is not open to the
   Tribunal to go behind that provision and create a  right  of  appeal.   I
   have considered with care the arguments advanced in the grounds of appeal
   but I do not consider that they confer on the Tribunal any such power.

18. It remains open to the appellant to make  a  further  application,  with
   that passport once returned, or to challenge the respondent's refusal  in
   judicial review (albeit significantly out of time).

19. In the meantime, applying  Regulation  26(2A),  there  is  no  right  of
   appeal before the First-tier Tribunal or this Tribunal and the appeal  is
   dismissed.

DECISION

20. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         6 November 2018                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson
