
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04716/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th January 2019                          |On 06 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                         rashmiben pankajbhai desai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Symes, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Monson) who, in a determination  promulgated
    on 7th June 2018 dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  decision
    of the Respondent to refuse her application for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of her right to reside in the United Kingdom as  a  family
    member of  a  British  Citizen  pursuant  to  Regulation  9  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("hereinafter
    referred to as the 2016 Regulations").

 2. The history of the application is set out in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.   The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  India.  Her  son,
    (hereinafter referred to as "sponsor") arrived in the UK to settle with
    his British citizen spouse in June 2008. In 2012  he  obtained  British
    citizenship.

 3.  In June 2011 the Appellant applied for entry clearance  as  a  visitor
    and was granted a multi-entry visit Visa valid for  a  period  of  five
    years. The purpose of the Visa was to visit her  son  and  daughter-in-
    law. Between 2011 and 2015, the Appellant entered the United Kingdom as
    a visitor.

 4. The Appellant's sponsor had employment in the UK until  February  2015.
    He and his family went to live in India for a  period  of  four  months
    before returning to the  UK.  In  July  2015  he  began  employment  in
    Ireland. The Appellant went to Ireland to visit  him  in  August  2015.
    According to the Appellant and the sponsor this was for a  short  visit
    but as a result of her illness she remained in  Ireland  for  a  longer
    period. In October 2015 he rented a property in Ireland.

 5. In November 2015 the Appellant made an application for an EEA residence
    card in Ireland. Following this, in December 2015,  the  Appellant  was
    admitted to hospital and remained there until her discharge in  January
    2016. She remained in Ireland living with her son.

 6. On 8 August 2016 she was granted a residence card (under Regulation  7)
    from the Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service.

 7. It is said that the sponsor's wife did not want to move to Ireland  and
    therefore the sponsor considered obtaining employment  back  in  United
    Kingdom. Later in August 2016 the Appellant returned to United  Kingdom
    and the sponsor followed shortly thereafter on  6  September  2016.  He
    obtained employment in the UK, but this was not  started  till  January
    2017 and in the  interim  continued  to  assist  his  former  employers
    working remotely.

 8. On the 19th September 2016 the Appellant  made  an  application  for  a
    residence card as a confirmation of  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 9. On 28 April 2017 the Respondent refused that application. The FtTJ  set
    out the reasons at paragraphs 16-24 of his decision.  In  summary,  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that she had provided adequate evidence to
    show  that  the  residence  in  Ireland  was  genuine.  She   had   not
    demonstrated that the centre of the British citizen's life  transferred
    to Ireland. She had resided there for a total period of only 12  months
    and had returned to the  UK  ahead  of  him  on  20  August  2016.  Her
    accommodation in Ireland was on a short-term basis  and  she  had  left
    nearly 7 weeks before the 12-month lease expired. Her  British  citizen
    sponsor had retained a principal  residence  in  the  UK  during  their
    period of joint residence in Ireland. The Secretary of State considered
    that she provided insufficient evidence of integration into Ireland and
    that there was little evidence  of  integration  on  the  part  of  her
    sponsor.

10. Consideration had also been to the purpose of  her  and  her  sponsor's
    residence in the EEA host country. She had gone on holiday  to  Ireland
    before being admitted to hospital. There was no explanation as  to  why
    she could not return to the UK after discharge form  hospital.  It  was
    further noted that she had been given periods of permission  to  remain
    in Ireland and thus it was not necessary to apply  for  residence  when
    she could have lawfully remained there. She was issued with a residence
    card in August 2016 and left Ireland  12  days  later.  The  Respondent
    considered that her actions indicated that she remained in  Ireland  to
    obtain residence documentation which was believed would support her  UK
    residence card application.

11. It was concluded that residence in Ireland had been provided purely  to
    meet the requirements of the application and that she was not genuinely
    dependent upon her sponsor. Therefore, it was not accepted that she and
    her British citizen sponsor's residence in the  EEA  host  country  was
    genuine, and it was considered that the purpose of the resident in  the
    EEA host country was as a means of circumventing  the  U.K.'s  domestic
    immigration rules.

12. The Appellant issued grounds of appeal and the appeal came  before  FtT
    on the 16th May 2018.

13. In a decision promulgated on the 7th June 2018, the FtT  dismissed  her
    appeal.  The  judge  did  not  consider  that  of  the  sponsor's  life
    transferred to the EEA State but that the  sponsor  undertook  work  in
    Ireland on a temporary  basis.  He  found  that  the  sponsor  was  not
    prepared to give up her life in the UK to live in  Ireland.  The  judge
    found that there was no significant economic incentive for  the  family
    to be  resident  in  Ireland  and  that  there  was  no  firm  plan  of
    resettlement  and  to  the  contrary,  the  UK  property  remained  the
    sponsor's principal place of residence  and  the  family  continued  to
    habitually reside there.

14. At paragraphs 45-46 of the decision, the judge gave reasons as  to  why
    he did not believe that the Appellant had integrated in Ireland and  at
    paragraph 47 he rejected her account that she had become  involuntarily
    resident in Ireland as a result of a deterioration in her health.

15. Therefore, the judge concluded that the residence of the Appellant  and
    the sponsor was not genuine having regard to the criteria  set  out  in
    Regulation 9(3).  He  further  found  that  the  Appellant's  continued
    residence in Ireland was contrived for the purpose of circumventing the
    Immigration Rules.

16. At paragraph 51,  he  rejected  the  alternative  case  advanced  under
    Regulation 45 of the TFEU.

17. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by FtTJ Page  on  grounds  one  and  four  and  on  further
    application to the Upper Tribunal permission was granted by UTJ Canavan
    on all grounds.

18. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Symes relied upon the grounds as  set  out
    in the papers. He supplemented those written grounds with the following
    oral submissions.

19. As to Ground 1, he submitted that the judge had applied the wrong  test
    and failed to have regard to Article 21 as interpreted in O and B, that
    is, whether the sponsor's free movement rights would be discouraged  if
    his mother was not granted a residence permit.  He  made  reference  to
    the evidence of the closeness of the bond between mother  and  son  and
    increasing dependency (see paragraphs 22-24 of  the  grounds).  In  the
    alternative he submitted that the formulation of the test found in  the
    EEA Regulations was narrower in scope than the provision of the  Treaty
    itself and that those Regulations must be read down in the light of the
    Treaty's fundamental status (see Van Gen e Loos and Marleasing).

20. In any event, he submitted that there was evidence before the  Tribunal
    which the judge not taken account  of  when  making  an  assessment  of
    whether residence was  "genuine".  In  particular  there  were  factual
    matters set out  in  the  Appellant's  own  witness  statement  and  in
    supporting evidence in the Appellant's bundle which had not been  taken
    into account. He acknowledged that the judge made reference to  one  of
    the letters in the bundle however, the letters were to demonstrate  the
    effect on the sponsor's wife which in turn  supported  the  Appellant's
    account that there was a genuine movement abroad.

21. He further submitted that  at  paragraph  43,  the  FtTJ  attempted  to
    compare the earnings in the UK and in Ireland. However, the  judge  had
    used the wrong figures by reference to the P60 at p111 of  the  bundle.
    Therefore, he was in error in reaching his conclusion that there was an
    economic disincentive to move to Ireland.

22. As set out at Ground 2, he submitted that the judge unduly  focused  on
    the Appellant's immigration status, both in the UK and  in  Ireland  at
    paragraphs 46,47 and 50 and that in the light of the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in in The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    and Christy [2018] EWCA Civ 2378 (which was not heard until  after  the
    FtT decision) that was the wrong  approach.  The  Appellant's  domestic
    immigration status was an irrelevant consideration relying on paragraph
    36 of that decision.

23.  As to Ground 3, the FtTJ did not lawfully assess the question of abuse
    of rights and that the factual evidence  was  relevant  when  assessing
    whether this was legitimate advantage seeking rather than an  abuse  of
    rights.

24. Ground 4 related to the alternative argument under Regulation 45 of the
    TFEU. He submitted that the judge gave this very  little  consideration
    at paragraph 51  and  that  he  had  misunderstood  or  misapplied  the
    decision of S and G and that there  was  a  viable  argument  that  the
    sponsor's ability to  work  in  Ireland  was  assisted  by  his  mother
    providing emotional support.

25. Mr Kandola on behalf of the Respondent relied upon the Rule 24 response
    dated 21st October 2018. He submitted that was no material error of law
    in the decision of the FtTJ who had regard to the evidence at paragraph
    45. As to the earnings in  Ireland,  the  judge  had  referred  to  the
    contract terms and he was entitled to look at this because the  initial
    claim made was that it was the salary which had encouraged the  sponsor
    to go to Ireland.

26. He further submitted that it was open to the  FtTJ  take  into  account
    Appellant's immigration status by  reference  to  Regulation  9(3)  (c)
    which made reference to the relevant factors.

27. As to Article 45 of the Treaty, he submitted that the judge was correct
    to conclude that factual matrix in the present appeal was significantly
    to that referred to in the of S and G. Looking  at  the  chronology  of
    events, the sponsor decided to work in Ireland before his mother joined
    him. Furthermore, the sponsor returned to his  principal  residence  to
    work in the country of which he was a national. Thus, it could  not  be
    demonstrated that the refusal to grant a  right  of  residence  to  his
    mother had the effect of discouraging him from  exercising  his  rights
    under Article 45 of  the  TFEU.  He  submitted  that  while  the  judge
    dispensed with the argument in a short paragraph  (paragraph  51),  the
    conclusion reached was open to him.

28. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion:

29. The core issue in this case is correct interpretation of  Regulation  9
    of the 2016 Regulations which provides as follows: -

    '9.- (2) The conditions are that-

             (a)  BC-

                  (i)  is residing in  an  EEA  State  as  a  worker,  self-
                  employed person, self-sufficient person or a  student,  or
                  so resided immediately  before  returning  to  the  United
                  Kingdom; or

                  (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence  in  an
                  EEA State;

             (b)  F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

             (c)  F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.

         (3)  Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State  is  or
             was genuine include-

             (a)  whether the centre of BC's life transferred  to  the  EEA
                  State;

             (b)  the length of F and  BC's  joint  residence  in  the  EEA
                  State;

             (c)  the nature and quality of the F and BC's accommodation in
                  the EEA State, and whether it is  or  was  BC's  principal
                  residence;

             (d)  the degree of F and BC's integration in the EEA State;

             (e)  whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with BC  was
                  in the EEA State.

         (4)  This Regulation does not apply-

             (a)  where the purpose of the residence in the EEA  State  was
                  as a means for circumventing any immigration laws applying
                  to non-EEA nationals to which F would otherwise be subject
                  (such as any applicable requirement under the 1971 Act  to
                  have leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or

             (b)  to a person who is only  eligible  to  be  treated  as  a
                  family member as a result  of  Regulation  7(3)  (extended
                  family members treated as family members)."

30. The origin of rights for family members of British Citizens on re-entry
    to the United Kingdom having exercised treaty rights in another  Member
    State comes not from Directive 2004/38/EC  but  from  the  case  of  C-
    370/90, Surinder Singh.

31. The Court of Justice said this: -

         "19  A national of a Member State might be  deterred  from  leaving
         his country of origin in order to pursue an activity as an employed
         or self-employed person as envisaged by the Treaty in the territory
         of another Member State if, on returning to  the  Member  State  of
         which he is a national in order to pursue an activity there  as  an
         employed or self-employed person, the conditions of his  entry  and
         residence were not at least equivalent  to  those  which  he  would
         enjoy under the Treaty or secondary law in the territory of another
         Member State.

         20   He would in particular be deterred from so doing if his spouse
         and children were not also permitted to enter  and  reside  in  the
         territory of his Member State of origin under conditions  at  least
         equivalent to those granted them by Community law in the  territory
         of another Member State.

         21   It follows that a national of a Member State who has  gone  to
         another Member State in order to work there as an  employed  person
         pursuant to Article 48 of  the  Treaty  and  returns  to  establish
         himself in order to pursue an activity as a self-employed person in
         the territory of the Member State of which he is a national has the
         right, under Article 52 of the Treaty, to  be  accompanied  in  the
         territory of the latter State by his spouse, a national of  a  non-
         member country, under the same  conditions  as  are  laid  down  by
         Regulation No 1612/68, Directive 68/360 or Directive 73/148,  cited
         above.

         22   Admittedly, as the United Kingdom submits,  a  national  of  a
         Member State enters and resides in the territory of that  State  by
         virtue of the rights attendant upon  his  nationality  and  not  by
         virtue of those conferred on him by Community law.  In  particular,
         as is provided, moreover, by Article 3 of the  Fourth  Protocol  to
         the European Convention on Human Rights, a State may not expel  one
         of its own nationals or deny him entry to its territory.

         23   However, this  case  is  concerned  not  with  a  right  under
         national law but with the  rights  of  movement  and  establishment
         granted to a Community national  by  Articles  48  and  52  of  the
         Treaty. These rights cannot be fully effective if such a person may
         be deterred from exercising them by obstacles raised in his or  her
         country of origin to the entry and residence of his or her  spouse.
         Accordingly, when a Community national who has availed  himself  or
         herself of those rights returns to his or her  country  of  origin,
         his or her spouse must enjoy at least the same rights of entry  and
         residence as would be granted to him or her under Community law  if
         his or her spouse chose to  enter  and  reside  in  another  Member
         State. Nevertheless, Articles 48  and  52  of  the  Treaty  do  not
         prevent Member States from applying to foreign spouses of their own
         nationals' rules on entry and residence more favourable than  those
         provided for by Community law.

         24   As regards the  risk  of  fraud  referred  to  by  the  United
         Kingdom,  it  is  sufficient  to  note  that,  as  the  Court   has
         consistently held (see in particular the judgments in  Case  115/78
         Knoors v Secretary of State for Economic Affairs  [1979]  ECR  399,
         paragraph 25,  and  Case  C-61/89  Bouchoucha  [1990]  ECR  I-3551,
         paragraph 14), the facilities created by the Treaty cannot have the
         effect of allowing the persons who benefit from them to  evade  the
         application of  national  legislation  and  of  prohibiting  Member
         States from taking the measures necessary to prevent such abuse."

32. I have been referred to the  decision  of  O  and  B  v  Minister  voor
    Immigratie, Intergratie en Asiel [2014] QB 1163 by Mr Symes.

33. The general conclusion of the Court in O and B is as follows:

         "Article 21(1) TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that where a
         Union citizen has created or strengthened a family life with a
         third-country national during genuine residence, pursuant to and in
         conformity with the conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) and
         Article 16(1) and (2) of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of
         citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside
         freely within the territory of the Member States amending
         Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing Directives 64/221/EEC,
         68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC,
         90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC, in a Member State other than
         that of which he is a national, the provisions of that directive
         apply by analogy where that Union citizen returns, with the family
         member in question, to his Member State of origin. Therefore, the
         conditions for granting a derived right of residence to a third-
         country national who is a family member of that Union citizen, in
         the latter's Member State of origin, should not, in principle, be
         more strict than those provided for by that directive for the grant
         of a derived right of residence to a third-country national who is
         a family member of a Union citizen who has exercised his right of
         freedom of movement by becoming established in a Member State other
         than the Member State of which he is a national."

34. In Surinder Singh, the European Court of  Justice  confirmed  that  the
    rights for family members did not include situations  of  an  abuse  of
    rights, stating in paragraph 24 as follows:

         "As regards the risk of fraud referred to by the United Kingdom, it
         is sufficient to note that, as the Court has consistently held (see
         in particular the judgements in Case 155/78 Knoors v Secretary of
         State for Economic Affairs [1979] ECR 399, paragraph 25, and Case C-
         61/89 Bouchoucha [1990] ECR I-3551, paragraph 14), the facilities
         created by the Treaty cannot have the effect of allowing the
         persons who benefit from them to evade the application of national
         legislation and of prohibiting Member States from taking the
         measures necessary to prevent such abuse."

35. Similarly, the Court stated in O and B in paragraph 22:

         "It should be added that the scope of Union law cannot be extended
         to cover abuses (see, to that effect, C-110/99 Emsland-Starke
         [2000] ECR I-11569, paragraph 51, and Case C-303/08 Bozkurt [2010]
         ECR I-13445, paragraph 47). Proof of such an abuse requires, first,
         a combination of objective circumstances in which, despite formal
         observance of the conditions laid down by the European Union rules,
         the purpose of those rules has not been achieved, and, secondly, a
         subjective element consisting in the intention to obtain an
         advantage from the European Union rules by artificially creating
         the conditions laid down for obtaining it (Case C-364/10) Hungary v
         Slovakia [2012] ECR, paragraph 58).

36. Therefore, in order to qualify under Regulation 9, an applicant and his
    or her family member (or durable partner, following Banger)  must  have
    resided in another member state; and secondly, that residence must have
    been genuine. The approach of the CJEU is whether the EU national would
    be discouraged from leaving his state of nationality  to  exercise  his
    right of residence under  the  Treaty  owing  to  an  uncertainty  over
    whether he can continue  a  family  life  which  has  been  created  or
    strengthened during a genuine residence.

37. The FtTJ was satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had  genuinely  resided  in
    Ireland as an employee (see paragraph 41) and thus judge was  therefore
    required to consider whether  the  parties  had  genuinely  established
    themselves in Ireland.

38. In his analysis, the FtTJ  did  not  accept  that  the  centre  of  the
    sponsor's life transferred to the EEA State for the reasons set out  at
    paragraph 42 - 50. However, I accept the submission made  by  Mr  Symes
    that  when  considering  the  evidence  which  had  been  advanced   to
    demonstrate a genuine establishment of residence, that the FtTJ did not
    engage with all of that evidence. In  particular,  there  was  evidence
    from the Appellant as to her  level  of  integration  in  Ireland.  Her
    witness statement made reference to attending English  lessons,  taking
    part in community activities and making friendships in the  EEA  State.
    That did not form part of the assessment.

39. The judge did make reference to letters  exhibited  in  the  bundle  at
    paragraph 45 of the decision but considered that the  letters  did  not
    come from people who habitually resided in Ireland. However, he did not
    consider the evidence of the parties in the context of  the  nature  of
    the family life in which it was asserted that family life was not  only
    created in the EEA State but was also strengthened. There was  evidence
    before the Tribunal which refers to support given to the sponsor's wife
    (see page 28  of  the  bundle).  This  was  arguably  relevant  to  the
    circumstances of the genuineness  of  the  residence  in  Ireland.  The
    nature of the evidence purported  to  demonstrate  the  effect  on  the
    sponsor's wife who stayed alone in United Kingdom and  to  support  the
    genuineness of the move made to Ireland.

40. Whilst the judge considered the medical evidence at paragraph  46,  the
    emphasis was on the period prior to December 2015. The judge considered
    that the referral to hospital that was made in December 2015 was via  a
    private GP and there was no evidence as to what  had  happened  in  the
    months prior to this date. This led to his  finding  at  paragraph  47,
    that the Appellant did not become  involuntarily  resident  in  Ireland
    because of significant deterioration in her  health  so  that  she  was
    unable to travel back to the UK or to India. However, the judge did not
    consider the evidence which post dated December 2015 as set out in  the
    witness statement at paragraph 9. The evidence recorded  that  she  had
    been treated with specialised treatment and thereafter, the Appellant's
    wife and children came to Ireland to assist in her care and stayed  for
    a period of 3 � weeks and after discharge from  hospital,  the  sponsor
    worked from home to care for her. At paragraph  10,  there  is  further
    reference as to the continuation and/or strengthening of family life in
    Dublin. Regulation 9(3)  requires  a  quantitative  evaluation  of  the
    residence and those evidential matters had not been taken into  account
    when undertaking such an assessment and whether it was "genuine".

41. It was also submitted by Mr Symes that the judge focused unduly on  the
    immigration status of the Appellant when assessing whether there was  a
    genuine exercise of treaty rights.  He  relies  upon  the  most  recent
    decision of the Court of Appeal in The Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department and Christy [2018] EWCA Civ 2378 at paragraphs  35  onwards.
    In his decision, the judge  made  reference  to  the  Appellant  having
    originally entered Ireland as a visitor and  then  obtained  permission
    for a further stay. He also  made  reference  to  her  applying  for  a
    residence card in Ireland relatively soon after her arrival there  (see
    paragraph 46).

42. In my judgement, the  Appellant's  immigration  status  is  not  wholly
    irrelevant and may, in appropriate  cases,  be  a  relevant  factor  to
    consider but in the right context. The CJEU did not seek  to  lay  down
    criteria for assessing what factors should be  taken  into  account  in
    assessing the quality of the residence over and above noting  that  the
    initial three-month period permitted by  the  directive  would  not  be
    sufficient. The Grand Chamber's decision in O and B, unlike  Regulation
    9, makes no reference to any "centre of  life"  test,  the  nature  and
    quality of accommodation,  the  question  of  principal  residence  and
    integration. However, the decision of O and B at paragraph 54 stated:

         "Where, during the genuine residence of the union citizen in the
         host member state, pursuant to and in conformity with the
         conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) of Directive 2004/38,
         family life is created or strengthened in that member state, the
         effectiveness of the rights conferred on the union citizens by
         Article 21(1) TFEU requires that the citizen's family in the host
         member state may continue on returning to the member state of which
         he is a national, through the grant of a derived right of residence
         to the family member who is a third-country national. If no such
         derived right of residence were granted, that union citizen could
         be discouraged from leaving the member state of which he is a
         national in order to exercise his right of residence under Article
         21(1) TFEU in another member state because he is uncertain whether
         he will be able to continue in his member state of origin a family
         life with his immediate family members which has been created or
         strengthened in the host member state (see, to that effect,
         paragraphs 35 and 36)."

43. The motivation of the Appellant and Sponsor  for  making  use  of  free
    movement rights is irrelevant. The court determined in Akrich C-109/01:

         "Where the marriage between a national of a member state and a
         national of a non-member state is genuine, the fact that the
         spouses install themselves in another member state in order, on
         their return to the member state of which the former is a national,
         to obtain the benefit of rights conferred by community law is not
         relevant to an assessment of their legal situation by the competent
         authorities of the latter state."

44. In his decision, the judge concluded that the exercise of Treaty Rights
    was not genuine and was therefore an abuse. However, it does not appear
    from the analysis of the evidence that he  addressed  the  question  of
    whether this was a case of "legitimate advantage seeking"  rather  than
    "an abuse of rights" as set out in the grounds.  In  this  context  the
    immigration status of the Appellant was relevant.

45. Furthermore, it is also not clear as to whether the judge  applied  the
    right test -that in order to establish an abuse of  rights  the  action
    taken must be at least the primary reason for undertaking the  changes,
    which in this case would mean that taking the job in  Ireland  was  not
    genuine and moving and establishing himself there for the period of one
    year was also not genuine (see the decision in Sadovska [2017] UKSC  54
    and O and B at [58-59].

46. In light of the identified errors, it is not necessary to consider  the
    freestanding grounds relating  to  Article  45  of  the  TFEU.  In  his
    submissions, Mr Symes set out the factual matrix relied on  in  respect
    of Article 45 which was that the sponsor's ability to work  in  Ireland
    was assisted by his mother by  providing  emotional  support.  However,
    there were no findings made by the judge concerning this as set out  in
    the earlier part of this decision which was an error  when  considering
    whether there was genuine residence and the creation and  strengthening
    of family life.

47. For those reasons I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law and that the
    decision should be set aside. Due to the nature of the  errors  of  law
    identified, it will be necessary for a fresh hearing and  for  findings
    of fact be made. I have therefore determined that the appeal should  be
    reheard by the FtT in accordance with the practice statement.

48. It is not clear whether any argument was advanced on the basis set  out
    at paragraph 26 of the amended grounds (namely that the test in the EEA
    Regulations is narrower in scope than the Treaty).  However,  there  is
    reference to this in the amended grounds of appeal. For  the  avoidance
    of doubt, any legal arguments  to  be  advanced  before  the  FtT  upon
    remittal should be fully set out in a skeleton argument and  served  on
    the Tribunal and the other party prior to the hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set  aside  and  is  remitted  for  a  fresh
hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be  fixed  and  in
accordance with the direction given.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds Date: 28/2/19

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
