






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number: EA/04421/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30th January 2018                       |On 5th February 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between


                              MISS SABINA BEGUM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rahman counsel instructed by Shah Jalal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, Miss Sabina Begum date of birth 22 January  1988,  is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh. Having considered all the  circumstances,  I  do
    not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James promulgated on the 23rd October 2017.

 3. The appellant had made an application for an EEA residence card  as  an
    extended family member of an EEA national, who  was  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom. I note that the  application  had  to  be
    considered  under  the  Immigration   (EEA)   Regulations   2006.   The
    application was refused by the respondent by decision dated 18 December
    2015. The appellant sought to appeal against the decision.

 4. The appeal came before Judge James on the 22nd September 2017. After an
    "oral"  hearing  the  judge  determined  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   In
    dismissing the appeal the judge gave a number of grounds:-

     i) The judge dismissed the appeal in accordance with the law as stated
        in the case of Sala (EFMs: Rights  of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  00411
        determining that the First-tier Tribunal did not have  jurisdiction
        to hear an appeal in respect of an extended family member.

    ii) Secondly even  after  hearing  the  evidence  the  judge  found  in
        paragraph 10  that  the  documentary  evidence  submitted  did  not
        establish a relationship between the appellant and her EEA sponsor.
        Accordingly the appellant was not an extended family member in  any
        event and was therefore not entitled to an EEA residence card.

   iii) Finally it was noted that the EEA  sponsor  had  been  refused  his
        application for a registration certificate on the same day. It  had
        been determined that the EEA  sponsor  was  not  exercising  treaty
        rights and as the sponsor was  not  exercising  treaty  rights  the
        appellant could not be dependent upon the EEA sponsor.

 5. The respondent's representative requested that the appeal be  adjourned
    pending further consideration of the issues raised in  this  and  other
    similar cases based on the issues in  the  Sala  case  by  the  Supreme
    Court. I refused the application by the respondent.

 6. With regard to the first  issue  raised  the  case  of  Sala  has  been
    overruled in the case of Khan [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in following the case of Sala cannot be criticised as he
    was following the guidance set down by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  that
    respect therefore in light of the case law the approach of the judge in
    dismissing the appeal for want of jurisdiction was legally flawed.

 7. However the grounds of appeal originally submitted  did  not  challenge
    the 2 remaining grounds for  dismissing  the  appeal.  The  grounds  of
    appeal in paragraphs 1 to 9 deal only with the issue with regard to the
    decision in Sala and make no challenge to the remaining  findings  made
    by the judge.

 8. At the hearing before me further grounds of appeal had  been  submitted
    together with a bundle of documents in support of the claims  that  the
    appellant was a dependent of  and  related  to  her  EEA  sponsor.  The
    appellant's representative sought leave to amend the grounds of  appeal
    to challenge the other  2  grounds  upon  which  the  appeal  had  been
    refused.

 9. In that respect consideration had to be given to  how  the  appeal  had
    been  conducted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  appears   at   the
    commencement of the hearing the issue of jurisdiction had  been  raised
    by the judge and whilst both the appellant  and  the  sponsor  were  in
    attendance no evidence was taken to deal with the other  issues  raised
    in the refusal letter. Had an  opportunity  been  given  to  give  oral
    evidence it may be that those issues to would have been dealt with.  To
    that extent it could  not  be  said  that  the  appellant  had  had  an
    opportunity to present her case and therefore had not had a fair trial.

10. I permitted the appellant's representative  to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

11. In the light of that and in light of the case of Khan the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contains  material  errors  of  law.  The  only
    courses for this matter to be heard afresh in the First-Tier  Tribunal.
    I do not preserve any of the findings of fact.




    Notice of Decision

12. I allow the appeal of the appellant and set the decision aside.

13. In the light of the matters set out the appropriate  courses  for  this
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

14. I do not make an anonymity direction.



Signed





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Dated: 30 January 2018



