
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04892/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 June 2019                      |On 13 June 2019                      |
|Extempore Decision                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                     Gihan de Zoysa Siriwardana Nanediri
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel, instructed by Chancery
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas ("the judge"), promulgated on 15  March  2019,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 11 April 2018, refusing to issue him with a residence  card
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 2. The Respondent  had  alleged  that  the  Appellant's  marriage  to  the
    relevant EEA national was one of convenience only and  the  application
    had been refused on this basis.

 3. The judge asserted that the burden of proof  in  the  case  before  him
    rested  with  the  Appellant  and  having  made  a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings, he went on to conclude that that burden  had  not
    been discharged.  Somewhat confusingly, the judge appeared to place his
    findings and conclusions in the context of a case  involving  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom in the context of the Article 8.

 4. The grounds of appeal focus primarily on the assertion that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in law having placed the burden  of  proof  on  the
    Appellant when in  fact  it  rested  throughout  with  the  Respondent.
    Challenges are made to a number of the adverse credibility findings  as
    well.  Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew on 1 May 2019.

 5. Prior to the hearing before me the Secretary of  State  issued  what  I
    consider to be an entirely sensible and appropriate  Rule  24  response
    indicating that the Respondent did not oppose the Appellant's appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.



Decision on error of law

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas maintained the position stated in the
    Rule 24 response.  In my view he was clearly right to do so.  The judge
    appears to have laboured under  the  misapprehension  that  the  appeal
    before him was focused on Article 8 rather than it being  an  EEA  case
    involving the serious allegation that the Appellant's marriage  to  the
    EEA national was one of convenience only.  It is quite clear to me that
    the judge has materially misdirected himself as to the location of  the
    burden of proof.  It is well-settled that that burden  rests  with  the
    Respondent (see for example Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 and Sadovska [2017]
    UKSC 54).  In light of this, the entire premise from  which  the  judge
    proceeded to determine the appeal was unsound.

 7. On the basis of the misdirection as to the location of  the  burden  of
    proof and on the agreement of the parties I set  the  judge's  decision
    aside.



Disposal

 8. In terms of disposal, the Rule 24 response initially suggested that the
    matter should be retained within the Upper Tribunal. However, Mr  Kotas
    was in agreement with Mr Aslam that in fact this was a case appropriate
    for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.  I agree.   Having  regard  to
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement, this is a case  in  which  the
    important allegation raised by the Respondent  needs  to  be  addressed
    with a complete rehearing of the appeal addressing all relevant issues.
     This will involve an extensive evaluation of the evidence as  a  whole
    together with wide-ranging findings of fact on the relevant issues.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law

I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

No anonymity direction is made




Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1. This appeal is remitted for a complete rehearing,  with  no  preserved
      findings;

   2. The remitted case shall not be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Lucas.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 12 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

