
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA 04700 2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2018                           |On 05 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                olubanke [b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not mAde)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, Counsel instructed by Mitchell Simmonds
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing her a residence card as the  parent  of  an
    EEA national residing in the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  is  the
    mother of four children. The oldest is an Irish national and the others
    are citizens of the United Kingdom.   The  oldest  child  was  born  in
    November 2003 and so is now  15  years  old.   The  next  was  born  in
    September 2005 and so is now 13 years old, and the other two are  twins
    born in February 2008 and so are now 10 years old.  The children attend
    boarding schools in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is divorced from their father.  It is her case  that  she
    is the parent in charge of the children pursuant to a court order.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 7  of  its  Decisions  and
    Reasons that the appellant is the  "primary  carer  of  her  daughter".
    That is sufficient  for  the  appellant's  purposes  because  her  case
    depends on any of the children satisfying the  necessary  criteria.   I
    take the judge's finding to mean that he accepted that the appellant is
    the primary carer of all of the children which is how the appellant put
    her case.  This part of the appeal has not been challenged.

 3. The judge said:

         "8.  In my  opinion  the  critical  question  is  whether  the  EEA
         national would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom  if  the
         appellant left the United Kingdom for an indefinite period.  On the
         evidence before me I cannot reach such a conclusion because the EEA
         national is  in  fact  in  a  boarding  school,  meaning  that  the
         appellant would have access to her during the school  vacation  and
         other breaks during the term.  The evidence before  me  shows  that
         such access has been exercised by the appellant visiting the UK  or
         the EEA national spending her vacation in Nigeria.   The  appellant
         has a multiple entry  visa  and  there  is  no  suggestion  on  her
         evidence that the circumstances are such that  she  intends  to  be
         absent from the United Kingdom for an indefinite period.

         9.  It is far from clear to me  what  precise  circumstances  would
         compel the  EEA  national  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
         appellant was not granted leave to remain.  The EEA national  would
         continue to be a boarder at school and would  continue  to  receive
         visits from her mother during the school breaks and  she  would  on
         occasions be able to spend her vacations in Nigeria".

 4. This is plainly a material error of law.  The judge was asking  himself
    if the appellant would be unable to look  after  the  children  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That is  not  the  test.   The  Regulations  impose  a
    hypothetical test and require the decision maker to  determine  if  the
    EEA  national  (Regulation  16(2)(b)(iii))  or  the   British   citizen
    (Regulation 16(5)(c)) would "be unable to reside in the United  Kingdom
    or in [another EEA state] if the person left the United Kingdom for  an
    indefinite period".  It does not matter in the slightest whether  there
    is any prospect whatsoever of the person leaving the United Kingdom for
    an indefinite period.  What matters is what would happen in that event.
     The First-tier Tribunal has plainly failed to apply the  correct  test
    and the decision cannot be sustained.

 5. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Further, on reflection, I am satisfied that  the  appeal  can  only  be
    decided one way.  The finding that the mother is the primary  carer  is
    undisputed.  Similarly, it has never been challenged that the  children
    reside in the United Kingdom as self-sufficient people.  They have  the
    advantages of coming from a  very  wealthy  family  and  the  financial
    obligations of the Rules are plainly met.

 7. I cannot see any  way  in  which  the  appellant  could  discharge  her
    responsibilities as the primary carer from outside the  United  Kingdom
    in a way that did not require the children to leave the United Kingdom.
     For much of their time, maybe even most of it, they are in the day-to-
    day care of the various schools that they attend but that  is  not  for
    all of the time.  They have holidays and they have breaks from  school.
    The appellant does not need to be  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  every
    minute the children are not at school but if she were not there for  an
    indefinite period she could not be their primary carer.  It is clear to
    me that the appeal has to be allowed.

 8. Ms Childs further submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred  by  not
    having regard to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009, the "welfare of children" provisions.

 9. Mr Wilding initially submitted that this  was  not  relevant  and  then
    modified that to the  more  insightful  observation  that  it  was  not
    helpful.  There is a statutory obligation to consider  the  welfare  of
    children and there can be little doubt that the best interests of these
    children are that their mother has  the  right  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom to support them.  However, the Rules and EEA rights are not  in
    any way discretionary.  Knowing the best interests of the  children  is
    not going to assist.  There is  no  material  error  in  not  making  a
    finding about where those interests lie.  What matters are the criteria
    recognised in the Rules and the criteria are  satisfied  in  this  case
    which is why I substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

10. In summary, the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is allowed.  The First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
    applying the wrong test and I set aside its decision and I substitute a
    decision allowing the appeal.

    Notice of Decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I  set  aside  its  decision  and
    substitute a decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 January 2019                |



