
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04531/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 September 2018                          |On 26 September 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr Muhammad Shahid Naseem
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss H Masih, instructed by Maya & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Young-Harry promulgated on 11 January 2018 in
    which she allowed Mr  Naseem's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 24 April 2017 to refuse to issue him with  a
    document confirming his right of  permanent  residence  as  the  family
    member of an EEA national.  The judge was  satisfied  by  the  material
    before her, which includes health insurance documents and various other
    documents, that Mr Naseem's wife had been exercising her treaty  rights
    as a self-sufficient person for a continuous five year period from 2011
    to 2016 while being in possession of comprehensive  sickness  insurance
    and on the basis that she was self-sufficient despite claiming  certain
    benefits, having directed herself in line with Brey C-140/12.

 2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:

         "The [appellant] respectfully submits that the  judge  of  the  FTT
         failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the  EEA  national
         had been exercising treaty rights for a continuous period  of  five
         years.

         The judge of the FTT failed to identify what evidence was available
         to satisfy him that the EEA national was either an employed  person
         or  a  self-sufficient   person   during   the   relevant   period,
         particularly in light of the finding that the family  were  largely
         supported by the appellant's income."

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever granted permission on 8 March 2018.

 4. When the matter came before me Mr Mills accepted  that  there  were  in
    fact no grounds of challenge properly open to him given that, while the
    extent to which a self-sufficient person could rely upon benefits was a
    question of law, the assessment of that was in light of the decision in
    Brey, a question of fact and given also that it was  possible  to  rely
    upon child benefit and tax credits, as the judge had  noted,  it  could
    not be said that the question of fact was improperly reached.

 5. Accordingly, in the circumstances, I did not need  to  hear  from  Miss
    Masih.

 6. I am satisfied that both parties were fully aware  from  the  documents
    produced that to the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  the  income  of  the
    respondent, and that there had been in place a  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance policy. There was sufficient  material  on  which  the  judge
    could properly conclude that, on that facts as shown, the  respondent's
    wife was,  reliance  on  benefits  notwithstanding,  properly  a  self-
    sufficient person. This finding, following from a proper  direction  as
    to the law, was clearly one open to her; it could not be said that this
    finding of fact was irrational or unsustainable.

 7. As the judge was clearly entitled to find that  the  sponsor  had  been
    continuously resident in accordance with the  Regulations  as  a  self-
    sufficient person it follows that it was a sustainable conclusion  that
    the respondent as her husband was entitled  to  a  permanent  residence
    card.  The decision therefore did not involve the making of an error of
    law and I uphold it, making it clear that the decision was one in which
    the judge concluded that the respondent  is  entitled  to  a  permanent
    residence card.



Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2) The respondent is reminded that any application for costs made pursuant
    to rule 10 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  must
    be made within a  month  of  the  issue  of  this  decision.  Any  such
    application must be served on the Secretary of State who  has  14  days
    thereafter to respond.


Signed                                  Date 18 September 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
