
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04915/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                Sohail Akhtar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin of Counsel, instructed by Rayan Adams
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss E Groves, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is national of Pakistan.  On 20 January 2018  he  applied
    for a residence card to confirm that he was  a  family  member  of  his
    sponsor [ES], an EEA national  from  Poland.   On  23  March  2018  the
    respondent refused his application because  it  considered  his  was  a
    marriage of convenience.  The appellant appealed.  In a  decision  sent
    on 21 February 2019 Judge Handler of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed
    his appeal.  The  judge  found  that  the  evidence  produced  to  show
    cohabitation was unsatisfactory, that the evidence  relating  to  their
    having undergone an Islamic marriage in May  2017  was  unreliable  and
    that sketchy photograph evidence  was  of  little  weight.   The  judge
    considered that there were  serious  inconsistencies  in  the  couple's
    account of their relationship.  The judge also found  that  the  couple
    had given inconsistent evidence about the sponsor's health.  The  judge
    also found shortcomings in the bank statement evidence produced to  the
    Tribunal.

2.   In setting out his conclusions the judge correctly  observed  that  the
    legal burden of proof rested throughout on the respondent to prove  the
    appellant's marriage was one of convenience.  At  paras  61  -  65  the
    judge stated:

         "61. The evidence which supports the marriage not being a  marriage
             of convenience is  principally  the  photos,  including  those
             referred to in the interview transcripts, and the evidence  of
             both the appellant  and  sponsor  having  given  the  Kingsway
             address to various third  parties.   I  have  considered  this
             evidence and attached weight to it.  I have  also  taken  into
             account the submissions made by Mr Parkin.  However, looked at
             in the round, all  of  that  does  not  offer  a  satisfactory
             explanation in respect of the points raised below.

         62.  The evidence indicates that the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
             known to each other but not that they were in a  relationship.
             The following matters support the conclusion that the marriage
             is a marriage of convenience.

             a.   The lack of evidence from  before  September  2016.   The
                  appellant was arrested in August 2016  and  at  that  time
                  said he was single.  None of  the  evidence  that  he  has
                  produced is shown to  be  from  before  the  date  of  his
                  arrest.

             b.   The lack  of  knowledge  of  the  sponsor  regarding  the
                  Islamic wedding.

             c.   The lack of knowledge  of  the  appellant  regarding  the
                  Islamic wedding certificate.

             d.   The lack of knowledge of the appellant of  the  sponsor's
                  health condition.

             e.   The inconsistencies in the evidence  regarding  when  the
                  relationship started and when the  appellant  and  sponsor
                  moved in to the Kingsway address.

             f.   The inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence regarding
                  why he said he was single when interviewed in detention in
                  August 2016.

             g.    The  other  matters  noted  above  which  undermine  the
                  credibility of the appellant and the sponsor.

         63.   The  appellant's  evidence   on   fundamental   matters   was
             inexplicably  inconsistent.   I  found   this   to   be   very
             significant when considered together with the  nature  of  the
             evidence supporting his case.  In particular, the fact that he
             gave three different, unsatisfactory reasons for saying he was
             single when he was arrested in 2016 and his lack of  knowledge
             about his wife's health  condition  provided  cogent  evidence
             that he was  in  a  marriage  of  convenience  undermined  his
             credibility   materially.    Both   of   these   aspects   are
             straightforward factual matters where  it  would  be  expected
             that clear and consistent answers would be given.  I would not
             expect an appellant to be fully  consistent  on  all  matters.
             However, I could not find a reasonable explanation  for  these
             inconsistencies.  The evidence that supported his case was all
             from after his date of arrest.

         64.  I conclude that the fact that neither the  appellant  nor  the
             sponsor was able to provide satisfactory evidence on the above
             issues leads to the conclusions that they  have  not  provided
             sufficient evidence to address satisfactorily  the  evidential
             burden on the appellant.

         65.   Notwithstanding  that,  the  legal  burden  remains  on   the
             respondent to set out  above.   The  weight  of  the  evidence
             falling against the appellant significantly outweighs that  in
             his  favour  and  demonstrates  that   on   the   balance   of
             probabilities the  marriage  between  the  appellant  and  the
             sponsor is a marriage of convenience.  It follows that I  find
             that they are not and have not been in a durable  relationship
             other than one of convenience."

3.   The grounds of appeal have a narrow compass.   They  contend  first  of
    all that the judge was wrong to find that the evidence  of  an  Islamic
    ceremony of marriage was inconsistent in showing dates  for  24  August
    2014 and 25 May 2017.

4.   The parties did not address me on this matter, but  I  am  prepared  to
    accept that the judge overlooked that what he took to be the 24  August
    2014 was in fact the  Islamic  year  date  24-08-1438.   However,  even
    assuming  that  the  Hijri  date  (Islamic  year  date)  24.08.1438  is
    therefore the English certificate date of 20 May 2017 (something  which
    the grounds do not establish), I cannot see that the judge's assessment
    of the  weight  to  be  attached  to  this  evidence  would  have  been
    materially different.  There were separate concerns listed by the judge
    with this evidence, namely that the couple were inconsistent as to  its
    whereabouts or existence and that:

         "34. No photographs of  the  Islamic  ceremony  were  submitted  in
             evidence.  The evidence  provided  that  the  sponsor  at  the
             interview in this respect does not support a  conclusion  that
             she was in a genuine relationship with the  appellant  because
             she is unclear  on  why  they  decided  to  have  the  Islamic
             ceremony when they did, and she was unable to  identify  those
             present at the ceremony on the photographs that she had on her
             phone.  Those photographs were dated 22 July 2017 which is not
             the date that the ceremony was said to have  taken  place  and
             she said that there was no certificate which was the  opposite
             of what  the  appellant  said.   He  said  that  there  was  a
             certificate and the sponsor had it."

    In my judgment these concerns were sufficient on their own  to  justify
    the judge's analysis.

5.   These are some points raised at para 8 of the written grounds,  but  as
    stated they do not identify any error of law on the part of  the  judge
    and Mr Parkin did not raise them before me.  The  only  other  properly
    formulated point left - and the only one ventilated by Mr Parkin before
    me - was that the judge had erred in making no mention when setting out
    the most significant evidence at para 61, of the evidence  recorded  at
    para 53 that the appellant and  the  sponsor  had  undergone  fertility
    treatment together: The  grounds  contend  that    "[i]t  was  perverse
    and/or irrational for the court to  simply  state  that  this  evidence
    added little" and that  the  respondent  could  not  be  said  to  have
    discharged the burden of proof in light of it.

6.   I am not persuaded that this ground is made out.  At para 61 the  judge
    stated:

         "61. The evidence which supports the marriage not being a  marriage
             of convenience is  principally  the  photos,  including  those
             referred to in the interview transcripts, and the evidence  of
             both the appellant  and  sponsor  having  given  the  Kingsway
             address to various third  parties.   I  have  considered  this
             evidence and attached weight to it.  I have  also  taken  into
             account the submissions made by Mr Parkin.  However, looked at
             in the round, all  of  that  does  not  offer  a  satisfactory
             explanation in respect of the points raised below."

7.   At para 53 the judge stated:

         "53.      I  note  that  the  sponsor  had  been  referred   to   a
             gynaecologist who she saw on 18 June 2018 because of  concerns
             about not having conceived despite trying for  two  years.   I
             have taken this into account but this evidence  does  not  add
             significantly to the appellant's case."

8.    The  evidence  relating  to  the  sponsor's  fertility  treatment   is
    contained at pp 101 - 105 of the bundle.

9.   There are several reasons why I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge's
    treatment of the fertility treatment  evidence  is  vitiated  by  legal
    error.  First of all, the judge clearly took it into  account  and  the
    observations made at para 53 also include a finding that he  considered
    it of little weight. As Miss Groves rightly  observed  in  submissions,
    weight is a matter for the judge.

10.  Second, the grounds assert that this  evidence  establishes  that  "the
    appellant and the sponsor have undergone fertility treatment together".
     It does no such thing.  It simply demonstrates that  the  sponsor  had
    been referred to a gynaecologist  due  to  concerns  about  not  having
    conceived despite trying for 2 years.  There is nothing stated  in  the
    evidence that links to the appellant.  Third, it was only evidence of a
    referral and significantly, there was a lack of any  evidence  of  such
    treatment going ahead despite over 7 months having elapsed.  Fourth, if
    either the sponsor or the appellant had had concerns about being unable
    to conceive,  despite  trying  for  two  years,  they  both  had  ample
    opportunity to mention it in their interviews and statements.  This  is
    not a trivial matter because when asked why he had said he was "single"
    when questioned in 2016 (despite claiming to have  cohabited  with  his
    partner since 1 May 2014), the appellant has said it was because he did
    not want to upset his partner because she had some medical problems  at
    the time (para 47).  The judge addressed this issue at paras  49  -  53
    under the subheading "The sponsor's health" as follows:

         "49. My findings regarding the sponsor's  health  are  as  follows.
             The sponsor had a  routine  smear  which  identified  abnormal
             cells in the cervix.  She then had a  colposcopy  and  a  loop
             excision of the cervical transformation zone was performed  24
             August 2016.   The  histology  revealed  no  evidence  of  any
             abnormality.  The sponsor's GP was informed of this by  letter
             dated 10 October 2016.  The sponsor did not have any  symptoms
             other than some bleeding  which  was  a  normal  part  of  the
             treatment that she had received.

         50.  The sponsor told the interviewer  that  she  was  not  working
             before November 2016 because she had uterus  cancer.   The  AB
             says in the index 'Sponsor Cancer Diagnosed Proofs'  on  pages
             19 - 22.  The evidence is in fact conclusive that the  sponsor
             did not have cancer as noted in  my  findings  above  and  the
             sponsor confirmed this at the hearing.  Having  uterus  cancer
             is very  serious  and  may  involve  extensive  and  difficult
             treatment.  It is quite  different  to  having  some  abnormal
             cells investigated after a routine smear followed  by  a  loop
             excision.  I found that  the  sponsor's  exaggerated  evidence
             regarding her health condition undermined her credibility.

         51.  The appellant was vague regarding the diagnosis, symptoms  and
             treatment that his wife had in respect of this  health  issue.
             The appellant told me that when the sponsor was ill, he had to
             do everything around the house.  There is no reason  why  this
             would have been necessary.  When asked, the sponsor said  that
             her symptoms were some bleeding and that  the  help  that  the
             appellant had given her was to support her emotionally.

         52.  I find that the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  the
             sponsor regarding the above health issue is  inconsistent.   I
             find that inconsistency is significant because if his  partner
             had cancer, it is reasonable  to  expect  that  the  appellant
             would know what the diagnosis was, when it was made, what  the
             symptoms were and what the treatment was.  If his partner  has
             some abnormal cells identified in a routine smear followed  by
             a loop exision which revealed no evidence of any  abnormality,
             he could reasonably be expected to explain that.  There  would
             be no reason why in those circumstances his  wife  would  need
             him to perform all  household  tasks  because  of  her  health
             condition.

         53.  I note that the sponsor had been referred to  a  gynaecologist
             who she saw on 18 June 2018  because  of  concerns  about  not
             having conceived despite trying for two years.  I  have  taken
             this into account but this evidence does not add significantly
             to the appellant's case."

11.  If the appellant was correct that the state  of  the  sponsor's  health
    was a major problem, it makes no sense that neither he  nor  she  would
    have failed to link it to her concerns about  not  conceiving.   Either
    she or both would have said that she or they were trying for  children,
    but were facing problems in her conceiving.  She  mentioned  only  that
    "we want to make family" - nothing about  facing  problems  conceiving.
    When asked if she had any medical problems she said no (apart  from  "a
    burn problem") and later said that  she  had  had  surgery  for  uterus
    cancer but was "fine now".  He only mentioned her cancer problems.

12.  For the above reasons I reject the appellant's principal ground.

13.  The judge did not materially err in law.

14.  Accordingly, the judge's decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 19 July 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey

