
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04096/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th April 2019                   |On 14th May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                               Md Rabiul Awal
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Graves  promulgated  on  18th  January  2019.   Judge  Graves
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  respondent
    dated 23rd May 2018 to refuse to issue him  a  residence  card  on  the
    basis that the appellant had a retained right of residence.   There  is
    no appearance today  by  the  appellant  or  his  representative.   The
    Tribunal received an e-mail sent on 25th April 2019 at 2305 hours  from
    City Heights Solicitors indicating that they were  not  instructed  for
    advocacy at the Upper Tribunal for  the  error  of  law  hearing.   The
    letter states, "Though we have attempted to contact  the  appellant  in
    order to seek instruction however were unable to do so." I am satisfied
    that the appellant has been informed of the  date,  the  time  and  the
    location of his hearing.  I am satisfied that there is no  good  reason
    for the appellant's absence.  In  these  circumstances  I  consider  it
    appropriate, having regard to the overriding interest in Rule 2 of  the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008,  and  having  regard  to  all  the
    circumstances of  this  appeal  holistically  considered,  that  it  is
    appropriate to proceed with the appeal.

2.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  in  1990.   He  entered
    the United Kingdom at some point in 2009.  He claims to  have  met  and
    commenced a relationship with a Polish national whom he married on 17th
    December 2012.  The respondent must have been satisfied both  that  the
    Polish national was exercising treaty  rights  and  that  there  was  a
    genuine marriage because the appellant was  granted  a  residence  card
    based on his relationship with the Polish  national  on  22nd  February
    2013.

3.   The relationship between the appellant and his spouse deteriorated  and
    they stopped living together in  February  2014.   Divorce  proceedings
    were initiated and the Decree Absolute was issued on 6th November 2015.
     This date is relevant  because  the  appellant  and  his  spouse  were
    married for less than three years by the time the marriage came  to  an
    end.  The appellant was arrested on suspicion of drug related  activity
    in October 2015 and he was remanded in custody until May 2016.  He  was
    ultimately  released  and,  although  later  recalled  to  custody,   I
    understand that no charges  have  been  brought  and  that  he  has  no
    criminal convictions.  He was however detained for  some  five  to  six
    months after the divorce.  It is clear that he would have  been  unable
    to undertake any employment for that period.  He claims to have started
    work in October 2016 and the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    does contain wage slips confirming such employment.

4.   The appellant applied  on  8th  February  2018  for  a  residence  card
    claiming to have a retained right of residence.  This  was  refused  by
    the respondent on 23rd May 2018.  The respondent was not satisfied that
    the appellant was working or exercising rights under the treaties after
    the date of divorce.  The respondent noted that the  marriage  had  not
    lasted three years before the divorce was finalised.

5.   The Secretary of State's decision attracted a  right  of  appeal.   The
    appeal was listed at Hatton  Cross  for  15th  January  2019.   At  the
    hearing there was no attendance by the  appellant  or  his  solicitors.
    The First-tier Tribunal received a letter dated 14th January 2019  from
    Taj Solicitors stating "we refer to the  above  hearing  and  write  to
    inform you that we are not instructed to attend the  hearing  which  is
    scheduled to take place on 15th January 2019.   We  apologise  for  any
    inconvenience this may cause."  The judge noted that the solicitors had
    come off the record the day before. It is not apparent from the  letter
    that Taj Solicitors had indeed 'come off the record',  only  that  they
    were not instructed to attend the hearing.  The  First-tier  Judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant had been informed of the hearing  and  had
    provided no  reason  for  his  non-attendance  or  no  grounds  for  an
    adjournment.  The judge,  making  reference  to  the  Procedure  Rules,
    concluded it was not  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  adjourn  and
    proceeded to hear  submissions  from  the  Presenting  Officer  and  to
    determine the appeal. The  judge  correctly  set  out  the  burden  and
    standard of proof and accurately summarised the relevant law. Under the
    heading "My findings" the judge was satisfied that the appeal had to be
    dismissed.  The judge noted that the married had not lasted three years
    at the date of the divorce and that the requirements  under  Regulation
    10 of the EEA Regulations were not met.  The judge  was  not  satisfied
    that the sponsor had lived in the UK for  at  least  one  year  of  the
    marriage.   The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant   had
    established that he was present in  the  UK  exercising  treaty  rights
    between the divorce petition being filed and the  Decree  Absolute  and
    the judge was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  undertaken  any
    employment or otherwise exercised the equivalent of treaty rights  from
    the point of divorce onwards.  In relation  to  the  last  finding  the
    judge noted that the appellant himself declared that he was  in  prison
    between October 2015 and May 2016 and that  he  only  started  work  in
    October 2016. The judge concluded that there was insufficient  evidence
    to establish a right of residence such that a residence card should  be
    issued.

6.   The grounds of appeal, presumably settled by  the  appellant's  present
    representatives, City Heights Solicitors, contend  that  he  was  taken
    unwell before the First-tier Tribunal hearing, that he decided  he  was
    not in a fit state to attend the hearing and that he  provided  medical
    evidence to Taj Solicitors in advance of the hearing and instructed Taj
    Solicitors to adjourn the appeal hearing. The grounds contend that  Taj
    Solicitors failed to apply for the  adjournment  and  instead  withdrew
    their instructions the  day  before  the  hearing.   According  to  the
    grounds the appellant was completely unaware of this and was under  the
    impression that the hearing had been adjourned.  On  instructions  from
    City Heights Solicitors the appellant is  said  to  have  attempted  to
    contact Taj Solicitors on several occasions by phone and e-mail but Taj
    Solicitors failed to respond.  I pause to note the complete absence  of
    any evidence either in relation to the appellant  being  unwell  at  or
    around the date of the  First-tier  hearing,  or  of  any  attempts  to
    contact Taj Solicitors.   The  grounds  first  invited  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to set aside the  judge's  decision  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant  was  not  present  and  was  unable  to  make   submissions.
    Alternatively, the grounds sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that there was a  procedural  irregularity.   The
    grounds contend that the appellant had strong grounds for the grant  of
    an adjournment as he was not medically fit to attend  the  hearing  and
    assert that Taj Solicitors  withdrew  their  instructions  without  any
    justified reason and that  the  absence  of  any  legal  representative
    prevented the appellant from having a fair hearing under Article  6  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights.  I pause once  again  to  note
    that Article 6 of the European Convention  of  Human  Rights  does  not
    apply  in  administrative  decisions,  although   the   principles   of
    administrative fairness and procedural fairness inherent on  Article  6
    do apply to all aspects  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure.  Permission  was
    granted  by  Judge  Hollingworth  on   28th   February   2019.    Judge
    Hollingworth stated, "It is arguable in the light of the  circumstances
    set out in the permission application, the condition of  the  appellant
    and the steps taken which are referred to that unfairness has arisen or
    is capable of being seen to arise."

7.   The appellant's current  representatives  have  provided  a  bundle  of
    documents for  the  purposes  of  the  error  of  law  hearing.   These
    replicate the documents that were before the First-tier Tribunal.  They
    include a  character  reference  letter,  letters  of  the  appellant's
    employment from October 2016, evidence of  his  address,  the  marriage
    certificate, the divorce certificate and the  appeal  documents.   They
    omit to contain any evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's  state  of
    health at the date of the First-tier hearing and any  evidence  of  any
    attempt to contact Taj Solicitors.  I am not satisfied that  there  has
    been any procedural impropriety or procedural unfairness in the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.  This is because  the  appellant  could  have
    provided medical evidence that he claims was given to Taj Solicitors in
    support of this appeal.  There is  no  evidence  of  any  sort  in  the
    Tribunal bundle.  Moreover, the appellant has made serious criticism of
    his  previous  representatives.   Following  HG  (Conduct  of  Previous
    Solicitor  -  Procedure)  Turkey  [2004]  UKIAT  00066,   the   current
    representatives should have communicated the grounds of appeal and  any
    supporting documents to the former representatives and  asked  them  to
    confirm, deny or comment.  There is no evidence before  me  that  there
    has been any attempt to communicate with Taj Solicitors and there is no
    evidence to support the very serious  allegation  that  Taj  Solicitors
    failed to act on the appellant's instructions to request an adjournment
    and came off record instead.

8.   In determining whether the failure by the judge to adjourn  the  First-
    tier hearing was lawful I have  had  regard  to  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418, a decision of the former President of  the
    Upper Tribunal promulgated in September  2014.  Having  regard  to  the
    principles set out in that decision I am entirely unpersuaded that  the
    appellant was denied a fair hearing, and that the failure by the  judge
    to adjourn or to even consider adjourning the hearing was not,  on  any
    view, one that led to unfairness.  Even if I am mistaken  in  terms  of
    the failure to adjourn I am entirely  satisfied  that  the  failure  to
    adjourn the hearing could not have made any material difference to  the
    First-tier Judge's conclusion.  This is for two  very  simple  reasons.
    The appellant had not been married for three years  and  the  appellant
    had not worked for  a  continuous  period  after  the  divorce.  It  is
    impossible for the appellant to have met the requirements for the grant
    of a residence card on the basis  that  he  had  a  retained  right  of
    residence.  The grounds wholly fail to engage with  these  unassailable
    conclusions of the First-tier Judge.   The  judge  granting  permission
    should have had regard to whether the appeal  could,  on  any  rational
    view, have succeeded. For the reasons given the appeal could  not  have
    succeeded and I find that there is  no  error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision ought to be set aside.  I therefore dismiss the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]                               10 May 2019
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
