
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04759/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2019                               |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                               fazal ur rehman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Hollywood, instructed by Andrew Russell & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He  appeals  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie  who  dismissed  his  appeal  for
    reasons given  in  a  decision  dated  14  February  2018  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision dated 12 April 2016 refusing to  issue  a
    permanent residence card.


 2. The judge explained at [31] to [35] of his decision after surveying the
    evidence regarding the EEA national's work pattern and its location:


         "31. More fundamentally a real issue arises in regard to  when  and
             for how long the parties were actually living together, if  at
             all.  The appellant made his  application  with  the  declared
             residence of 20 Foxglove Street, Belfast  and  there  are  two
             letters appended with it from the Social Security Agency dated
             24 October 2012 and 23 February 2015 to her at this address in
             regard to Employment and Support Allowance.  But in the bundle
             of documents produced at the hearing other  Belfast  addresses
             appear on  the  Jobseekers  Allowance  correspondence,  namely
             Templemore Hostel, 7 -9 Upper Frank Street,  Belfast  and  160
             Madrid Street, Belfast.


         32.  In his application he said he was living with his sponsor from
             January 2010 (5.6).  He is asked whether he has lived with her
             at an address other than that given in section 1 (20  Foxglove
             Street, Belfast) and he states that he lived with  her  at  49
             Graymount Road, Newtownabbey giving the relevant period as  20
             January 2010 to 1 July 2010.


         33.  The letter from the University of Ulster is written to her  in
             November 2010 at Apt 1 Pypers Field, Comber  Road,  Dundonald.
             Most of the Red Sky Group pay advice slips  are  addressed  to
             her at 1 Pipers Field, Comber Road, Belfast.   There  are  pay
             advice slips in 2012 from Allied Bakeries to her at 160 Madrid
             Street, Belfast.


         34.  These various addresses raise a real doubt as to  whether  the
             parties were ever genuinely residing together, and from  early
             on in their alleged association at that.


         35.  I find the appellant comes nowhere near to proving that he  is
             entitled to a Permanent Residence Card under the provisions of
             the Regulations.  The  last  three  of  the  four  constituent
             elements noted above have not been met."


 3. The grounds of challenge refer to  Regulation  14  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 with the  observation  that  the  appellant  had
    asserted that permanent residence  had  already  acquired  by  the  EEA
    national prior  to  the  events  occurring  after  April  2011.  It  is
    contended that appellant and his spouse were not actually  required  to
    demonstrate they resided in the same house in order to succeed and  the
    judge had failed to take into account PM  (EEA  -  spouse  -  "residing
    with") Turkey  [2011]  UKUT  89  (IAC).   The  genuine  nature  of  the
    relationship had never been disputed.  In summary it is argued that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  misapplied  the  law,  made  inadequate
    findings on the salient issues and failed to have  regard  to  relevant
    caselaw.


 4. The Secretary of State has served a notice pursuant to rule 24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  explaining  that  the
    application for permission is not opposed.  The Tribunal was invited to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral continuance hearing to  consider
    whether the appellant has  satisfied  the  requirements  for  permanent
    residence.


 5. The hearing of this appeal began without Mr Matthews  as  he  had  been
    delayed. In deciding the way forward, I reviewed the evidence  with  Mr
    Hollywood during which he  clarified  that  the  appellant's  wife  had
    commenced employment at Park View Lodge Bed and Breakfast on  23  April
    2006.  Her WRS registration had been updated as  of  2  April  2007  to
    reflect commencement of her employment at  the  University  of  Ulster.
    The papers in the bundle included  a  letter  from  the  University  of
    Ulster dated 25 November 2010 confirming her last day of service was 24
    October 2010 and the appellant's wife had produced pay  slips  for  her
    employment with Red Sky from 16 July 2010  until  1  April  2011.   The
    chronology showed that the appellant had moved  to  Wales  in  February
    2011 and his wife had moved there at the end  of  April  2011  and  had
    sought work and obtained job seekers allowance.


 6. The arrival of Mr Matthews obviated the need for remittal to the First-
    tier Tribunal or any further fact finding in the Upper Tribunal.  After
    conferring with Mr Hollywood, Mr Matthews accepted  that  the  evidence
    almost covered a five year period but for a week or  two  and  did  not
    resist a finding that the appellant's wife  had  achieved  a  right  of
    permanent residence in  April  2011.   As  a  consequence,  Mr  Mathews
    accepted that the appellant himself had achieved a comparable right  of
    permanent residence in January  2015.  He  therefore  agreed  that  the
    appeal should be allowed.


 7. Neither party required me to give detailed reasons for my decision.   I
    consider that Mr Matthews was correct to proceed as he had; the  issues
    were whether the appellant's wife had acquired  a  right  of  permanent
    residence by April 2011 and whether the appellant benefited as a family
    member.  The subsequent difficulties encountered by the couple are  not
    relevant to that enquiry.


 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of  law.
    I re-make the decision and allow the appeal against the decision of the
    Secretary of State refusing to recognise the appellant's  status  as  a
    permanent resident under the 2006 Regulations.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed
                                                 Date 18 April 2019
UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

