

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
ea/04081/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September 2017                        |On 5 October 2017              |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               ROMILA MUSHTAQ

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Ali (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  from  a
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter the tribunal) made after
   a hearing of 5 January 2017 whereupon it allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
   against the Secretary of State's decision of 31 March  2016  refusing  to
   grant her  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  of  derivative  rights  of
   residence.

2. By way of brief background, the claimant is a national  of  Pakistan  and
   was born on 4 November 1983. She entered the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  student
   migrant on 20 May 2011. The  following  month  she  met  one  Mr  Arminas
   Karpovicius who  is  a  Lithuanian  national.  The  two  entered  into  a
   relationship and  married  each  other,  in  the  United  Kingdom,  on  7
   September 2011. The claimant discontinued her studies and on 7 March 2012
   gave birth to the couple's first child. A further child was  subsequently
   been born to the claimant on 1 February 2016 and Mr Karpovicius is  named
   as the father on the birth certificate.  However,  the  relationship  hit
   difficulties and in or around September  2015  Mr  Karpovicius  left  the
   claimant and there has been no subsequent contact.

3. The claimant's application for a derivative residence card  was  made  on
   the basis of her being the primary carer of the first child, a Lithuanian
   national, and that the child was in education in the United Kingdom.

4.  The  primary  issue  for  the  tribunal  to  resolve  was  whether   the
   requirements contained within regulation  15A(3)(c)  of  the  Immigration
   (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  were  met.  That  included
   requirements that the relevant  child  is  in  education  in  the  United
   Kingdom and was in such education at a time when the EEA national  parent
   (Mr Karpovicius) was in the United Kingdom.

5. The Judge made a  number  of  favourable  findings  from  the  claimant's
   perspective  including  one  that  since  the  child  she  had  commenced
   attending a school reception  class  she  was  in  education  within  the
   meaning of the Regulations. But there was a difficulty in that there  was
   no clear evidence regarding the whereabouts of Mr  Karpovicius.  So,  the
   Secretary of State had argued that the claimant had failed to  show  that
   the EEA national parent was in the United Kingdom at the time  the  child
   commenced in that reception class. It was clarified before  me  that  she
   had commenced her attendance at the reception class in September of 2016.
   However, the Judge decided that, even if that was the  position,  it  did
   not matter. This was the Judge's reasoning;

           "17. The appellant told me that the  child  in  question  is  in
           "reception". Mrs Brewer [the Secretary of State's representative
           at the tribunal] accepts that this would meet the first part  of
           reg  15A(3)(c),  the  "education"  requirement.   However,   she
           submitted that the latter part, namely Mr  Karpovicius  must  be
           present in the UK, is not met. In my view, the whole purpose  of
           reg 15A of the 2006 Regs is to protect  the  rights  of  an  EEA
           national child. If the appellant cannot prove,  on  balance,  Mr
           Karpovicius "was" present in the UK at the moment the  child  in
           question enters education, it defeats the whole purpose  of  reg
           15A of the 2006 regs, namely the protection of the treaty rights
           of an EEA national child. If Mr Karpovicius  had  not  abandoned
           his child there would have been no need  for  the  appellant  to
           make an application under reg 15A to protect the child's  treaty
           rights. Therefore, interpreting the second part of reg 15A(3)(c)
           literally defeats the child's treaty rights. I do not find  that
           that is the effect the second part of reg 15A(3)(c) was intended
           to have. In my view, adopting a  "purposive"  interpretation  of
           the second part of reg 15A(3)(c) I find the  intention  of  this
           part of the regulations is that the  child  in  question  is  in
           "education"  in  the  UK  whether  or  not  his  father  can  be
           demonstrated to be in the UK as well.  In  my  view,  any  other
           interpretation defeats the child's treaty rights to  be  present
           in the UK."

6. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal.  The  grounds,  in
   summary, were to the effect that the tribunal had  erred  in  failing  to
   apply the proper meaning of regulation 15A(3)(c) and  also  in  accepting
   that Mr Karpovicius at some point whilst in the UK had been a "worker" (a
   consideration relevant to 15A(3)(b). Permission to appeal was granted.

7. Permission having been granted there  was  a  hearing  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal (before me) so that it could be decided whether the tribunal had
   erred in law or not. Directions made provision for matters to proceed  to
   remaking   should   that   be   necessary   or   otherwise   appropriate.
   Representation at the hearing was as in indicated above and I am grateful
   to both representatives.

8. Mrs  Petterson  did  not  seek  to  rely  upon  the  second  ground.  She
   acknowledged that the  Judge  had  indicated,  at  paragraph  15  of  his
   determination, that there was "copious" evidence of  past  worker  status
   which had gone unchallenged. So, the only matter for me to  decide,  with
   respect to error of law, was that relating to the Judge's  interpretation
   of regulation 15A(3)(c). As to that, Mrs  Petterson  essentially,  relied
   upon the grounds as drafted. Mrs Ali made various points. She  said  that
   there had been in place a government concession regarding  the  15A(3)(c)
   requirements though she did not produce it  before  me  and  acknowledged
   that there had been no evidence of any  relevant  concession  before  the
   Judge. She pointed out that further  regulations,  which  had  come  into
   force after the relevant dates in this appeal, did not  impose  the  same
   requirement concerning the EEA national parent's presence at the time the
   child entered into education.

9. I decided to set aside the Judge's decision and I  indicated  so  to  the
   parties. That is because the  Judge's  reasoning,  of  itself,  does  not
   justify departure from the  clear  and  straightforward  wording  of  the
   regulation. The parties agreed that the only issue relevant  to  remaking
   would be that of whether the evidence suggested the EEA  national  parent
   was or was not in the United Kingdom at the date the child  entered  into
   education and that that was a matter to be determined on the basis of the
   balance of probability. In seeking to remake the decision  I  heard  oral
   evidence from the claimant. She did indicate, at  the  outset,  that  her
   command of English was limited but she and her representative  wished  to
   push on. Mrs Petterson did not express any concerns. In the event,  clear
   and straightforward questions were put to  her  which  she  was  able  to
   understand and appropriately answer.

10.  In  response  to  questions  put  by  me  the  claimant  said  that  Mr
   Karpovicius had been living in the United Kingdom for five years prior to
   the two meeting for the first time in 2011. He had not told  her  why  he
   had come to England but, during the time that they were a couple, he  had
   not returned  to  Lithuania.  He  has  a  mother  and  five  brothers  in
   Lithuania. She believes that he is in East London because he had or has a
   girlfriend who lives in East London. Mrs Ali did not  ask  any  questions
   but in response to questions put by Mrs Petterson the claimant said  that
   he had not been present when she had given birth  to  her  second  child.
   She had not seen him since September of 2015.

11. Mrs Petterson submitted that in the  above  circumstances  the  claimant
   had failed to demonstrate that Mr Karpovicius was in the UK at  the  date
   the child entered into education and that, on that basis, I should remake
   the decision against the claimant. Mrs Ali submitted the opposite.

12. As I indicated to the representatives at the hearing, I  have  concluded
   that it is more likely than not that, as at the date  the  child  entered
   into relevant  education,  Mr  Karpovicius  was  present  in  the  United
   Kingdom. That is because he has previous long  residence  in  the  United
   Kingdom which suggests he may prefer to be here rather than elsewhere, he
   clearly had reasons for leaving his home country to come here which might
   have been linked to his view as to his economic prospects, there  was  no
   reason to think that the ending of his  relationship  with  the  claimant
   would lead to his departure from the country given that the  relationship
   was not the reason for his arrival in the country and that there was,  on
   the face of it, no other reason as to why he would depart from the UK.

13. In light of the above, although I have set aside the  decision,  I  have
   remade the decision in favour of the claimant.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error
of law and is set aside.

15. In remaking the decision, I allow  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 31 March  2016  refusing  to  grant  her  a
derivative residence card under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006 (as amended).


Signed:                           Date: 3 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction. None was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and
none was sought before me.


Signed:                           Date: 3 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway





To the Respondent

I make no fee award


Signed:                           Date: 3 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



