
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04368/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2020                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             anthony sunday ogbo
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, instructed by Edmans & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a Nigerian national born on  19  April  1978.  He  appeals,
with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
his appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue him  with  a
permanent residence card under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016 as the former family member (spouse)  of  an  EEA  national
with a retained right of residence on divorce.

The background to this appeal is as follows. The appellant  claims  to  have
entered the UK on 12 February 2008. On 27 November 2010 he married  [TG],  a
Portuguese national, and  on  25  June  2012  he  was  granted  a  right  of
residence as the family member of an  EEA  national,  valid  until  25  June
2017. In October 2015 legal proceedings commenced to end  the  marriage  and
on 21 March 2016 the decree absolute for divorce was issued.  On  23  August
2017 the appellant applied for a permanent residence card on the basis of  a
retained right of residence on divorce, but his application was  refused  on
1 December 2017. He made  another  application  on  the  same  basis  on  10
January 2018, but that was also refused on 3 June 2018.

The appellant's application was refused on the grounds that  he  had  failed
to submit a valid passport or national identity  card  as  evidence  of  his
former  spouse's  identity  and  nationality  and  had  failed  to   provide
sufficient evidence to show that his sponsor was  exercising  treaty  rights
to the date the marriage was dissolved. Although photocopies of tax  returns
had been submitted, there was nothing official from  HMRC  to  confirm  that
the returns had been submitted and paid.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision.  His  appeal  was  initially
listed for hearing on 8 January 2019.  However,  following  the  appellant's
representative's request on 20 November 2018 for an  "Amos"  direction,  the
First-tier  Tribunal  issued  directions,  on  7  December  2018,  for   the
respondent to make enquiries of the DWP and/or HMRC in relation to  the  EEA
national sponsor's employment, and the hearing was adjourned until 26  April
2019 in order to await a response.

The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge MA Khan  on  26  April
2019, by which time the respondent had filed evidence from HMRC in  relation
to the EEA national's employment records, confirming no self-assessment  tax
record being held for the subject and no PAYE  employment  records  for  the
tax years 2015-16 and 2017-18. Prior to the hearing, on 5  April  2019,  the
appellant's representatives requested a further  "Amos"  direction,  on  the
basis that the HMRC checks had only been conducted in  relation  to  one  of
the EEA national's NI numbers, whereas  she  had  two  numbers  and  further
checks therefore needed to be made on  the  other  NI  number  in  order  to
confirm the evidence of her self-employment.

At the hearing, the appellant's counsel applied for an adjournment  for  the
further Amos enquiries to be made, but the  judge  refused  to  adjourn  and
proceeded to hear the appeal. The appellant gave oral  evidence  before  the
judge, claiming that his ex-spouse was working as a  care  assistant,  on  a
self-employed basis, at  the  time  the  divorce  proceedings  commenced  in
October 2015. He did not understand why there were two NI  numbers  for  his
wife, since she only had one number.  The  appellant  relied  upon  the  tax
returns for his ex-wife for 2014/15 and 2015/16 which  had  been  submitted,
together with a letter from T.T. Accountancy Services confirming  her  self-
employment as a carer, and the fact that the  respondent  had  accepted  the
evidence of her self-employment  until  the  time  of  the  divorce  in  the
previous refusal decision of 1 December 2017.

The judge noted that the  respondent  had  conceded  the  first  reason  for
refusal concerning the sponsor's identity documents and that the only  issue
was whether the sponsor was exercising treaty rights  at  the  time  of  the
commencement of the divorce proceedings. The  judge  found  the  appellant's
evidence with regard to his ex-wife's employment to be neither credible  nor
consistent and considered that the accountant's letter was of no  evidential
value. The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide
evidence to demonstrate that his former wife was  exercising  treaty  rights
at the time  of  the  divorce  and  that  he  therefore  did  not  meet  the
requirements of regulations 10(5) and 15(1)(f) of the EEA Regulations  2016.
He accordingly dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the judge had failed to make findings on the tax returns  which
had not been checked by the respondent against HMRC  records;  that  he  had
erred in rejecting the accountant's letter and had erred by failing to  give
reasons for finding the appellant's evidence not to be  credible;  and  that
he had erred  by  failing  to  adjourn  the  appeal  in  order  for  further
information to be sought from HMRC.

Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 21 November 2019.

The matter then came before me.


Hearing and submissions

Mr Davison submitted that the judge had erred  by  failing  to  adjourn  the
proceedings for full Amos enquiries  to  be  carried  out,  further  to  the
request of the appellant's solicitors, as it had become  apparent  that  the
appellant's ex-wife had two NI numbers and two  temporary  numbers,  whereas
the HMRC statement produced for the appeal only  contained  the  results  of
enquiries made in respect of one of the numbers,  SL632208A,  as  stated  in
the First-tier Tribunal's Directions  of  7  December  2018.  Had  the  full
checks been made against all the numbers, including  the  second  NI  number
SL632983A, the HMRC records would have confirmed the  appellant's  ex-wife's
self-employment at the time the divorce proceedings  commenced.  Mr  Davison
submitted further that the judge had erred by concluding at  [35]  that  the
appellant's evidence  with  regard  to  his  ex-wife's  employment  was  not
credible or consistent as there was no basis for such a  finding,  since  he
had always maintained that she had two NI numbers. The judge  had  erred  by
finding that the accountant's letter was self-serving. He had also erred  by
failing to make findings on the evidence which was before him, such  as  the
tax returns for 2014/15 and 2015/16, and the divorce petition  referring  to
the appellant's ex-wife's occupation as a mental health worker.  Mr  Davison
also relied on the previous refusal decision of 1  December  2017  in  which
the respondent had accepted that  the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  exercising
treaty rights at the time of the divorce.

Mr Avery submitted that the appellant had had an opportunity to put all  the
relevant  information  forward  and  the  judge   was   entitled   to   have
reservations about a second NI number, to consider the documentary  evidence
to be unusual and to give the documents the weight that he did. The  grounds
are simply a disagreement with the judge's decision.



Discussion and conclusions

The main challenge made by the appellant to  Judge  Khan's  decision  is  in
regard to the refusal to adjourn for a further Amos  direction  and  further
enquiries to HMRC related to a second NI number. It is of  some  note  that,
whilst permission was granted in relation to that ground of  challenge,  the
permission decision also stated that the  refusal  to  adjourn  appeared  to
meet the test of fairness in the circumstances. I am entirely in  agreement.
This was a case which had already been adjourned for an  Amos  direction  to
be made and for enquiries to be carried out by  the  respondent  with  HMRC,
based upon the information provided by the appellant in a  letter  from  his
solicitors dated 6 December 2018.  It  was  not  until  shortly  before  the
adjourned hearing on 26 April 2019 that mention of the second NI number  was
made in the appellant's representative's letter of 5  April  2019,  with  no
explanation as to why, when that  number  appeared  within  the  documentary
evidence produced for the appeal, it had not been included in  the  previous
request of 6 December 2018. That was precisely the point made by  the  judge
at [7] when considering the adjournment request.

I also pointed out to Mr Davison that the HMRC statement  appeared,  in  any
event,  to  already  have  provided  all  the  information  held   for   the
appellant's ex-spouse and to have  not  been  limited  to  information  held
against the one NI number SL632208A. The HMRC statement provides details  of
Ms  [G]'s  PAYE  employment  with  Hestia  Housing  and  Support  and   Life
Opportunities Trust Ltd which were consistent  with  the  salary  slips  and
P60s produced by  the  appellant  under  NI  number  SL632083A.  By  way  of
example, the final salary slip for Hestia Housing and Support  at  page  116
of the appellant's consolidated bundle is consistent  with  the  figures  in
the HMRC statement for 2012/13, as is the salary slip dated  31  March  2014
for Life Opportunities Trust at page 100 with the information  in  the  HMRC
statement for the year 2013/14, to which I  referred  Mr  Davison.  Further,
the P45 at page 62 for Life  Opportunities  Trust  is  consistent  with  the
entry in the  HMRC  statement  for  2014/15,  but  contains  the  NI  number
SL632208A. Accordingly it seems  that  the  HMRC  statement  is  a  complete
statement of  all  records  held  for  the  appellant's  ex-spouse  for  all
relevant NI numbers and  that  the  relevant  search  must  have  been  made
against her name and date of birth as opposed to the one NI number  provided
in the Tribunal's directions. That is indeed consistent with  what  is  said
at [65] of  Kerr  v  Department  for  Social  Development(Northern  Ireland)
[2004] UKHL 23, as extracted at [41] of Amos v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 552, in regard to the  information  required
by the HMRC to make  its  relevant  enquiries.  In  such  circumstances  the
request for a further Amos direction and enquiry  was  unnecessary  and  the
refusal of the judge to adjourn the proceedings was of no  consequence.  The
judge was perfectly  entitled  to  rely  upon  the  HMRC  statement  already
submitted as  full  and  complete  evidence  of  the  appellant's  ex-wife's
employment and self-employment tax record.

In the circumstances I do not consider that there was any error of law  made
by the judge in refusing to adjourn the proceedings. There  was  nothing  in
the judge's refusal to adjourn that was inconsistent with  the  judgment  in
Amos. On the contrary, the Court of Appeal in that case held  at  [42]  that
the case of Kerr was "not  authority  for  the  proposition  that  the  Home
Secretary is bound to  make  enquiries  of  other  government  departments".
There was no unfairness in the judge's decision to  refuse  to  adjourn  the
proceedings and there was no  prejudice  to  the  appellant  in  the  appeal
proceeding as it did.

Neither do I find any  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
evidence or his adverse credibility findings made at [35]. I  do  not  agree
with Mr Davison that there was  no  basis  for  his  adverse  findings.  The
appellant's evidence  about  his  ex-wife's  employment  was  confusing  and
inconsistent.  The  documentation  showed  two  different  NI  numbers.  The
appellant stated before the judge (recorded at [34]) that  his  ex-wife  had
only one NI number, yet, as the judge found at [7], he must have known  that
there were two numbers  as  the  documents  he  relied  upon  contained  two
numbers.  The judge considered the explanation provided by the appellant  at
[23] but was fully entitled to conclude that his  evidence  was  simply  not
reliable. Likewise, the judge was fully entitled to accord no weight to  the
accountant's letter, for the reasons  cogently  given  at  [36].  The  judge
provided the appellant with ample opportunity to provide an explanation  for
his concerns, as recorded at [27] and [29]  and  was  entitled  to  conclude
that the letter was  not  reliable  evidence  of  his  ex-wife  being  self-
employed at the relevant time. Whilst the appellant's  grounds  assert  that
the judge failed to make any findings on  the  self-assessment  tax  returns
for 2014/15 and 2015/16, it is clear  that  the  judge's  findings  at  [36]
related to those returns and tied in with the submissions recorded  at  [28]
and [29] and the observations at [33]. The judge plainly accorded no  weight
to the tax returns, given that there was no  evidence  that  they  had  been
submitted to the HMRC,  and  he  was  fully  and  properly  entitled  so  to
conclude. In so far as Mr Davison sought to argue that  the  HMRC  statement
did not include checks made against the NI number SL632083A referred  to  in
those tax returns, I refer to my  observations  above  in  relation  to  the
information held about Hestia Housing and  Support  and  Life  Opportunities
Trust Ltd under the same NI  number  which  showed  that  checks  were  made
against that number.

As for Mr Davison's submission that the judge ignored the  evidence  showing
the appellant's ex-wife's economic activity  at  the  time  of  the  divorce
proceedings, I do not accept that that is the case. As I have  found  above,
the judge gave detailed consideration to the accountant's  letter  and  made
proper findings open to him in that regard. The suggestion that the  divorce
petition was evidence of employment is without any merit, as it referred  to
the appellant's ex-wife's occupation and not her current employment, and  in
any event was not evidence relied upon by the appellant for that purpose  at
the hearing. With regard  to  the  respondent's  comments  in  the  previous
refusal decision of 1 December 2017, I  do  not  consider  that  to  be  any
formal and binding concession by the respondent  that  the  appellant's  ex-
wife was exercising treaty rights  at  the  relevant  time,  and  indeed  Mr
Davison did not expect me to do so. That decision has been followed  by  the
current decision of 3 June 2018 where the respondent clearly did not  accept
that that was the case and it was for the judge to make his decision on  the
basis of all the evidence before him, which is what he did.

As for the further evidence produced for  the  hearing  at  page  4  of  the
consolidated bundle, namely an email said to be  from  the  appellant's  ex-
wife stating that the HMRC had confirmed that they held her  self-assessment
records, I do not give any weight to this. It is  clearly  not  relevant  to
the question of whether the judge erred in law as it was not evidence  which
was before him at the time. In any event it adds nothing  of  value  to  the
appellant's case, given the adverse observations and findings properly  made
by the judge.

For all of these reasons I do not find any merit in the  challenges  to  the
judge's decision.  The  judge  considered  all  the  evidence,  gave  cogent
reasons for according the evidence the weight that he did and was fully  and
properly entitled to conclude that the evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that
the appellant's  ex-wife  was  exercising  treaty  rights  at  the  time  of
commencement  of  divorce  proceedings.  The  judge's  decision,  that   the
appellant was unable to meet the requirements of the  EEA  Regulations  2016
on the basis of a retained right of residence upon divorce,  was  fully  and
properly open to him on the evidence before him. There are no errors of  law
in his decision.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.



Signed: [pic]                           Dated:           8 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
