
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: EA/04420/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 8th January 2019                          |On: 16th January 2019        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                          Samuel Onuorah Nwachukwu
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Wass, Counsel instructed by Sunrise Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of birth 6th September 1977
    who appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Doyle) to dismiss his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    to refuse to recognise a  right  of  residence  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.


 2. Judge Doyle dismissed the appeal before  him  with  reference  to  Rule
    25(1)(e) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. He found that no grounds of appeal  had
    been lodged with the appeal form, and that despite being warned by  the
    Tribunal that the appeal would be dismissed if no grounds  were  filed,
    the Appellant failed to comply with this requirement.


 3. The grounds in this onward appeal are that grounds of  appeal  were  in
    fact  filed  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  accordance  with  the
    Procedure Rules.  A fax transmission sheet is produced dated  the  11th
    July 2018 showing successful transmission of said grounds. Judge  Doyle
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that grounds had not  been  submitted
    by that date.

 4. Before me Ms Cunha for the Secretary of State accepted that there  does
    appear to have been a procedural  irregularity  and  accepted  that  in
    those circumstances the decision of Judge  Doyle  must  be  set  aside.
    Given that the Appellant has in effect been denied a  right  of  appeal
    before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appropriate  disposal  would  be
    remittal de novo.

 5. Ms Wass requested  that  prior  to  remittal  I  make  an  Amos  order,
    requiring the Secretary of State to make the  relevant  enquiries  with
    HMRC about whether the Appellant's former partner was exercising treaty
    rights at the relevant time. I will do so but  first  direct  that  the
    Appellant furnish the Secretary of  State  with  all  of  the  relevant
    details, required to conduct such checks.  This must be done  no  later
    than 2 weeks from the date that this decision is promulgated.  Pursuant
    to s40 of the Borders Act 2007 I direct that  the  Secretary  of  State
    thereafter conduct the  relevant  enquiries  and  file  and  serve  the
    resulting information no later than 6 weeks from  the  date  that  this
    decision is promulgated.

 6. There is no anonymity order.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    8th
                                January 2019
