
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/04870/2016
     EA/04873/2016
     EA/04874/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Decision given orally immediately after     |On 09 July 2019                |
|hearing                                     |                               |
|On 24 June 2019                             |                               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                E1, E2 and E3
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Walsh, Counsel instructed by Universe
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has been before this Tribunal on  two  previous  occasions.
    Following the first hearing on 21 February 2019 I found that there  had
    been a procedural irregularity in the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such that the decision had to be remade.  It is not  necessary
    for the purposes of this decision to set out the basis of that decision
    save to repeat that it arose out  of  a  misunderstanding  between  the
    judge and Counsel then appearing on behalf of the appellants  and  that
    no criticism was made by this Tribunal of the conduct of the judge.

 2. Subsequently the appeal was again listed for hearing on 10  April  2019
    but because an interpreter had not been booked it had to  be  adjourned
    until today.

 3. The appellants are  all  nationals  of  Nigeria  who  had  applied  for
    permanent residence cards as  the  wife  and  stepchildren  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in this country.  That national is  a
    Portuguese citizen (hereinafter "the husband") who  was  deported  from
    this country  in  April  2016  following  his  conviction  for  various
    offences.  The appellants had been granted residence cards in 2011, the
    first appellant having been married certainly in name  to  the  husband
    and the second and third appellants (the first  appellant's  daughters)
    having come to join her in this country.  The husband was not  deported
    from this country until the parties had been married for  a  period  of
    five years and so if this had been a genuine marriage at its inception,
    and if the husband had been  in  employment  and  therefore  exercising
    treaty rights in this country during this period,  all  the  appellants
    would be entitled to permanent residence cards.

 4. After his arrest on criminal offences the husband was interviewed while
    in custody and had given answers suggesting that he was single and  had
    no children and that he had not been involved in any application for an
    EEA residence permit.  As a matter  of  fact  this  was  not  truthful,
    because even if the marriage was not  a  genuine  marriage  but  was  a
    marriage made for the purpose of facilitating the grant  to  the  first
    appellant of a residence card nonetheless  in  name  at  any  rate  the
    sponsor was married.  However,  in  light  of  this  statement  by  the
    husband the respondent took the  view  that  the  marriage  was  not  a
    genuine marriage.

 5. The respondent also questioned whether as a matter of fact the  husband
    had been exercising treaty rights in the UK for the requisite period.

 6. On appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    ordered the notes of interview of the husband to be produced which they
    were not and for this reason the judge had stated that  she  would  not
    take account of any of the answers said  to  have  been  given  by  the
    husband in the interview concerning which no record had been  produced.
    Unfortunately the appellants' then representative understood  this  (in
    the event incorrectly) as indicating that the judge was satisfied  that
    the marriage was a genuine one.  Because of this in argument he did not
    address this issue.

 7. In the event the judge went on to find for other reasons that  she  was
    not satisfied that the marriage was a genuine one and at the  error  of
    law hearing I found that this was  a  procedural  irregularity  because
    looking  at  this  dispassionately  it  seemed   there   had   been   a
    misunderstanding and that as a  result  of  this  misunderstanding  the
    appellants' case had not been properly  put.   I  accordingly  directed
    that there  should  be  a  rehearing  before  this  Tribunal  and  that
    rehearing took place today.

 8. Prior to this hearing on behalf of  the  respondent  Mr  Kotas  set  in
    motion very full enquiries which regrettably had not been made  before.
    As was absolutely appropriate he put the  results  of  these  enquiries
    before the Tribunal, to which such reference as is  necessary  will  be
    made below.  I also heard  oral  evidence  from  the  first  and  third
    appellants who were both asked questions, both by the Tribunal and also
    on behalf of the respondent.  The purposes of the  questioning  was  to
    elicit from these witnesses what actually occurred and to clarify  what
    was contained within the material which had so recently been put before
    the Tribunal by Mr Kotas.

 9. I do not intend to set out in any great detail the evidence  which  was
    given or the new material that was produced save to the extent that  is
    necessary.  However, I have before making this decision had  regard  to
    everything which was said to me during the course of  the  hearing  and
    also to all the documents contained within the file, whether or not the
    same is referred to specifically below.

10. The evidence established first that the first appellant had married the
    husband  and  that  following  this  marriage  the  second  and   third
    appellants, her daughters from a previous relationship, had joined  her
    from Nigeria.  Having considered the evidence carefully, I am  entirely
    satisfied to the requisite standard of proof which is  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the evidence of the third appellant  and  the  first
    appellant was truthful evidence, and I make my decision on this basis.

11. The evidence which I have accepted establishes that  at  its  inception
    the marriage was a genuine one, but that it had broken down largely  as
    a result of inappropriate sexual conduct by  the  husband  towards  the
    third appellant which was distressing for her to relate and distressing
    for this Tribunal to hear.  This evidence is supported by other  papers
    within the file, including the evidence recently obtained by  Mr  Kotas
    and put before the Tribunal from which  it  appears  that  amongst  the
    charges of which the husband was convicted were sexual  assaults  which
    in the papers are said to relate to his stepdaughter.   Although  there
    is  some  confusion  as  to  whether  and  if  so  what  charges   were
    specifically brought in  respect  of  his  conduct  towards  the  third
    appellant I am satisfied to the requisite standard of proof as  I  have
    said that the evidence of the third appellant was truthful.

12. It was also clear from the evidence which  I  have  accepted  that  the
    husband had been working certainly up until he  went  into  custody  in
    late 2015 or early 2016 and it is not now submitted on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that he had  not  been  exercising  treaty  rights  for  the
    requisite period of time.

13. The evidence having concluded, Mr Kotas very fairly accepted on  behalf
    of the respondent that he could not seriously argue that the  witnesses
    were not credible witnesses and that on that basis the respondent could
    not properly argue that this appeal should be dismissed.

14. I entirely agree.  The burden of proof to establish that a marriage was
    not a genuine marriage at its inception remains on the  respondent  and
    it is clear having regard to  the  evidence  that  is  now  before  the
    Tribunal that the respondent has not discharged that burden.  Even were
    the burden on the appellant to establish that  the  marriage  had  been
    genuine at its inception  I  would  be  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that it was.  I am also satisfied that  the  husband  was
    exercising treaty rights for the requisite period.

15. It follows that this appeal must now be allowed and I will so order.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  substitute  the
following decision:

The appellants' appeal is allowed, under the 2016 EEA Regulations.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 4 July 2019




