
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04634/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th July 2019                    |On 25th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                 YUMAN AZAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Abebrese promulgated  on  1  March  2019  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the refusal of a residence card  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clive
    Lane on 10 June 2019 on the following grounds: "It is arguable that the
    judge at [22] has misunderstood the relevance of the previous  decision
    of Judge Kekic and the conclusions expressed in the paragraph  are  not
    supported by any or any sufficient reasoning. All the  grounds  may  be
    argued."

3.   The Appellant married the Sponsor, an EEA national,  in  2004  and  was
    issued with  a  residence  card  in  2005.  On  20  December  2010  his
    application for a permanent residence card was  refused  on  the  basis
    that his marriage was one of convenience because  Home  Office  records
    showed that on 22 September 2009 the Appellant's Sponsor had married  a
    Ghanaian national. The Appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
    permanent residence card was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal and the
    Respondent appealed.  Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic found that  there  was
    an error of law and reheard the appeal. She  found  that  there  was  a
    marriage of convenience and dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  11
    April 2012. The Appellant challenged this decision, but permission  was
    refused by the Court of Appeal  in  2012.   Accordingly,  there  is  an
    extant  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  party  to  a  marriage   of
    convenience.

4.   On 25 June 2015 the Appellant submitted an application for a  residence
    card on the basis of a retained right of residence. The application was
    refused because the marriage was found to be one of convenience and the
    Appellant had failed to submit  a  decree  absolute.   The  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed by Upper Tribunal Judge James on 24 February 2017.
     The Appellant did not appeal, but  made  a  further  application,  the
    subject of this appeal, submitting a decree absolute. This  application
    was refused on the basis that the Appellant was party to a marriage  of
    convenience.

5.   The refusal letter of 18 June 2018 states as follows:

         "It is noted that  you  married  your  Sponsor  in  2004  and  have
         previously been issued with a residence card in 2005.  However,  it
         is also noted that  on  16/05/11  your  application  for  permanent
         residence dated 20/12/10 was  refused  under  Regulation  2,  as  a
         marriage of convenience.


         Departmental records show that on 22/09/09 your former spouse Sonia
         Cristina Furtado Monteiro married Ghanaian national Frederick Owusu-
         Ansah in a  customary  marriage.  Furthermore,  on  17/10/09  Sonia
         Cristina Furtado Monteiro submitted an application for a  residence
         card for her spouse Frederick Owusu-Ansah.


         ...


         On 25/06/15 you submitted an application for a  retained  residence
         card, this application was refused with regard  to  the  fact  that
         your marriage was found to be one of convenience by an  Immigration
         Judge. As your marriage was not accepted your application  was  not
         considered under Regulation 10 of the EEA Regulations 2016.


         You have now submitted this application, it is noted that you  have
         submitted a decree absolute dated 18/11/15, however, in  order  for
         you to be considered as the former spouse of an  EEA  national  you
         will need to document that the marriage to your former  spouse  was
         genuine.  Your marriage has been found by this  department  and  an
         Immigration Judge to be one of convenience, undertaken to give  you
         an immigration advantage.  Therefore, your application  is  refused
         in accordance with the EEA Regulations 2016.


         In your appeal determination the Immigration Judge stated:


             '13. Upon reviewing the UTT Judge's  decision  she  notes  the
                  inconsistencies and contradictions in the written and oral
                  evidence of all witnesses in  material  matters,  such  as
                  whether the Sponsor's two children resided with the couple
                  or not, reasons for living apart or  indeed  whether  they
                  have lived apart or not  and  when.  The  judge  deals  in
                  detail with Ms Furtado's pregnancy to another  man  during
                  the marriage, the absence of evidence by the Appellant  of
                  his interactions with the two children of  Ms  Furtado  or
                  indeed the role of the biological fathers of the children,
                  as well as the fact that Ms Furtado appeared to live apart
                  from the Appellant directly after the wedding  took  place
                  and further application for a residence card  for  another
                  man claiming to  be  her  husband  from  her  address  and
                  whereby these two relationships overlapped  in  time,  and
                  which are distinct from the relationships which led to the
                  pregnancy during the claimed marriage to the Appellant.


             21.  Upon revisiting the reasons for refusal set down in  this
                  refusal by the Respondent, although the Appellant  submits
                  his decree absolute dated 18/11/15 regarding  his  divorce
                  from Ms  Furtado,  the  point  remains  that  this  was  a
                  marriage of convenience from the very beginning. Therefore
                  the marriage itself cannot be used as a  springboard  upon
                  which he can then seek to obtain  permanent  residence  in
                  the  UK  after  divorce  by  way  of  retained  rights  of
                  residence, when the foundation of his claim is based on  a
                  fraudulent claim i.e. the  marriage  entered  into  was  a
                  genuine marriage, when it was not.'


         Furthermore, even if your marriage had been accepted you  would  be
         expected to be able to submit valid I.D. in your sponsor  name,  or
         evidence that you had exhausted all avenues in order to obtain  the
         relevant document. You have failed to do so."

Submissions

6.   Mr Iqbal submitted that there was an error in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Kekic because there was insufficient evidence before  her  to  conclude
    that the marriage was entered into with the intention of  circumventing
    immigration law notwithstanding her negative credibility findings.  The
    Appellant had been refused a permanent residence card on the  basis  of
    what happened in 2009, namely that his Sponsor had allegedly married  a
    Ghanaian citizen. The Respondent had based the decision on an inference
    that the Respondent was not entitled to make.  There  was  no  evidence
    before Judge Kekic as to the intention of the parties when they entered
    into the marriage.
7.   Mr Iqbal accepted that there was no  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge James where she found that there was no error  of  law  in  Judge
    Kekic's decision in relation to the application of Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ
    14. However, on the appeal before  Judge  Abebrese  there  was  further
    evidence in order to support the Appellant's case, namely that  of  the
    Sponsor and two witnesses, and the judge failed to give reasons why  he
    did not believe the evidence of those witnesses. There was  no  finding
    in Judge Kekic's decision that the Respondent had  shown  the  marriage
    was one of convenience. It was argued at [19]  and  [20]  before  Judge
    Abebrese that Judge Kekic had failed to properly apply the decision  of
    Rosa. Now there was further evidence upon which a different  conclusion
    could have been reached. Therefore,  regardless  of  all  the  negative
    credibility findings, which only proved the  marriage  could  not  have
    subsisted from 2009 onwards, it could not be said by inference that the
    parties intended a marriage of convenience. Judge Abebrese rejected the
    further evidence but gave no reasons for doing so. He merely relied  on
    the decision of Judge Kekic and  gave  no  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    evidence before him.

8.   Mr Jarvis submitted that the issue of a  marriage  of  convenience  had
    been decided against the Appellant on two occasions.  Judge  Kekic  did
    consider the predominant purpose of the marriage at the  point  it  was
    contracted. She dealt with the  proxy  marriage  and  the  Respondent's
    burden of proving the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.  The  judge
    assessed this issue looking at the totality of the evidence. It was  no
    defence to say that the matters were not put to  the  Appellant.  Judge
    Kekic considered the entire period of the  Appellant's  marriage.   She
    looked backwards from 2009 at  [49]  onwards  and  identified  material
    discrepancies. She gave adequate reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's
    evidence. She directed herself on the burden of proof  at  [40].  Judge
    Kekic had to listen to multiple witnesses giving  extremely  discrepant
    evidence  and  her  findings  were  clear  and  cogent.   Judge   James
    subsequently found that the Judge  Kekic  had  properly  applied  Rosa.



9.   Judge Abebrese correctly applied  Devaseelan  and  lawfully  approached
    the assessment of a marriage of convenience. He understood  the  impact
    of Judge James' decision.  There were adequate  reasons  for  rejecting
    the evidence of the witnesses. The witnesses before  Judge  Kekic  were
    different and they were recounting events closer to the time.   It  was
    going to take something fairly remarkable to overturn  the  substantial
    negative credibility findings  made  by  Judge  Kekic.  The  witnesses'
    evidence before Judge Abebrese did not really add anything.  There  was
    no material error of law at [22]  because,  although  the  finding  was
    brief, there were sufficient reasons in the context of the appeal.  The
    further  evidence  was  not  sufficient  to   displace   the   negative
    credibility findings from before.

10.  Mr Iqbal relied on  [44]  of  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  and
    submitted that Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic did not deal with this period
    of time and therefore there was  a  gap  in  the  judge's  findings  in
    relation to evidence of the marriage prior to  2006.  Therefore,  there
    was insufficient evidence to demonstrate  that  the  intention  of  the
    parties was to enter into a marriage of convenience.

Conclusions and reasons

11.  Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic accepted that there  was  a  legal  marriage
    between the Appellant and Sponsor and that the parties did not have  to
    live together for the marriage to be genuine.  She  accepted  that  the
    marriage did not have to be subsisting as long as it had  been  genuine
    and not a marriage of convenience. In reaching her findings  the  judge
    considered the oral evidence of all  four  witnesses,  the  documentary
    evidence and the submissions made.


12.  The judge then set out the matters going to  the  claimed  relationship
    and detracting from it. At [48] to [64] Judge Kekic  gave  reasons  for
    why she found the Appellant, the Sponsor and  the  witnesses  were  not
    credible. At [65] she concluded:

         "...My main difficulties and concerns with the evidence are set out
         above. Ms Asanovic submitted that the  documents  showed  that  the
         couple had a genuine  marriage  and  that  no-one  would  attend  a
         hearing of an appeal and lie repeatedly.   I  can  only  say  that,
         regrettably, people will and do go to great lengths to stay in  the
         UK, including lying at hearings, and for the reasons I have set out
         I find that the applicant is one of those people.  I conclude  that
         he and the Sponsor have not been reliable or honest  witnesses  and
         have failed to show that their marriage is genuine and not  one  of
         convenience".


13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge James made the following relevant finding:

         "16. I am therefore not persuaded that the  UTT  Judge  only  dealt
             with whether or not the marriage was subsisting,  as  a  close
             reading of her  decision  proves  otherwise  and  reading  the
             decision as a whole addresses matters as at the  date  of  the
             marriage, as well as after the marriage, whereby  the  actions
             of the parties informed their intentions as at the time of the
             marriage".


14.  The evidence before Judge  Abebrese  did  not  undermine  the  previous
    findings of Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic  or  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James. Judge Abebrese considered all the evidence and concluded that it
    was not capable of doing so at [22]:

         "I am of the view that in light of the findings referred  to  above
         and also taking into consideration the evidence that was before  me
         I do not accept the evidence of the appellant, sponsor and evidence
         of Ms Illahi and  Mr  Jehangir  as  credible  in  relation  to  the
         genuineness of the relationship and that the  relationship  is  not
         one of convenience because the Appellant in the hearing before  the
         Tribunal provided evidence which was  inconsistent  and  unreliable
         and they have not provided evidence evidence (sic) in  the  hearing
         before me to render me to alter those findings I have  referred  to
         the relevant paragraphs above. I do not accept the  submissions  of
         the Appellant representative  on  the  claimed  deficiency  of  the
         evidence in the hearing before IJ Kekic. I also find that it is not
         the case that the decision does not  take  into  consideration  the
         intention of the parties and Mr Iqbal did  not  direct  me  to  any
         parts of the decision to support his submissions."


15.  It is apparent from the decision of Judge Abebrese that  he  found  the
    intention of the parties was addressed by Judge  Kekic.  This  was  the
    undisturbed finding of First-tier Tribunal Judge James.  The  Appellant
    did not appeal this decision and Judge Abebrese saw no reason to depart
    from it. The new evidence amounted to evidence that the  Appellant  had
    married his spouse and they had lived together in  Walthamstow  at  the
    time of the marriage. Taken at its highest, this  was  insufficient  to
    displace the credibility findings of Judge Kekic or to demonstrate,  on
    the totality of the evidence, that the Respondent had  failed  to  show
    the marriage was one of convenience.

16.  I am not persuaded by Mr Iqbal's argument that there  was  any  gap  in
    the consideration of evidence  in  Judge  Kekic's  decision.  It  is  a
    comprehensive  decision  which  makes  numerous  negative   credibility
    findings. The Appellant and Sponsor have been found not to be  credible
    witnesses by Judge Kekic after hearing oral  evidence.  Judge  Abebrese
    found they were not credible at the hearing before him. His  conclusion
    that the evidence he heard was not sufficient to displace those earlier
    credibility  findings  were  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience and dismissing the appeal.

17.  I accept that Judge Abebrese could have explained  himself  better  but
    there was no error  of  law  in  his  decision.  He  engaged  with  the
    submissions of Mr Iqbal, which have  now  been  made  on  two  separate
    occasions and rejected. It is not possible to rely  on  a  marriage  of
    convenience in respect of a retained  right  of  residence.  Given  the
    strong negative credibility findings  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic
    there would need to be very strong evidence to the contrary to displace
    those findings. It was not before First-tier Tribunal Judge  James  and
    it was not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese.

18.  There was no error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese promulgated on 1 March 2019  and  I  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal.


Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.



              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 22 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 22 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

