
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/04277/2017
                                                               EA/04284/2017
                                                               EA/04288/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                           |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                A S Fazlur Rahman Chowdhury (first appellant)
                 Farzana Raida Chowdhury (second appellant)
                Rowshon Ara Begum Chowdhury (third appellant)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Khan, instructed by KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants  are  citizens  of  Bangladesh.   The  first  and  third
    appellants are husband and wife  and  the  second  appellant  is  their
    daughter.  The first and third appellants appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's refusal to grant them an  EEA  family
    permit to join Nazmin Islam their daughter in the United Kingdom as the
    dependent parents of her husband Bazlur Rahman Chowdhury who  is  their
    son.  The second appellant appealed against the  decision  refusing  to
    grant her an EEA family permit to join Nazmin Islam  as  the  dependent
    sibling of her husband Mr Chowdhury.

2.   It was common ground before the judge that the only issue in  the  case
    was whether the appellants were dependent  upon  the  sponsor  and  her
    husband.

3.   The judge noted what had been said by the Court of Justice in  Reyes  v
    Sweden [2014] EUECJ C-423/12 that in order for a direct descendant  who
    is 21 years old or older of  a  Union  citizen  to  be  regarded  as  a
    "dependant" of that citizen within the meaning of  Article  2(2)(c)  of
    Directive 2004/38, the existence of a situation of real dependence must
    be established.  It does not appear to have been controversial  in  the
    case that although none of the appellants were direct descendants of Mr
    Chowdhury the issue in regard to establishing dependency  must  be  the
    same as that set out in Reyes.  It would be enough to show that a Union
    citizen regularly for a significant period paid a sum of money to  [the
    appellant] regularly for a significant period  which  is  necessary  in
    order for him to support himself in the state of origin.

4.   The judge also considered the Home Office free movement  rights  policy
    document of 21 April 2017 which in respect of "essential needs" said:

         "If the applicant cannot meet their essential living needs  without
         the financial support of the EEA national, they must be  considered
         dependent even if they also receive  financial  support  or  income
         somewhere else."

5.   On considering the documentary evidence the  judge  accepted  that  the
    majority of the income of the first and third appellants  was  received
    from their son and his wife.  He commented however  that  unfortunately
    they had not provided any details regarding their essential needs other
    than their rent agreement which showed a  regular  monthly  payment  of
    7,000 taka.  The judge noted that the  first  appellant's  income  from
    other sources, according  to  his  bank  statement,  more  than  easily
    covered those payments.  There was however no other evidence of payment
    in  respect  of  essential  needs  including  the  second   appellant's
    university fees.  She said in her affidavit that her  father  paid  for
    her university fees from the funds sent by her brother  and  sister-in-
    law but there was no evidence whatever of the university fees, nor  was
    there evidence of any travel expenditure or payment  of  utility  bills
    for which the appellants were responsible,  according  to  the  tenancy
    agreement.  The judge concluded that the appellants had not shown  that
    the funds were necessary to meet the essential needs of the  appellants
    and therefore did not meet the criteria for establishing dependency  as
    set down in Reyes and in the Home Office guidance.

6.   In the grounds of appeal it was argued what the  sponsor  had  said  in
    oral evidence that the funds went to support his retired parents and/or
    in-laws to pay for their rent and secondly to  pay  the  fees  for  the
    third appellant's education and  these  were  essential  needs.   As  a
    consequence it was argued that the judge had erred in law.

7.   Following the refusal  by  a  First-tier  Judge,  the  application  was
    renewed to the Upper Tribunal, and permission was granted on the  basis
    that it was arguable that the decision was perverse in that  the  judge
    had accepted that there was some dependency and there was evidence that
    the first and third appellants paid their rent and paid for the  second
    appellant's education out of  the  money  received  from  the  sponsor,
    bearing in mind also that the first and third appellants were  retired.



8.   In his submissions Mr Khan referred to the evidence before  the  judge.
    The sponsor in his witness statement at  paragraph  11  said  that  the
    money was for the  everyday  expenses  of  the  appellants.   This  was
    repeated in the appellants' son's statement and was also referred to at
    page 10 in the appellants'  affidavit  at  paragraph  3  as  being  for
    essential living needs.  There was therefore clear evidence  confirming
    the essential needs and as regards the tenancy the rent was paid by the
    son according to what was said.  The funds in the account to which  the
    judge referred was  money  previously  sent  by  the  sponsor  but  the
    appellant  was  not  reliant  on  that.   The  policy  requirement  was
    satisfied.

9.   Mr Melvin had put in the decision of the Court of Appeal in Lim  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1383 with particular reference to paragraph 32, where  it  was
    said that it was a simple matter of fact that  if  an  appellant  could
    support himself there was no dependency even if he was given  financial
    material support by the EU citizen.   The  facts  here  were  different
    however, it was argued, as there was evidence of  a  tenancy  agreement
    and in the affidavit it was said that the  appellants  were  dependent.
    The judge said there was no evidence of the daughter and paying for her
    education but evidence had been given about  that,  that  most  of  the
    money was sent to her mother for that.  There was a material  error  of
    law.  The policy suggested that although other money was coming in,  if
    the essential living needs were being met that was enough.   The  judge
    had not resolved this issue.

10.  In his submissions Mr Melvin referred to and  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    response.  It was argued there that the judge had  been  clearly  aware
    that the appellants did not need to demonstrate  entire  dependency  on
    the sponsors and the appellants had failed adequately to evidence  what
    their actual essential needs were and the judge had noted an absence of
    evidence for the university fees and the only other  evidence  was  for
    rental  needs  which  could  otherwise  be  met  from  the  income  not
    attributed to the sponsors.  In essence the judge had found that on the
    limited evidence available, were the sponsor's  remittances  to  cease,
    the essential needs would still be met from other sources and this  was
    not an irrational or perverse finding.  Mr Melvin argued that  Mr  Khan
    was simply seeking to  reargue  the  case.   Reyes  had  been  properly
    applied and was reinforced by Lim.  All the  evidence  had  been  taken
    into  account  by  the  judge,  who  had  quoted  the  guidance.    The
    conclusions were open to the judge.  There were clearly  other  sources
    of income coming into the appellants' account.  Mr Khan was seeking  to
    cherry-pick what money was coming in  on  the  essential  needs  point.
    There was insufficient  evidence  to  show  the  sponsor's  remittances
    showed that the essential needs point was met.  There was  no  material
    error of law.

11.  By way of reply Mr Khan referred  to  what  was  said  in  the  policy.
    Income from elsewhere did not matter.  The judge  had  identified  that
    the money had been remitted but did not consider what was said  in  the
    evidence about the money going for the rent.  There was no reference to
    the tenancy agreement.

12.  I reserved my decision.

13.  The evidence as accepted by the judge was, as  noted  above,  that  the
    majority of the appellants' income is received from their daughter  and
    son-in-law.  The judge's concern was that they had not provided details
    as to their essential needs other than the rent agreement which  showed
    a regular monthly payment of 7,000 taka.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    first appellant's income from  other  sources  according  to  his  bank
    statement more than easily covered those payments.  The judge commented
    however that there was no other  evidence  of  payment  in  respect  of
    essential needs including the second appellant's  university  fees,  if
    any.  There was no evidence of  the  university  fees  or  evidence  of
    travel expenditure or payment of utility bills for which the appellants
    were responsible according to the tenancy agreement.

14.  I bear in mind the wording of the extract from the policy that  I  have
    set out above that if the applicant cannot meet their essential  living
    needs without the financial support of the EEA national  they  must  be
    considered dependent even if they also  receive  financial  support  or
    income from somewhere else.  I bear in mind that the  appellants'  rent
    is paid by the sponsor, and bear in mind also that the first and  third
    appellants are retired.  Clearly the expenses of accommodation comprise
    essential living needs, albeit not all the essential living needs,  but
    in effect the judge found that the living needs  other  than  the  rent
    were being met by the appellants out of the other income.   Other  than
    the rent it is unclear how the essential living needs of the appellants
    are met and that was the essential basis upon which the  judge  decided
    that the appeal fell to be dismissed.  In my view that  was  a  finding
    that was properly open to him, and  as  a  consequence  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 11 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

