
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04946/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 10 November 2020                |On: 20th November 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            ahmed abdelrahman ali
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Afzal of Global Migration Solution UK Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing to which there  has  been  no  objection
    from the parties. The form of remote hearing was Skype for business.  A
    face to face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and
    all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

 2. The appellant, a national of Somalia born on 12 June 1998, appeals with
    permission against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue  him
    with an EEA family permit  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations") to join his  brother,  a
    Dutch national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 3. The appellant applied for an EEA family permit as the family member  of
    Ahmed Ali on 9 April 2019. His application was refused on 5  July  2019
    on the basis that he could not be considered as a direct family  member
    under the EEA Regulations, but could only  be  considered  an  extended
    family member under Regulation 8, and that he had failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 8. On the limited  evidence  submitted  with
    the application, consisting of four money transfer remittance receipts,
    the respondent could not be satisfied that the appellant was  dependent
    upon his sponsor and  was  therefore  not  satisfied  that  he  was  an
    extended family member in accordance with the EEA Regulations.

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision and produced further money
    transfer receipts and some medication receipts.  The  matter  was  then
    reviewed by an entry clearance manager who upheld the decision  on  the
    basis that there still remained insufficient evidence of dependency and
    of the appellant's financial circumstances.

 5. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge French on
    10 March 2020. The  judge  heard  from  the  sponsor,  Ahmed  Ali,  and
    recorded his evidence. The evidence  was  that  the  family  came  from
    Somalia and moved to Yemen in 1993. The sponsor fled Yemen in 2008  and
    was granted refugee status in  the  Netherlands  and  was  subsequently
    naturalised as a Dutch citizen. His father died in 2012, at which  time
    his mother and the  appellant  moved  to  Egypt.  In  2013  his  mother
    departed Egypt for the UK and left the appellant in  the  care  of  her
    sister who then died in August 2018. The sponsor arranged for  someone,
    Emad, to assist the appellant and he reported back concerns  about  the
    appellant's mental health and ability to live alone. Emad then moved in
    with the appellant at the end of 2018. The sponsor said that  he  lived
    with his mother in the UK and he gave evidence  about  his  income  and
    outgoings. The judge noted that a  DNA  report  was  submitted  at  the
    hearing to confirm the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor. There were also three medical reports from a hospital in Egypt
    confirming the appellant's epilepsy, together  with  receipts  for  his
    medication. In addition there was a tenancy agreement in the sole  name
    of the appellant dated 17 May 2015 and another rental agreement dated 9
    September 2018, again in the sole name of the appellant. The agreements
    made reference to the appellant's British brother being a guarantor.

 6. On behalf of the respondent it was argued before  the  judge  that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated dependency on the  sponsor  because  the
    sponsor did not have the financial means to maintain him.  Further,  it
    was argued that the family relationship between the appellant  and  the
    sponsor was not accepted because the DNA  report  did  not  verify  the
    identity of the people tested.

 7. Judge French considered that  there  was  a  fundamental  inconsistency
    between the claimed concern of the sponsor for the appellant because of
    his health difficulties and the fact that he had visited him only  once
    between December 2017 and January 2018.  The  judge  also  noted  that,
    whilst the sponsor claimed that the appellant was unable to live on his
    own, the tenancy agreements were  in  his  sole  name  and  the  second
    agreement stated that he was precluded from having anyone live  on  the
    premises. In addition, the judge did not  find  it  credible  that  the
    sponsor could meet all of his commitments  and  make  payments  to  the
    appellant on the income evidenced and  he  did  not  believe  that  the
    sponsor had the capacity to make regular payments to the appellant.  He
    did not accept that the appellant was financially  dependent  upon  the
    sponsor for his essential needs. Furthermore, the judge did not believe
    that the appellant  and  the  sponsor  were  brothers  because  of  the
    unreliability of the DNA evidence and the lack of visits by the sponsor
    to the appellant despite  his  health  concerns.  The  judge  therefore
    concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements   of
    Regulation 12 of the EEA Regulations to be entitled to a family permit.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had erred in his approach to the
    DNA evidence and had wrongly assessed the evidence  in  regard  to  the
    relationship of the appellant to the sponsor; and that  the  judge  had
    erred when considering the evidence of dependency and  had  disregarded
    evidence of funds sent to the appellant.

 9. Permission was granted on 11 August 2019 in  response  to  the  grounds
    raised and also on the basis that the judge arguably applied too high a
    standard of proof.

10. The matter came before me and both parties made submissions.

11. Mr Afzal submitted that the judge had  erred  by  finding  against  the
    appellant on the DNA evidence when there had been no challenge  by  the
    respondent to the relationship between the appellant and  the  sponsor.
    The DNA report had been before the ECO and ECM when  the  decision  was
    made and no challenge had been raised. The judge applied the wrong test
    when considering the issue of  dependency.  There  was  ample  evidence
    before the judge of funds sent to the  appellant  by  the  sponsor  and
    there was evidence of what the funds were spent  on,  in  the  form  of
    medical and food receipts. The question of dependency was a factual one
    and the sponsor had provided evidence of funds to meet the  appellant's
    essential needs. The judge applied too high a test for dependency.

12. Mr Lindsay submitted that, contrary to the suggestion in  the  grounds,
    there was no concession  by  the  respondent  as  to  the  relationship
    between the appellant and sponsor. The matter was raised on  behalf  of
    the respondent at the hearing and the appellant's representative  could
    have objected at that point if there  were  concerns  about  procedural
    fairness.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  have   concerns   about   the
    relationship as the DNA report had been  prepared  based  only  on  the
    appellant's photograph with no identity documents produced.  The  judge
    did not err in that regard. As for  the  question  of  dependency,  the
    respondent had not accepted that there was legally adequate evidence of
    funds remitted to the appellant. The judge gave clear reasons  for  not
    accepting the evidence of dependency - he  did  not  believe  that  the
    sponsor would have been too busy to visit the appellant  if  they  were
    genuinely brothers, he did not accept that the  sponsor  had  financial
    capacity to maintain the appellant and he did not accept the  sponsor's
    evidence that the appellant was unable to live alone. The judge applied
    the correct standard of proof and was entitled to conclude as he did.

13. Mr Afzal responded, reiterating the points previously made.



Discussion

14. The first issue before me was the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor, which the judge found not to  be  established  by  the
    evidence. Whilst the grant of permission and the submissions made by Mr
    Afzal in that respect  amounted  to  a  challenge  on  the  grounds  of
    procedural unfairness (although the term was  not  specifically  used),
    the original grounds were couched in terms of an erroneous approach  to
    and assessment of the evidence. The fact that no issue as to procedural
    unfairness was raised in the original  grounds  undoubtedly  diminishes
    the weight of the submissions made before me at  the  hearing  in  that
    regard, particularly as there was no  objection  made  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal itself.

15. In any event, I do not agree that there was any procedural  unfairness.
    Whilst it is the case that neither the refusal decision of 5 July  2019
    nor the ECM review of 18  December  2019  specifically  challenged  the
    relationship between the appellant and the sponsor, neither  was  there
    any concession in that regard. Insofar as the grant of  permission  and
    the submissions referring  to  [4]  of  the  judge's  decision  suggest
    otherwise, they are clearly misconceived. The respondent, at the end of
    the first page and the top of the second page of the refusal  decision,
    was simply advising the appellant that brothers were not considered  as
    direct family members  under  the  EEA  Regulations,  but  fell  within
    Regulation 8 as extended family members.  Furthermore,  although  there
    was no prior specific challenge to  the  relationship,  the  respondent
    made it clear at the hearing that it was challenged (at  [4])  and,  at
    [5], the appellant's representative, although stating that he  was  not
    aware that the relationship was disputed, did not object to the  matter
    being raised and did not request an adjournment or  an  opportunity  to
    adduce further evidence and had a full opportunity to  respond  to  the
    challenge.

16. As for the challenge made in the grounds,  which  was  to  the  judge's
    approach to the evidence of the relationship between the appellant  and
    the sponsor, it seems to me that the judge gave full  consideration  to
    all the evidence and was entitled to have the concerns that he did  for
    the reasons properly given. The integrity  of  the  organisation  which
    produced the DNA report was not disputed, but the judge was entitled to
    accord the weight that he did to the DNA report, given that it appeared
    to have been prepared without the benefit of any identity document from
    the  appellant,  aside  from  a  photograph,  and  that   no   adequate
    explanation was given for that, as stated at [7] of his  decision.  The
    judge had other  concerns  aside  from  the  DNA  testing,  namely  the
    inconsistencies identified in the sponsor's evidence and the fact  that
    the sponsor had only visited the appellant in Egypt  once  in  December
    2017/January 2018 despite his concerns about his health. I note further
    that the judge observed at [3] that there was  no  statement  from  the
    appellant himself and accordingly the only  evidence  he  had  was  the
    sponsor's inconsistent oral evidence and a DNA report which  gave  rise
    to concerns. For all those reasons the judge was perfectly entitled  to
    conclude that the evidence was not such as  to  satisfy  him  that  the
    appellant and sponsors were brothers.

17. In any event, even if the judge erred by engaging in a challenge to the
    relationship between the appellant and sponsor (which, for the  reasons
    given, I find that he did not), that is clearly not  a  material  error
    given his properly made findings that the appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of the EEA Regulations in  relation  to  the  question  of
    dependency. The challenge made in the original grounds to  the  judge's
    findings in that regard was a limited one, at [2(c)],  namely  that  he
    disregarded the evidence of funds sent by the sponsor to the appellant.
    The grant of permission was in fact made on a different  basis,  namely
    the judge's application of too high a standard of proof,  which  in  my
    view is not made out. Looking at the judge's findings  and  conclusions
    as a whole, beyond his use of the  words  mentioned  in  the  grant  of
    permission, it is clear that he applied the correct standard  of  proof
    to the evidence.

18. Mr Afzal's submission was that the judge  applied  a  higher  test  for
    dependency,  requiring  evidence  of  funds  beyond   those   for   the
    appellant's essential needs. He submitted that there was ample evidence
    of funds remitted to  the  appellant  from  the  sponsor  to  meet  his
    essential needs, together with evidence in the form of medical and food
    receipts to show how the funds were used to meet those needs.  However,
    the judge plainly applied  the  correct  test  for  dependency,  as  is
    apparent in his conclusions at [11] of his decision.  Furthermore,  the
    submission misses the point made by the judge, that the evidence of the
    sponsor's financial circumstances did not show that he had the capacity
    to provide such support, despite the fact that there  was  evidence  of
    remittances  made,  and  that   the   evidence   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances in Egypt and of his financial needs was inconsistent.

19. It is clear from the judge's decision at [6] that he undertook  a  full
    and careful assessment of  the  evidence  produced  in  regard  to  the
    question of dependency.  The  judge  noted  that,  whilst  the  sponsor
    claimed that the appellant required support as he was unable to live on
    his own owing to his health concerns, that he had been looked after  by
    his aunt from the time his mother left Egypt in 2013 until  his  aunt's
    death in September 2018, and that his friend had moved in with  him  at
    the end of 2018 to look after him, the tenancy agreements  produced  in
    the appeal bundle, dating back to May 2015 showed that  he  was  living
    alone. On that basis alone the judge was entitled to conclude  that  he
    had not been provided  with  a  credible  account  of  the  appellant's
    circumstances and his support needs. However  in  addition  the  judge,
    having carefully considered the evidence of the  sponsor's  income  and
    financial commitments and outgoings, at [2] and [6], found  that  there
    were insufficient funds available for the sponsor to make the  payments
    claimed to cover the appellant's essential needs. It seems to  me  that
    there is nothing inconsistent in the judge's findings  in  that  regard
    with the evidence before  him  and  that  he  was  fully  and  properly
    entitled to conclude as he did on the available evidence.

20. For all of these reasons, I find neither ground of challenge made  out.
    In my view the judge undertook a full and careful assessment of all the
    evidence, he gave cogent reasons for according the evidence the  weight
    that he did, applying the correct legal tests,  and  he  made  properly
    reasoned findings.  The  judge  was  fully  and  properly  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant had failed to demonstrate that he  was  the
    extended family member of the relevant EEA national and that  he  could
    not, therefore, meet the requirements of  the  EEA  Regulations  to  be
    issued with a family permit. Accordingly I find no errors of law in the
    judge's decision. I uphold the decision.

DECISION

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeals stands.

    Anonymity

    Although Judge French made an anonymity order I do not agree that there
    is a need for anonymity in this case  and  I  therefore  discharge  the
    order, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:  11 November 2020
