
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04390/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 November 2020                        |On 07 December 2020             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              MR Tarikul ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Bantleman, instructed by Brit Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre, promulgated on 6 February 2020 dismissing
    his appeals under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2016 ("the EEA Regulations") against the decisions  of  the  respondent
    made on 6 August 2019 (i) to revoke his residence card and to refuse to
    issue him with a card certifying his permanent right of residence.

 2. On 27 October 2016, the appellant applied for a residence card  as  the
    unmarried partner of an EEA national, Ms Tsaneva.  That application was
    granted on 8 May 2017 with permission to remain until 8 May 2022.  On 8
    May 2017 the appellant was issued with a residence card valid  until  7
    May 2022.

 3. On 30 April 2019 the appellant's solicitors  wrote  to  the  respondent
    applying for a residence card confirming that he had retained the right
    of residence subsequent to the breakdown of  the  relationship  between
    him and Ms Tsaneva.  In that letter it was explained  that  the  couple
    had lived together  until  February  2018  but  were  no  longer  in  a
    relationship.

 4. On 6 August 2019 the respondent issued  a  letter  giving  reasons  for
    revoking the residence card,  stating  that  as  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's solicitor  had  explained  that  he  was  no  longer  in  a
    relationship with Ms Tsaneva he was no longer a family member of an EEA
    national as defined within Regulation 8 of the EEA  Regulations.   That
    decision attracted a right of appeal.  The  appellant  avers,  however,
    that he never received that letter.

 5. On the same day the respondent issued a second letter stating  that  in
    order to be considered  as  a  person  who  had  retained  a  right  of
    residence he needed to show that he met Regulation 10(5) which required
    him to show that he had ceased to be a family  member  of  a  qualified
    person on the termination of a  marriage  or  civil  partnership.   The
    respondent concluded as he had not entered into  a  marriage  or  civil
    partnership  with  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights,   his
    application did not fall for consideration under  the  EEA  Regulations
    and no further consideration would be given to his application.

 6. The respondent did not, however, engage with the argument  put  in  the
    application of 30 April 2019 that he was entitled to a  residence  card
    and that in the specific circumstances of his case, a refusal to  issue
    him with a residence card would be a breach of his rights  pursuant  to
    Article 20 TFEU combined with Article 7 of the Charter  of  Fundamental
    Rights of the EU protecting the right to respect for family and private
    life.

 7. As a preliminary matter, the judge extended time to treat the appeal as
    including an appeal  against  the  revocation  of  the  residence  card
    finding that the failure to produce a family permit was  not  fatal  to
    the right of appeal.  The  judge  noted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
    included a submission that Article 20 TFEU was raised, as was Article 7
    of the charter.

 8. The judge noted  [14]  the  appellant's  representative,  Mr  Muquit's,
    concession if the appellant was no longer  an  extended  family  member
    given the revocation.  She noted also his submission that  the  refusal
    to issue a permanent residence card under Regulation 10(5) was  legally
    correct but was discriminatory against those who chose  not  to  marry.
    He submitted that once an individual such as  the  appellant  had  been
    issued with a residence card, then he  must  be  treated  as  a  family
    member  so  long  as  the  EEA  national  continues  to   satisfy   the
    requirements of Regulation 8.  Although the  appellant  can  no  longer
    meet the requirements of the Regulation because  the  relationship  had
    broken down there was no reason why, having been treated  as  a  family
    member, he did not get the same benefits under Regulation 10  according
    to a family member whose marriage to an EEA national had broken down.

 9. In short, the argument as put to the judge was  that  following  Banger
    [2018] EUECJ C-89/17 an EEA national should be given the  same  benefit
    accorded to family members under the same principle as Surinder  Singh.



10. The judge concluded that:-

      i) reliance on Banger was misplaced  given  the  concession  that  the
         appellant is not now an extended family  member  and  there  is  no
         question of the UK being  required  to  facilitate  the  entry  and
         residence of a third country national because he is already in  the
         United Kingdom and no longer in a durable relationship [22];

     ii) the facts in this case were different from those in Banger where  a
         British national and his South African partner had  moved  back  to
         the United Kingdom where she was refused  a  residence  card  since
         they were not a married couple and within that case,  and  that  in
         the facts of this appeal were totally dissimilar given that  Banger
         and Surinder Singh were based on the premise a  new  citizen  might
         otherwise be deterred from leaving home in order to  take  economic
         activity in another member state,  yet  on  return  to  the  United
         Kingdom without surveillance would not be equivalent  to  those  he
         would enjoy in the territory of another member state [23];

    iii) the EU national ex-partner continued to exercise treaty  rights  in
         the United Kingdom and thus there was no need to  facilitate  entry
         of the third country national [25];

     iv)  the  Secretary  of  State  had  fully  considered   the   personal
         circumstances of the appellant  and  was  entitled  to  revoke  the
         residence card, given that the durable relationship had broken down
         [26];

      v)  the requirements of Regulation 10 were not met;

     vi) Mr Muquit no longer relied on Article 20 or 21  of  TFEU  [29]  and
         that there was not in this case  less  favourable  treatment  to  a
         third country national who has had a durable relationship which  it
         was conceded no longer exists.

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law in that:-

      i) having had regard to recitals 6, 15 and 31 of Directive  2004/38/EC
         ("the Directive") which preclude discrimination, that it was  wrong
         and discriminatory for a member state not to  accord,  through  its
         domestic law  transposing  the  Directive  to  those  who  are  not
         included in the Directive's definition of family  members  but  who
         had  been  beneficiaries  of  a  residence  card,  the  same  legal
         safeguards provided to family members;

     ii) Regulation 10 of the  EEA  Regulations,  which  did  not  extend  a
         retained right of residence to those who  had  been  in  a  durable
         relationship was therefore inconsistent with the Directive;

    iii) although Article 13 of the Directive refers only to retained rights
         being available to family members, by reference to recital 6, those
         not  automatically  entitled  to  advance  family  members   should
         nevertheless be granted residence;

     iv) there was no reason why the benefit accorded to family  members  to
         retain the rights of residence should not be available to  extended
         family members, albeit subject to an extensive examination of their
         circumstances;

      v) Regulation 10 of the EEA  Regulations  was  inconsistent  with  the
         exceptions under Regulation 7(3), in that, once an  individual  was
         an extended family member and had been issued a residence card they
         must be treated as a family member so  long  as  they  continue  to
         satisfy Regulation 8, there being no rational reason  why,  if  the
         appellant was a family member, up to the point of the  relationship
         breakdown, he did not get the  same  benefit  under  Regulation  10
         accorded to a family member whose marriage to an EEA  national  had
         also broken down; nor was it  rational  to  deny  the  facility  of
         securing  residence   rights  to  those  not  falling  within   the
         definition of family member because such denial did not present  an
         obstacle to the exercise of  free  movement  rights  of  the  Union
         citizen, as this was  not  a  precondition  of  according  retained
         rights to a family member of a  Union citizen;

     vi) that the principle to be derived from Banger is that the absence of
         an express reference in a Directive to a particular  benefit  being
         available to family members and no reference  being  made  to  such
         benefit being available to extended family members did not preclude
         those being  extended  to  extended  family  members  on  the  same
         principles as set out in the Directive;

    vii)  accordingly,  the  refusal  of  the  respondent  to  consider  the
         appellant as being potentially entitled to rights of  residence  on
         the simple basis he had never been  married  was  contrary  to  the
         terms of the Directive whose terms were not  given  effect  by  the
         Regulations and the decision upholding that was wrong in law.

12. On 3 August 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission  although
    noting that both Regulation 10(5) and Article 13 of the Directive, both
    refer to divorce or annulment proceedings or  termination  of  arranged
    partnership, thus appearing to preclude their  application  to  durable
    relationships.

13. I heard  submissions  from  both  representatives,  both  of  whom  had
    produced skeleton arguments.

14. Ms Bantleman submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred by failing to
    consider the duty in Article 3(2)(b) in determining whether  to  revoke
    the appellant's residence card and facilitate residence  and  retention
    rights under Regulation 10(5).  As is discussed below,  the  difficulty
    with that submission is that it is not set out within  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

15. Ms Bantleman submitted further that Banger  was  relevant  in  that  it
    extend the  principle  that  spouses  of   British  citizens  could  be
    accorded derived right of residence  on  the  basis  of  Article  21(1)
    should apply equally  to  durable  partners  of  British  citizens  and
    accordingly, the  obligation  to  facilitate  entry  and  residence  in
    Article 3(2)(b) of the Directive, Article 21  must  be  interpreted  as
    requiring a member state of which the Union citizen is  a  national  to
    facilitate  the  provision  of  a  residence   authorisation   to   the
    unregistered partner.  Thus, an absence of an express reference in  the
    Directive of a particular benefit being available  to  extended  family
    members did not preclude any obligation on the Secretary  of  State  to
    consider whether to facilitate residence under Article 3(2)(b)  of  the
    Directive.

16. She submitted further that, following Banger, Article 3(2)(b)  must  be
    applied by analogy as  regards  the  conditions  for  which  entry  and
    residence of a third country national envisaged by that Directive  must
    being facilitated.  She submitted that although the appellant might not
    enjoy a retained right of residence under Article 13 of the  Directive,
    as he was not in a marriage or a  British  partnership,  that  did  not
    exclude  the  obligation  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  facilitate  the
    residence of the appellant  in  accordance  with  the  Directive.   She
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in failing to consider
    the facilitation of the appellant's residence.

17. Ms Bantleman submitted that the appellant came within  the  concept  of
    "partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable  relationship,  duly
    attested"  as  shown  by  the  residence  card  however  this  was  not
    facilitated.  She submitted that the actions of the Secretary of  State
    in not doing so were contrary to the duty  to  undertake  an  extensive
    examination of personal circumstances, an obligation to  be  considered
    against the principles underlying the Directive set out in recitals  6,
    15 and 31, the latter preventing discrimination on  grounds  of  belief
    and that for family members who retained rights there did not  need  to
    be an obstacle to the free movement of an EU citizen,  as  set  out  in
    Regulation 10(5).  She submitted further that the United Kingdom's  own
    national legislation, to which recital 6 of the Directive referred, did
    not require any difference in treatment between married  and  unmarried
    or unregistered partners whilst they lived together,  thus  by  analogy
    the appellant met Regulation 10(5)(a) and ceased to be a family  member
    on the termination of the relationship.

18. Ms Bantleman submitted that all the requirements other than  for  there
    to be a marital relationship were met and  that  the  2016  Regulations
    were intended to transpose and implement the  Council  Directive  which
    they did not do as a result.  She  further  submitted  that  Regulation
    10(5) ought to be read in  accordance  with  recitals  6,  15,  31  and
    Article 3(2)(b) of the Directive  and  against  proportionality,  there
    being no reason why the appellant, who was  accepted  to  be  a  family
    member of an EU national, should be treated differently from a   family
    member whose marriage had broken down.

19. She submitted that in the alternative it was open to the respondent  to
    exercise discretion to issue a residence card  to  an  extended  family
    member even by not following Regulation  7(3)  if  it  appears  to  the
    Secretary of State appropriate to do so.  Accordingly,  to  the  extent
    that the respondent was not entitled  to  revoke  the  residence  card,
    given that the duty of facilitation was extended to  the  retention  of
    residence.

20. Mr Deller submitted that the appellant's case was misconceived in  that
    although there was an obligation to facilitate the entry and  residence
    of beneficiaries under  Article  3(2)  that  applied  only  to  current
    beneficiaries;  it  did  not  apply  to  those  who   are   no   longer
    beneficiaries as is the case  with  the  appellant.   The  question  of
    whether Regulation 24(3) applied was dependent on an applicant being in
    a durable relationship.  He submitted further that both  the  direction
    of the Regulations was very clear that  the  rights  of  residence  are
    retained only in circumstances consequent to  the  termination  of  the
    marriage or civil partnership which provided for the  non-EEA  national
    being a beneficiary under Article 2.2.  He submitted that had  it  been
    intended for the Directive to extend  directly  to  other  forms  of  a
    durable  partnership  this  would  have  been  specified  and  explicit
    provision made for that in Article 13(2), which had not been done.

21. Mr Deller submitted  further  that  a  right  of  residence  under  the
    Directive could not be derived from  the  general  principles  of  free
    movement and that Banger did not apply given that unlike Ms Banger, who
    plainly met the definition of an extended family member, the  appellant
    ceased to be a beneficiary at the point when this durable  relationship
    ended and from that point he was not  owed  any  particular  treatment.
    Although it had been open to the United Kingdom to apply more  generous
    measures it had not chosen to do so.

22.  Elaborating,  Mr  Deller  submitted  that  Article  3(2)(b)   had   no
    "afterlife" in that it did not continue to have effect  after  somebody
    ceased to meet the qualification to be a beneficiary.  In response,  Ms
    Bantleman submitted that properly understood in light of the  recitals,
    Article  3(2)(b)  could  apply  once  someone  had  ceased  to   be   a
    beneficiary.

Discussion

23. As a preliminary point, at  no  stage  was  it  averred,  prior  to  Ms
    Bantleman's skeleton argument, that there was a continuing  duty  under
    Article 3 (2) in this case to  facilitate  residence.   Nonetheless,  I
    have considered that submission out of an abundance of caution.

24. The recitals to the Directive provide:

         '(6) In order to maintain the unity of  the  family  in  a  broader
         sense and without prejudice to the prohibition of discrimination on
         grounds of nationality, the situation of those persons who are  not
         included in the definition of family members under this  Directive,
         and who therefore do not enjoy an  automatic  right  of  entry  and
         residence in the host Member State, should be examined by the  host
         Member State on the basis of its own national legislation, in order
         to decide whether entry and residence  could  be  granted  to  such
         persons, taking into  consideration  their  relationship  with  the
         Union citizen or any other circumstances, such as  their  financial
         or physical dependence on the Union citizen. ...

         (15) Family members should be legally safeguarded in the  event  of
         the death of the Union citizen, divorce, annulment of  marriage  or
         termination of a registered partnership. With due regard for family
         life and human dignity, and in certain conditions to guard  against
         abuse, measures should therefore be taken to ensure  that  in  such
         circumstances family members already residing within the  territory
         of  the  host  Member  State  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on a personal basis. ...

         (31) This Directive respects the fundamental  rights  and  freedoms
         and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter
         of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. In accordance with the
         prohibition of discrimination  contained  in  the  Charter,  Member
         States  should  implement  this  Directive  without  discrimination
         between the beneficiaries of this Directive on grounds such as sex,
         race, colour, ethnic or  social  origin,  genetic  characteristics,
         language,  religion  or  beliefs,  political  or   other   opinion,
         membership of an ethnic minority, property, birth, disability,  age
         or sexual orientation.'

25. Article 3 (2) of the Directive provides as follows:

         'Beneficiaries

         1.   This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to
         or reside in a Member State other than that of  which  they  are  a
         national, and to their family members as  defined  in  point  2  of
         Article 2 who accompany or join them.

         2.   Without prejudice to any right to free movement and  residence
         the persons concerned may have in their own right, the host  Member
         State  shall,  in  accordance  with   its   national   legislation,
         facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:

         ...

         (b)  the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
             relationship, duly attested

         The host Member State shall undertake an extensive  examination  of
         the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
         residence to these people.'

26. It is the settled case law of the ECJ that where the wording of  an  EU
    law provision  is  clear  and  precise,  its  contextual  or  purposive
    interpretation may not call into question the literal meaning  of  that
    provision, as  this  would  run  counter  to  the  principle  of  legal
    certainty.  See Commission v United Kingdom [2010]  EUECJ  C-582/08  at
    [49] to [51]:

         "49   According  to  settled  case-law,  the  principle  of   legal
         certainly requires that Community rules enable those  concerned  to
         know precisely the extent of the obligations which are  imposed  on
         them. Individuals must be  able  to  ascertain  unequivocally  what
         their rights and obligations are and take  steps  accordingly  (see
         Case C-345/06 Heinrich [2009] ECR I'1659, paragraph 44 and the case-
         law cited).

         50   It is true that  that  case-law  refers  to  the  relationship
         between  individuals  and  public  authorities.  However,  as   the
         Advocate General observed in point 64 of his Opinion, that case-law
         is also relevant in the context of the transposition of a directive
         in the area of taxation.

         51   The Court cannot, in the face of the clear and precise wording
         of a provision such as Article 2(1) of  the  Thirteenth  Directive,
         interpret that provision with the intention of  correcting  it  and
         thereby extending the obligations of the Member States relating  to
         it (see, by analogy, Case  C-48/07  Les  Vergers  du  Vieux  Tauves
         [2008] ECR I-10627, paragraph 44)."

27. Put simply, when interpreting European law, a court cannot  ignore  the
    clear and precise wording of an EU law provision.

28. In R (on the application of BJ & Ors) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department (Article 9, Dublin III; interpretation) [2019] UKUT 66 (IAC)
    the Upper Tribunal held at [33] to [38]:

         "33. If, however, the meaning is not clear and precise, regard must
             be had to the  context  and  purpose  of  the  legislation  in
             question as the ECJ did in  Elgafaji  [2009]  ECR  I-92  (Case
             465/07). Faced with an apparent contradiction within the terms
             of Article 15 (c), the ECJ interpreted it in such a way as  to
             give  it  an  autonomous  meaning  which   gave   it   effect,
             illustrating the premise that the creator of  the  legislation
             is acting rationally, and that the provision was introduced to
             have effect in a logical and rational scheme. A  provision  of
             EU law cannot be redundant.  It  follows  that  where  several
             interpretations of a provision are possible, that  which  best
             ensures effectiveness and  consistency  with  primary  EU  law
             should be followed.

         34.  It is evident also from the  case  law  of  the  ECJ  that  in
             interpreting a provision, regard may be  had  to  the  travaux
             pr�paratoires if they are available. This, in the  context  of
             immigration, can be seen in  Teixeira  [2010]  ECR  I-1107  at
             [58].

         35.  The method of interpretation which is generally seen  as  most
             characteristic of the ECJ is  a  purposive  or  "teleological"
             approach. That is most easily seen in  the  interpretation  of
             TFEU provisions such as Article 21 in, for  example,  Zambrano
             and the extensive case law on the meaning of  "worker"  within
             Article 45 and its predecessors. The teleological approach  to
             interpretation may, as the circumstances require, give rise to
             three closely linked questions:

             a.   Which interpretation, having had regard to the context of
                  the provision, best preserves its effectiveness?

             b.   If the provision is ambiguous, which interpretation  best
                  achieves the objective it pursues?

             c.   What consequences would flow from each interpretation?

         36.   Teleological  interpretation  is,  however,  subject  to  the
             proviso that exceptions are to be  interpreted  strictly  (see
             Commission v UK [39]) although a broader interpretation may be
             adopted if that is required to give effect to the objectives.

         37.  It is to be  noted  also  that  the  words  which  are  to  be
             construed  are  the  operative  part  of  the  instrument   in
             question; the preamble may be an aid to the interpretation  as
             in Toshiba Europa GmBH v Katun Germany GmBH [2001] ECR  I-7945
             where at [36] -[37] recourse was had to a  recital  because  a
             literal interpretation of Directive 84/450  as  amended  would
             result in a contradiction with Directive 89/104 but it is  not
             a legal Rule - see  Casa  Fleischhandel  v  Bundesantalte  fur
             Landwirtschaftliche Marktordnung  [1989]  ECR  2789  at  [31]:
             "Whilst a recital in the preamble to  a  regulation  may  cast
             light on the interpretation to be given to a  legal  rule,  it
             cannot in itself constitute such a rule."

         38.  It follows that the approach to interpreting a provision of EU
             law requires a systematic approach , looking at the  words  in
             the context of the structure of EU law as a whole and asking:

             (i)  Is the meaning of the provision defined in EU Law?

             (ii) If not, can the words  be  given  their  usual,  ordinary
                  meaning?

             (iii)      If   not,   what   are   the   possible   different
                  interpretations?

             (iv) What is the objective of the provision?

             (v)  Which interpretation best preserves its effectiveness?

             (vi) Which interpretation best achieves the objective?

             (vii)     What  are  the   consequences   of   the   different
                  interpretations?"

29. Contrary to Ms Bantleman's submissions, article 3(2)  is  quite  clear.
    The duty to facilitate entry arises when  the  partner  with  whom  the
    Union citizen has  a  durable  relationship  duly  attested.   That  is
    manifestly a continuing requirement  in  order  for  someone  to  be  a
    beneficiary; there has to be an extant nexus  with  the  EEA  national.
    The difficulty with Ms Bantleman's argument, that it should be read  as
    extending to scenarios where there had been a relationship, would  make
    it open-ended; it would not  be  possible  for  a  state  on  whom  the
    obligation lies, to know who does  or does not come within the ambit of
    the duty to facilitate. Equally, were the same logic to apply to  other
    provisions, such as article 3 (2)(a), this would be  contrary  to  what
    the ECJ held in Rahman [2012]EUECJ   C-83/11  at  [27]  to  [35]  where
    dependence in the  country  from  which  the  family  member  comes  is
    necessary.  That is in the present tense.

30. Accordingly, a non-EEA national, whose durable relationship has  ended,
    comes within the ambit of article 3 (2) and so there can at that  point
    be no duty on a member state to facilitate that individual's  entry  to
    or residence.

31. Further, and in the alternative, even were article 3 (2)(b)  not  clear
    and precise, the recitals in the Directive do not assist the appellant.
    Nor can it be argued that the Directive can be read such  that  article
    13 should apply to  those  in  durable  partnerships,  an  argument  Ms
    Bantleman chose not to pursue with any vigour.

32. Recital 6 starts "In order to maintain the unity  of  the  family"  yet
    what occurred here is that the family has ceased to exist.  The durable
    relationship has ceased.  Further, recital 6  and  recital  15  clearly
    maintain a distinction between "family members" and others.  Recital 15
    proceeds on the basis of that distinction. It would have been  open  to
    the European Union when enacting the Directive to have included  within
    that recital the position of individuals in  durable  relationships  or
    whose entry and residence had been facilitated,  but  it  did  not.  As
    Rahman  and  subsequent  cases  make  clear,  those  whose   entry   is
    facilitated do not acquire rights under  the  Directive.   Further,  in
    recital 15, there is a closed list of those  whose  rights  are  to  be
    preserved, which does not include the breakdown of a relationship.

33. The discrimination, it is claimed here, is treating differently  people
    who have chosen not to marry.  But that is not  to  compare  like  with
    like.  Not all those who have been  married  fall  within  Article  13.
    There are a number of additional requirements over and  above  marriage
    which are required to be met before that person's right  to  remain  is
    reserved.

34. For the sake of completeness, I find no proper basis on which, applying
    the principles of interpretation set out above, the  Directive  can  be
    read as though there was no  distinction  to  be  made  in  Article  13
    between those who are married and those who are  not.   That  would  do
    violence to the structure of the Directive which clearly maintains  the
    distinction between people who are married and those who are  not.   To
    suggest  that  Banger  makes   a   difference   is   fundamentally   to
    misunderstand what Banger is  about.   What  Banger  is  about  is  the
    situation in which those involved were not covered  by  the  Directive.
    That is because they fell out  of  the  scope  of  it  because  the  EU
    national in question was returning to his own member  state  which  did
    not engage European law.  It was thus necessary to have a derived right
    pursuant to Article 20 and 21, as otherwise a person travelling to work
    abroad might be inhibited if he were not able to return to the  country
    of nationality having formed a relationship in another state.  That  is
    not the situation here.  The  appellant's  former  partner  is  clearly
    covered by the Directive.  It is not at all possible to see  how  there
    would be in this case any discouragement and of course  Ms  Banger  met
    the definition of extended family member.  It is simply not possible to
    derive any conclusion that Article 13 must be interpreted  in  the  way
    contended.   The  European  Union  has  clearly  decided  that  certain
    categories of family membership will be protected and others will  not.



35. The reality is that the appellant ceased  to  be  a  family  member  by
    operation of the Regulations when his relationship  ceased.   That  was
    well before the date of decision and it simply cannot  be  argued  that
    there is any basis  on  which  there  was  a  duty  to  facilitate  his
    continued residence.

36. Accordingly, for these reasons, I consider that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I
    uphold it.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed   Date 27 November 2020
Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

