

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04215/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Skype                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22 December 2020                            |On 11 January 2021             |
|                                               |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 NASEER AZAM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Rashid instructed by Mamoon Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Jepson ('the Judge') promulgated on the 11  November
        2019 in which the appellants appeal was dismissed.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1  June  1989  whose
        application for a residence permit was refused by the Secretary  of
        State on 19 July 2019.
     3. Having considered the documentary and oral evidence given  by  both
        the appellant and his wife, the Judge sets  out  findings  of  fact
        from [29] of the decision under challenge.
     4. At [32] the Judge writes "The key (and perhaps  only)  question  is
        whether this marriage is one of convenience, designed to afford  Mr
        Azam an immigration advantage." The Judge found it was.
     5. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  on  grounds  that,  in
        themselves, would have been unlikely to have  led  to  a  grant  of
        permission, although permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
        granted  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
        following terms:


        3.   The grounds completely miss  the  central  point  and  do  not
             address the fact that legal validity is only one part  of  the
             matter,  if  the  marriage  has  been  entered  into  for  the
             Appellant to gain entry to the UK then that is a valid  reason
             to refuse to issue a residence  card.  More  surprisingly  the
             grounds do not refer to the case of Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -
             marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038  (IAC)  and
             the burden of proof shifting to the Respondent to  show  at  a
             marriage is one of convenience. I could find no  reference  in
             the decision either to the burden having reversed and the only
             citation  of  a  burden  and  standard  of  proof  appears  in
             paragraph 7 with a reminder at paragraph 29 but that  is  only
             of the standard position.



Error of law



        The Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ('the
        regulations')  define  a  marriage  of  convenience   as   follows:
        "marriage of convenience"  includes   a   marriage   entered   into
        for the purpose of using these  Regulations,  or  any  other  right
        conferred by the EU treaties,  as  a  means  to  circumvent  -  (a)
        immigration rules  applying  to  non-EEA  nationals  (such  as  any
        applicable requirement under the 1971  Act   to   have   leave   to
        enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom);  or  (b)  any   other
          criteria    that    the    party    to    the     marriage     of
        convenience   would   otherwise  have   to   meet   in   order   to
        enjoy  a  right  to  reside  under  these  Regulations  or  the  EU
         treaties."

     6. It is not disputed that in Rosa [2016] EWCA  Civ  14  it  was  held
        that  the  legal  burden  was  on  the  Secretary of State for  the
        Home Department to  prove  that   an   otherwise   valid   marriage
        was  a  marriage  of  convenience  so  as  to  justify the  refusal
         of  a  residence  card  under  the  EEA  Regulations.   The  legal
        burden of proof in relation to marriage lay  on  the  Secretary  of
        State, but if she adduced  evidence  capable  of  pointing  to  the
        conclusion that the marriage was one of convenience, the evidential
        burden shifted to the applicant (paras 24 - 27).
     7. In Agho [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 it was held that  where  an  applicant
        sought an EEA residence card on the basis that he was married to an
        EEA national, he simply had to produce his marriage certificate and
        his  spouse's  passport.  As  a  matter  of  principle,  a   spouse
        established a prima facie case that he was the family member of  an
        EEA  national  by  providing  the  marriage  certificate  and   his
        sponsor's passport. The legal burden was on the Secretary of  State
        to show that any marriage thus proved was a marriage of convenience
        and that burden was not discharged merely  by  showing  'reasonable
        suspicion'. The evidential burden might shift to the  applicant  by
        proof of facts that justified the inference that the  marriage  was
        not genuine. The facts giving rise  to  the  inference  included  a
        failure  to  answer  a  request  for  documentary  proof   of   the
        genuineness of the marriage  where  grounds   for   suspicion   had
        been   raised:  Papajorgji    (EEA    spouse    -    marriage    of
        convenience)  [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC) considered (para 13).
     8. That the burden of proof is on the respondent  is  now  put  beyond
        doubt by Sadovska [2017] UKSC  54 an appeal from the First Division
        of the Inner House of the Court of Session, see [28] - [30].
     9. It is not disputed that there  is  no  specific  reference  in  the
        Judge's decision to any of the above  cases  or  to  the  fact  the
        evidential burden is reversed. That there is no such  reference  is
        not however, of itself, material. What it does create is  the  need
        to consider what the Judge said to ascertain whether there  is  any
        material error in this decision.
    10. At [7] the Judge wrote "The  burden  of  proof  is  to  the  higher
        standard - the balance of probabilities. It is for the Appellant to
        show he fulfils the requirements of  the  EEA  Regulations".  As  a
        generic self-direction this is correct as the burden  is  upon  the
        appellant  to  prove  he  is  married.  That  burden  was   however
        discharged on the basis of the material provided.
    11. At [29] the Judge writes  "I  remind  myself  of  the  burden,  and
        standard of proof. All of the evidence, written and oral, has  been
        considered with care". Judges of the  First-tier  Tribunal  receive
        extensive training in relation to the correct burden  and  standard
        of proof to be applied and as the Court of Appeal have reminded  us
        it is permissible to assume that a Judge will have applied the same
        unless it is shown to the contrary.
    12. The submission by Mr Rashid that he would have adopted a  different
        approach before the Judge may be so, but that  does  not  establish
        material legal error as he was not the advocate  before  the  Judge
        and it is not made out any  procedural  unfairness  arises  in  the
        Judge not taking into account evidence, or  submissions  that  were
        made, or adopting a structurally flawed assessment.
    13. The starting point has to be  the  decision  under  challenge,  the
        refusal letter dated 19 July 2019 the relevant text of which reads:

Your application has been considered under  regulation(s):  7  &  2  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

We have determined that you have not  provided  adequate  evidence  to  show
that you qualify for a right to reside as the  family  member  of  your  EEA
sponsor.
You  have  provided  your  validity  identity   document,   1xPak   passport
BP1854793/C8783271 and a valid identity document 1xRou  passport  057251661,
for your EEA or Swiss national sponsor Andreea Irina Cotea.

Have also provided a  Cypriot  marriage  certificate  as  evidence  of  your
relationship to your sponsor Andreea Irina Cotea which shows  your  marriage
was solemnised at the Municipality of Nicosia, Cyprus on 21 August 2018.

You have stated on your  application  form  that  you  first  met  your  EEA
sponsor in March 2018 and your relationship began 21 August 2018,  and  that
you started living together as a couple on 19 May 2018. Also stated  on  you
application form you have told this department that your  date  of  marriage
was 19 June 2018, according to  the  official  marriage  document  you  have
provided states date of marriage 21 August 2018.

Whilst travelling with your EEA sponsor you  where  both  stopped  by  Irish
Immigration Officials at  Belfast  Stena  docks  and  invited  to  attend  a
marriage interview.

The interview, which took place on 08 April 2019 had  highlighted  a  number
of inconsistencies in you and your EEA sponsor's answers.

You stated you had travelled via Dublin and had intended to stay  there  and
where only visiting the UK for 2 days. When asked  you  intended  to  travel
you stated you were going to the "famous"  city  of  Glasgow.  However  when
asked what you were going to see you were unable to say, you  then  admitted
to not knowing anything about Glasgow. Subsequently your EEA sponsor  stated
you were going to Manchester or London.

When asked why you were splitting up your trip, you  stated  you  could  not
explain why. You were asked why you had  told  Irish  immigration  you  were
staying in Ireland for 17 days however left within 24 hours  you  could  not
explain this either. You and you EEA sponsor were  interviewed  subsequently
regarding details of your wedding, spouses family members, job, hobbies  and
how you met. The majority of your answers did  not  match  with  regards  to
details of your wedding in terms of guests, where  your  reception  was  and
make up of guests. You also provided incorrect  information  regarding  your
EEA sponsor's family. You also stated that you crossed the  land  border  by
coach on 3 April 2019.

Based on  the  information  detailed  in  the  marriage  interview  and  the
inconsistencies on your application form,  this  department  has  reasonable
grounds to suspect that the  marriage/civil  partnership  undertaken  on  21
August 2018 to Andreea Irena Cotea  is  one  of  convenience  for  the  sole
purpose of you obtaining an immigration advantage.

You have provided a Residence card date of issue 27  March  2019  which  was
issued in Cyprus however it has been noted that you were  not  issued  entry
clearance  prior  to  your  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom.  Although   not
mandatory, it is advisable for spouses/partners of EEA nationals  to  obtain
an EEA Family Permit before entry to the United  Kingdom.  This  allows  the
spouse/partner  of  an  EEA  national  to  have  their  legal  entry  to  UK
facilitated free of charge.  When  a  non-EEA  spouse/partner  follows  this
route, they have the opportunity to demonstrate a  genuine  and  substantive
relationship prior to their entry to the country.

Also you have not provided adequate evidence  to  prove  that  you  are  the
dependent direct family member and EEA or Swiss national.

You have not provided this department with evidence to  show  that  you  are
currently living with your EEA or Swiss national partner.

As such department would expect  you  would  be  able  to  provide  a  wider
variety of documentation confirming your joint residency  together  for  the
duration as claimed. This department would expect that you would be able  to
provide evidence which confirms joint finance and commitments  to  your  EEA
sponsor.

Based on the information detailed, the Secretary  of  State  has  sufficient
evidence to believe that the marriage is one of  convenience  for  the  sole
purpose of you remaining  here  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Kevin  the  other
evidence that you have supplied in support to your application.

    14. These issues are clearly capable of pointing to the conclusion that
        the marriage was one of convenience.
    15.  The  Judge  took  careful  note  of  both  the   appellant's   and
        respondent's cases and I find no merit in the suggestion the  Judge
        erred in the structure of the determination. The fact the Judge set
        out the appellant's evidence between [10 - 23] and the  respondents
        between [24 - 28] does not mean an incorrect burden was applied.  I
        was referred to no authority that suggests otherwise.
    16. The Judge was  not  satisfied  that  anything  other  than  "little
        weight" could  be  placed  upon  the  transcript  of  the  marriage
        interview for the reasons set out at [33 - 34] but  that  does  not
        mean that no weight was placed upon the same.
    17. The Judge recorded concerns with the evidence specifically at  [39]
        where it is written: "The Appellants account of events  in  Ireland
        makes little sense. He described arriving on 5th April, and staying
        for a week. When it was pointed out in cross examination that could
        not possibly be right given the marriage interview took  place  the
        following day, the account changed - staying for a week after being
        refused travel. Only then did  the  couple  visit  the  Appellant's
        friend" which the Judge did not find fitted with the suggestion the
        appellant came to Ireland to see that person.
    18. The Judge also expresses concern about  the  method  in  which  the
        appellant  and  sponsor  left  Cyprus  indicating  one  would  have
        expected to see some sort of contingency plans if the  couple  were
        to return to Cyprus, of which there was no evidence [43].
    19. At [44 -49] the Judge writes:

        44.  Given Mr Azam seems to have just abruptly left his job  there,
             how would they have survived? That  suggests  strongly  to  me
             that settlement in the UK was the plan from the outset. I note
             the assertion by Mr Azam in court that the couple had a return
             booked to Cyprus for  20th  April.  Although  not  necessarily
             central to the case, Ms Cotea made no  mention  of  that.  One
             might have reasonably expected to see evidence of that  return
             ticket

        45.  It equally seemed strange  that  (on  Ms  Cotea's  account  in
             court) the couple went directly on  arrival  to  Belfast.  The
             intention was, as she claimed, to sightsee in  Ireland  before
             going to England, why was  that  part  suddenly  skipped?  The
             strong inference to be drawn is that sight seeing was never on
             the cards.  If that is right, why go to Ireland at all?  I  am
             not persuaded by the explanation the couple  chose  to  go  by
             ferry rather than a  plain  because  Ms  Cotea  was  tired  of
             flying.

        46.       It is  surprising  that  (as  described  previously)  two
             conflicting dates are provided  within  the  residence  permit
             application form. Contrary to  the  Respondent's  submissions,
             these dates do not both relate to the marriage. Rather, it  is
             variously said that the relationship began on 21  August  2018
             and the marriage occurred on  19th  June  of  the  same  year.
             Clearly, both cannot be right.

        47.       When asked about that in court, the Appellant claimed  he
             had not completed the relevant paperwork.  No  explanation  as
             given as to why might have done this, and on what basis.   Why
             would two contradictory dates be  stated  on  the  same  form?
             Neither is in fact correct - wedding was 21st August.   Whilst
             it might be the forms were completed on the Appellant's behalf
             (although there is no evidence to  show  that),  Mr  Azam  has
             signed the form to confirm the answers given are accurate.

        48.       Compounding this is the assertion within the  grounds  of
             appeal that the difference  in  date  is  a  "typo".   If  the
             relationship were genuine, it would be expected a person would
             know the date and so  spot  any  error  within  the  paperwork
             immediately.

        49.       Putting things in stark  terms,  I  do  not  believe  the
             account(s)  given  by  the  Appellant  and  Ms   Cotea.   Even
             disregarding  the  marriage  interview,  there   are   several
             manifest  discrepancies  here  that  to  my  mind  cannot   be
             explained by human error  or  fading  memory.  These  are  too
             numerous and to fundamental to ignore.

    20. Leading to the Judge finding at [50] "On that basis, I find this is
        a Marriage of convenience, designed solely to gain  an  immigration
        advantage. The Appellant does not come close to satisfying me  that
        he fulfils the EEA Regulations. For that  reason,  this  appeal  is
        refused".
    21.  The  submission  the  respondent  had  failed  to  discharge   the
        evidential burden upon her as a result of the Judge placing  little
        weight upon the marriage interview is without merit in establishing
        material  legal  error.  The  refusal  relied  on  more  than   the
        discrepancies that arose  from  the  marriage  interview  as  noted
        above. The evidence was capable of pointing to the conclusion  that
        the marriage was one of convenience as a result of which the burden
        passed to the appellant.  The appellant was given  the  opportunity
        to explain the discrepancies that arose which  were  identified  by
        the decision-maker but failed to provide a satisfactory explanation
        for the same. The Judge was, on the evidence, entitled to  conclude
        that it had been established this  is  a  marriage  of  convenience
        designed solely to gain an immigration advantage.
    22. It is not made out the Judge reversed the burden of  proof  on  the
        basis that he started from the premise the appellant had  to  prove
        the marriage was not a marriage of convenience. There is nothing in
        the wording of the determination that suggests this was the Judge's
        mindset.
    23. Although not mentioning the case law above or specifically  setting
        out the test in the  decision,  no  legal  error  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal is made out as it  can  be  inferred
        the correct test was in the Judge's mind and was applied.
    24. The answer to the question whether the appellant's  marriage  is  a
        marriage of convenience was clear-cut on  the  evidence,  including
        that elicited through cross-examination, and does not  turn  solely
        on the question of whether the Judge had set out  in  the  decision
        the accepted legal test. As Mr  Rashid  accepted,  it  would  be  a
        difficult submission for him to make that the Judge should not have
        taken into account and consider the oral  evidence  that  had  been
        given.


Decision

    25. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.



   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 December 2020












