
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/04693/2019 (V)
                                                           EA/04690/2019 (V)
                                                           EA/04694/2019 (V)
                                                           EA/04689/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2020                 |On 02nd November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                               QAYNAT [S] (1)
                                  [J H] (2)
                                  [Z H] (3)
                                  [M H] (4)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Sadeghi, of Counsel, instructed by JML
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




    Introduction

 1. The appellants are citizens of India, the  first  appellant  being  the
    mother born in 1981 and the second, third and fourth  appellants  being
    her three children born in 2007, 2010 and 2012, who are  the  wife  and
    children of Mr Asfak [H], whom it is said is a citizen of Portugal. The
    appellants were issued with EEA family permits dated 21st May 2019  but
    were refused admission to the UK on the basis  of  serious  grounds  of
    public policy on 22nd August 2019. They lodged  appeals  against  these
    refusals, which were dismissed under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
    2016 (henceforth the EEA  Regulations)  in  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge KR Moore promulgated on 12th March 2020.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  L
    Murray on the 8th July 2020 on all grounds but principally on the basis
    that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in
    failing to make any clear finding as to the nationality of the  sponsor
    when it appears he was granted settlement under the EU scheme after the
    decision to refuse the appellants entry but prior to the hearing of the
    appeal; and because it was arguable the test under Regulation 27 of the
     EEA Regulations had not been applied; because there  was  an  arguable
    failure to consider the best interests of  the  children;  and  because
    there were arguably irrational conclusions relating to  the  complicity
    of the first appellant in any fraudulent behaviour of the sponsor  (her
    husband).

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law. The hearing was held at a remote Skype  for  Business
    hearing in light of the need to reduce the transmission of the Covid-19
    virus, and in light of this  being  found  to  be  acceptable  by  both
    parties, and being a means by which the  appeal  could  be  fairly  and
    justly determined. There were problems with audibility at the start  of
    the hearing but these were resolved by  muting  of  microphones  before
    submissions were heard.

 4. The appellants submitted some further documentation by  email  on  22nd
    October 2020 which consisted of birth certificates for two  baby  girls
    born on 23rd June 2020 in  the  UK  to  the  first  appellant  and  the
    sponsor, and copies of their British citizen passports. Mr Melvin  said
    this documentation amounted to a new matter and that the respondent did
    not consent to it being admitted, and  expressed  the  opinion  of  the
    respondent that  the  decision  of  the  Presidential  Panel  in  Birch
    (Precariousness and mistake; new matters) [2020] UKUT  86  was  wrongly
    decided,  and informed me that it was under appeal. It  was  ultimately
    agreed by Mr Sadeghi that he did not need to rely  upon  this  material
    and so it was not admitted and was not considered in this appeal.

    Submissions - Error of Law

 5. In grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, drafted by Mr  Sadeghi  for
    the appellants, and in oral submissions from Mr Sadeghi  it  is  argued
    for the appellants, in summary, as follows.

 6. It is argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  errs  in  law  firstly  in
    failing to make a finding as to the  nationality  of  the  sponsor.  At
    paragraph 34 of the decision it is said that there is no clear evidence
    as to how the sponsor was able to obtain Portuguese citizenship but  it
    is not disputed that he  has  a  Portuguese  passport.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal then throws doubt  on  this  issue,  without  making  a  clear
    finding and without considering that the respondent had  not  have  any
    apparent interactions with the Portuguese  authorities  regarding  this
    issue; and without considering that  the  respondent  had  granted  the
    sponsor settled status under Appendix EU of the Immigration Rules;  and
    that  the  sponsor  had  renewed  his  documents  with  the  Portuguese
    authorities two months after the decisions appealed and registered  his
    marriage and births of his children with them. Further, the sponsor had
    indicated that he was entitled to this nationality through his  mother,
    and offered at the First-tier Tribunal to provide further  evidence  if
    required. If, as is argued must be the case on the evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the sponsor must be seen as an  EU  national  then
    the appeal must then be determined by reference to Regulation 27 of the
    EEA Regulations, which only permits exclusion of the family  on  public
    policy, public security and public health grounds.

 7. The second ground of appeal is  that  there  was  a  failure  to  apply
    Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations There are no express findings that
    the behaviour of the first appellant demonstrates  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat to the integrity and  effectiveness  of
    the immigration control system. The First-tier Tribunal simply  decided
    that the first appellant's evidence was not credible or plausible,  and
    then wrongly decided the matter  under  Regulation  26(3)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations on the basis that  it  found  that  there  are  grounds  to
    suspect that the first appellant has misused the right to reside.

 8. The third ground of appeal is that there was a failure to  engage  with
    the evidence with respect to the second, third  and  fourth  appellants
    that they are quite possibly Portuguese citizens as they have  passport
    applications pending and  have  been  registered  with  the  Portuguese
    authorities;  and  that  they  have  derived  rights  to  reside  under
    Regulation 16(3)-(4) of the EEA Regulations because they  are  children
    in education in a host member  state  where  their  EEA  parent  works.
    Further it is argued that the assessment of the best interests  of  the
    children is inadequate.

 9. Fourthly it is argued that the findings at paragraphs 25 and 37 of  the
    decision  that  the  first  appellant  was  complicity  in   fraudulent
    behaviour by the sponsor are irrational, as it is accepted by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that there are cultural differences in India  which
    might mean she knows little of her husband's conduct at  paragraph  29,
    and it is clear that she gave  this  explanation  in  response  to  the
    respondent's questioning before the First-tier Tribunal.  However,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  then  concludes  that  the  first  appellant  had
    complicitly signed false documents at paragraph  36  of  the  decision.
    Further this is not consistent  with  the  legal  test  for  deception,
    correctly cited at paragraph 17 of the decision.

10. In written submissions in the form of a  Rule  24  reply  and  in  oral
    submissions from Mr Melvin it is argued, in summary, for the respondent
    as follows.

11. Firstly it is argued that the hearing did not relate to the  Portuguese
    spouse as recorded at paragraph 9 of the decision, and at paragraph  12
    it was stated that it was not necessarily disputed that the spouse  and
    sponsor is a Portuguese citizen. However, it is the conclusion  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  sponsor's  nationality  had  not  been
    genuinely or reliably obtained.

12. Secondly it is argued that there was reference to Regulations 23(1) and
    24(6) of the  EEA  Regulations  at  paragraphs  10,25  and  37  of  the
    decision, and that this was correct and sufficient.

13. Thirdly it is argued that the best interests of the children were dealt
    with adequately at paragraph 37 of the decision as they had  only  been
    in the UK for a few months at the time of hearing.

14. Fourthly it is argued that the findings on the complicity of the  first
    appellant are detailed and rationally  made  at  paragraph  28  of  the
    decision.

15.  It is argued as a result that the decision  should  be  upheld  as  it
    makes complete sense read holistically.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

16. The respondent revoked  the  family  permits  for  the  appellants  and
    refused them admission to the UK under Regulations 23(1) and  24(6)  of
    the EEA Regulations. It is clear that the First-tier  Tribunal  rightly
    found that the refusal was made with reference to Regulation 27 of  the
    EEA Regulations based on there being serious grounds of  public  policy
    to exclude the appellants as set out at  paragraphs  1  and  2  of  the
    decision.

17. At paragraph 26 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal finds that  the
    appellants are related as claimed to the sponsor on the  basis  of  DNA
    evidence.

18. I find that  the  next  question  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ought
    logically to have been whether the sponsor  is  a  Portuguese  citizen,
    however this was not address explicitly as the next issue, and  instead
    the First-tier Tribunal engaged in a consideration of whether the first
    appellant was  aware  and  complicit  with  the  sponsor's  history  of
    applications to come  to  the  UK  as  an  Indian  citizen  using  fake
    documents between 2005 and 2010, and  his  residence  in  this  country
    working illegally.

19. The evidence on the issue of the sponsor's nationality accepted in  his
    favour at various points in the decision is that it was found  that  he
    holds  a  Portuguese  passport  and  a  Portuguese   nationality   card
    (paragraph 34). I find that there was an  error  of  law  in  not  also
    considering in favour of the sponsor being Portuguese evidence that  he
    had been issued with EU residence  cards  by  the  respondent,  and  in
    particular that he had been granted settlement under Appendix EU of the
    Immigration Rules, as per page 10 of the  appellant's  bundle.  I  also
    find that it was an error not  to  have  considered  the  lack  of  any
    evidence  that  the  respondent  had  reported  her  concerns  to   the
    Portuguese authorities and the lack of any evidence from the Portuguese
    authorities that they were considering these  concerns.   The  specific
    evidence found to be against the sponsor being Portuguese is  that  his
    passport records his place of birth wrongly (Sanjan Valsad Guj and  not
    Daman), and this, together this his history of use of  false  documents
    for British visa  applications,  is  found  to  be  evidence  that  the
    passport was not properly obtained.

20. I find that the  lack  of  a  clear  finding  that  the  sponsor  is  a
    Portuguese citizen is irrational  on  the  evidence,  as  there  is  no
    evidence that the issue  with  place  of  birth  would  invalidate  the
    passport as good evidence of his nationality at the  date  of  hearing.
    Even if the respondent has uncovered evidence casting doubtful that the
    sponsor's Portuguese nationality was properly  obtained  there  was  no
    evidence that he did not remain a Portuguese citizen at that  point  in
    time and so the appeal should have been determined on that basis.

21. If the sponsor was a Portuguese citizen at the time of appeal  then  it
    was an error of law to fail  to  consider  whether  his  children,  the
    second, third and fourth appellants, were entitled to remain in the  UK
    on the basis that they were his family members under  Regulation  7  of
    the EEA Regulations as they are found to be his children and  were  all
    under the age of 21 years;  and potentially (although it is unclear why
    this would be necessary) on the basis that they had been  in  education
    for 6 months at the time of the hearing and the sponsor was working, by
    reference to derived rights of residence under Regulation 16 of the EEA
    Regulations, given the documentation in the appellant's bundle at pages
    44 to 46 with respect to their being in schooling and the  evidence  of
    the sponsor's work.

22. If the sponsor is a Portuguese citizen the first appellant,  his  wife,
    still might be liable to be refused entry to the UK if it were  in  the
    interests of public policy to do so under  Regulation  27  of  the  EEA
    Regulations. It is noted by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 29  of
    the decision that culturally Indian wives might  be  "subordinate   and
    know little of their husband's conduct", and it is  recorded  that  her
    evidence was that she had blindly signed applications in  her  name  in
    2007.  However  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concludes  that  the   first
    appellant did know about a number of  applications  the  sponsor  made,
    which he accepts were fake, in the period 2006 to  2010,  and  further,
    contrary to her evidence, did know he was working illegally in  the  UK
    between period 2006 to 2010 because it was not "implausible" (paragraph
    31)  that she did not know this. It is not clear from the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal why her evidence that she had no  knowledge  of
    the fraudulent visa applications was implausible as  the  only  reasons
    given are her failure to identify herself and the sponsor  in  pictures
    on the applications at paragraph 33, which  is  described  as  a  minor
    issue only, and her inability to explain how he had got his  Portuguese
    passport beyond saying it was because of his mother and  her  heritage,
    as recorded at paragraph 35. I find that this is insufficient reasoning
    to explain how it is found that the first appellant  was  complicit  in
    the past false visa applications. In  addition  there  is  an  unlawful
    total absence of reasoning as to how the high test of exclusion on  the
    basis of public policy is met even if the first appellant  had  on  two
    occasions colluded in making false visa applications in 2007,  and  had
    known the sponsor was living and working illegally in  the  UK  in  the
    period 2006 to 2010.

23.  I  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal and all of the findings except that finding  that
    the appellants and the sponsor are related as claimed based on the  DNA
    evidence.

24. It was agreed by both parties, after I informed them that I found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and after a short  adjournment
    for Mr Sadeghi to take instructions, that  the  appeal  could  also  be
    remade on the basis of submissions only at this hearing.

    Submissions - Remaking

25. Mr Melvin  submitted  for  the  respondent  that  he  relied  upon  the
    immigration decision of 22nd August 2019 in relation to the appellants.
    From this document and the explanatory statement  the  essence  of  the
    respondent's case is as follows. The first appellant fell to be  refuse
    entry on the basis that there was evidence that her husband and sponsor
    had made a number of false applications for entry clearance using false
    Indian passports between 2006 and 2007, and had then travelled  to  the
    UK and worked illegally between 2007 and 2010. The respondent says  she
    has a reasonable suspicion that the sponsor's Portuguese citizenship is
    suspect because the sponsor had previously been able  to  obtain  false
    Indian documents. It  was  contended  that   the  first  appellant  was
    involved with the two false visa applications made in 2007 because  she
    initially claimed the sponsor had been in India when he had been in the
    UK between 2007 and 2010, and said she did not recognise a  picture  of
    herself and him from 2007 when the  sponsor  had  confirmed  they  were
    their photographs. As a result it was concluded that  the  sponsor  was
    not a Portuguese citizen,  and  she  was  not  a  family  member  under
    Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations and her  exclusion  was  consistent
    with Regulation 27 as she had attempted to  enter  the  UK  through  an
    abuse of the Immigration Rules.  The  decision  was  considered  to  be
    consistent with s.55 of the Border, Citizen and Immigration Act 2009 as
    the other appellants had been living with the first appellant separated
    from the sponsor since 2014 and were  not  in  school  until  September
    2019.

26. Mr Melvin added that the Portuguese authorities had  been  informed  of
    the respondent's concerns but there was nothing from them revoking  the
    citizenship of  the  sponsor,  so  he  accepted  that  the  sponsor  is
    currently a Portuguese citizen. He candidly accepted that he was not in
    the strongest position to argue that the first appellant posed  a  real
    and present risk to immigration control in this context.

27. Mr Sadeghi submitted  for  the  appellants  that  he  relied  upon  his
    skeleton argument as before the First-tier Tribunal. In short he argued
    that the sponsor has shown on the balance of probabilities that he is a
    Portuguese citizen, and that the second, third  and  fourth  appellants
    are therefore entitled to succeed as his family members  in  accordance
    with Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations, and in accordance with  their
    derivative rights based on their education. It was also in  their  best
    interests to remain in the UK.

28. With respect to the first appellant it is argued that she does not fall
    to be excluded from the UK  on  the  basis  of  Regulation  27  as  the
    respondent has not shown on the balance of probabilities that  she  has
    been dishonest. The allegations made are against the  sponsor  for  the
    most part and concern events which took place prior to 2007. The  first
    appellant was subjected to  rigorous  cross  examination  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  she  was
    consistent but was found to lack the same level of detail  the  sponsor
    was able to provide. Her evidence is that she blindly signed documents,
    and this clearly would not amount  to  her  deliberately  making  false
    statements to the British authorities. Before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the respondent's representative said that no enquiries  had  been  made
    with the Portuguese authorities  about  these  matters,  but  today  Mr
    Melvin has said that something had been sent about the concerns of  the
    Secretary of State but as  yet  nothing  had  been  received  back.  It
    follows that this was not seen as a pressing matter by the  respondent,
    and that it is not something on which the Portuguese  authorities  have
    seen fit to act to date.  Ultimately it is not possible to say that the
    first appellant poses a real present and sufficiently serious threat to
    immigration control on the basis of matters that  took  place  over  12
    years ago in relation to two visa  applications,  which  were  in  fact
    refused because she failed to  have  sufficient  documentary  evidence,
    even if it were found that she had been complicit with the  sponsor  in
    putting forward a false applications at  that  time,  and  particularly
    because no action has been taken against the sponsor for these matters.



    Conclusions - Remaking

29. It is rightly conceded for the respondent that the sponsor is currently
    a Portuguese citizen, and I find that this is the case in light of  his
    having a Portuguese passport and identity card, and having been granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK under the EU Settlement Scheme  on
    29th October 2019.

30. As the sponsor is a Portuguese citizen and  it  is  accepted  that  the
    second, third and fourth appellants are his children and all under  the
    age of 21 years I find that they  are  all  his  family  members  under
    Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) of the EEA  Regulations  and  thus  entitled  to
    succeed in their appeals on this basis, there being no contention  that
    they fall to be excluded from the UK on any basis. I  do  not  need  to
    consider whether they are entitled to derivative rights to reside based
    on their being in education in the UK under Regulation 16  of  the  EEA
    Regulations in these circumstances.

31. The basis on which the first appellant was refused entry to the  UK  is
    that  she  fell  to  be  excluded  under  Regulations  23  of  the  EEA
    Regulations as this was  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy  in
    accordance with Regulation 27.  Such a decision must be  proportionate,
    be based exclusively on her personal conduct and she must  represent  a
    genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  a  fundamental
    interest of society. It is contended that in 2007 in  relation  to  two
    visa applications to come to the UK she colluded with her husband,  the
    sponsor, to put forward false applications with  false  documents.  The
    evidence for this is said to be  that  the  first  appellant  initially
    denied that the sponsor had left India in the period 2007 to  2010  and
    afterwards has given vague evidence about what she understood about his
    whereabouts in this  time;  that  she  claimed  not  to  recognise  the
    photograph of herself used in one or both of these applications whereas
    the sponsor said it was a picture of her; and that she lacked  detailed
    understanding of how he had obtained his  Portuguese  citizenship.  The
    evidence of the first appellant was that she had no  knowledge  of  the
    visa applications and had "blindly signed" them  as her role  in  their
    marriage was simply to look after the house and the children, and  thus
    she had not colluded in any deception. This was also  the  evidence  of
    the sponsor. Her evidence about his Portuguese citizenship was that  he
    was entitled through his mother's heritage.

32. I find that the  first  appellant  was  not  wholly  candid  about  the
    sponsor's whereabouts during the period 2007 and 2010 at interview, but
    I do not  find  that  the  respondent  has  shown  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that she  consciously  colluded  with  her  husband,  the
    sponsor, in making two false visit visa applications in  2007.  I  find
    that it is irrelevant that she did not recognise  her  photograph  from
    2007 (which does look different from  the  photographs  submitted  with
    applications made in 2016 and 2017)  and  I  find  that  her  level  of
    understanding of his entitlement  to  Portuguese  citizenship  is  what
    might be normally expected of a lay person. Her evidence  and  that  of
    her husband, the sponsor, who  was  very  candid  about  his  own  past
    fraudulent applications, was that she had  no  involvement  with  these
    applications. I accepted that evidence as consistent with the  role  it
    is said she has had in their marriage. Further, even if  she  had  been
    aware of and to some extend involved with  the  applications  that  her
    husband was making in 2007, I would not have found that this would have
    meant that she was a present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
    maintenance of immigration control. She has never travelled on any visa
    issued in her name as a result of the presentation of false  documents;
    clearly since 2007 she  has  respected  immigration  control  and  made
    proper applications with genuine documents, one in 2016 and  one  2019,
    for EEA family permits, and did not attempt to travel  after  the  2016
    application was refused but reapplied again in 2019, and thus has  only
    travelled to the UK with the correctly issued family permit as the wife
    of an EU citizen.

33. I therefore find that the first appellant is also entitled  to  succeed
    in her appeal as she is  a  family  member  of  an  EU  national  under
    Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations, and does not fall to  be  excluded
    from  the  UK  under  Regulation  23  and  Regulation  27  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

    Decision:

 1. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 2. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 3. I remake the appeals allowing them under the EEA Regulations.


Signed:  Fiona Lindsley                 Date:  27th October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

