
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/04027/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2018                             |On 08 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                               saif ur rehman
                       (anonymity direction Not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Seehra, Counsel instructed by Farani-Javid-
                  Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nixon, promulgated  on  31  August  2017,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to issue a residence card.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows;

         "The grounds state that although the judge took into  consideration
         the decision of Judge Camp dated 6th October 2014 the judge  failed
         to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  marriage  is   still
         subsisting.  It is argued that the interview notes were before  the
         present judge and therefore should have been looked at afresh as if
         the first decision had never been made.   I  find  that  there  are
         arguable errors of law as stated in the grounds.  I also note  that
         the judge stated at paragraph 4 of the decision that the burden  of
         proof is on the appellant and the standard of proof required  is  a
         balance of probabilities.  That is a clear  error  of  law  as  the
         burden  of  proof  is  on  the  Respondent  on   the   balance   of
         probabilities.   I  find  that  all  aspects  of  the  grounds  are
         arguable."

 3. The  Appellant  and  Sponsor  attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  brief
    submissions from Mr. Jarvis in which  he  accepted  that  the  decision
    involved the making of a material error of law.  Ms Seehra  made  brief
    submissions.  I stated that I found the decision involved the making of
    a material error of law and I remitted the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be reheard.


Error of Law


 4. At [13] of the decision the Judge states:

         "I turn next to the consideration of the  additional  documentation
         before me and do not find that there is anything new before  me  of
         such significance that the determination should be departed from."

 5. The Judge then goes on to refer to the medical  evidence  of  fertility
    treatment which was before him.  He concludes [13] by stating:

         "In any event, I do not find that this is fresh evidence and  I  do
         not find that it is sufficient to displace the  original  decision.
         I find that there is nothing before me to cause me [to] depart from
         Judge Camp's determination and consider this matter afresh."

 6. I find that this evidence was  fresh  evidence.   It  was  not  just  a
    general assertion in oral evidence, but was  independent  corroborative
    documentary evidence.  No explanation has been given for the  statement
    that it was not fresh evidence.  Further, given  the  passage  of  time
    since Judge Camp's decision in 2014, the fact that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor were still claiming to be in a relationship in  and  of  itself
    was something to be taken into account when considering whether it  was
    appropriate to depart from the previous findings.


 7. Given that there was fresh evidence before the Judge, it was  incumbent
    on him to explain why it could not be relied on.   However,  he  stated
    only that this evidence "could have been put  before  the  Tribunal  to
    bolster the claim".  There are no reasons given for why  he  considered
    this to be the case, given that it was independent evidence.


 8. I find that the Judge has failed properly to engage with this evidence.
     He has failed to explain why it is not fresh evidence, and why he  has
    rejected it.  This goes to the core of the Appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision that he is not in a sham marriage.


 9. Further, as stated by Judge Adio when granting  permission,  the  Judge
    has incorrectly stated the burden of proof.  He states that the  burden
    of proof is on the Appellant [4].  This  is  incorrect.   It  is  well-
    established in caselaw that, where the Respondent is  alleging  that  a
    marriage is a marriage of convenience, the burden of proof lies on  the
    Respondent in  the  first  instance.   Only  when  the  Respondent  has
    provided evidence which raises the suspicion that  the  marriage  is  a
    marriage of convenience does the burden shift to the Appellant.


10. I find that this is a material error of law, especially given that  the
    Judge relies on the findings of Judge Camp who, as was pointed  out  by
    Ms Seehra, also stated that it was for the Appellant to  discharge  the
    burden of proof, see [28].  Further, when making his decision in  2014,
    Judge Camp did not have the interview transcript before him.  Had  this
    evidence been before Judge Camp, and had he been able to  consider  it,
    it is not possible  to  say  that  he  would  have  come  to  the  same
    conclusion.


11. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of  law
    in the failure to consider the fresh evidence, and the failure to apply
    the correct burden of proof.  I have  taken  account  of  the  Practice
    Statement dated 10 February 2010,  paragraph  7.2.   This  contemplates
    that an appeal may be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  the
    effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for the party's case to
    be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the  nature
    and extent of the fact-finding necessary to enable this  appeal  to  be
    remade, having regard to the overriding objective, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
    errors of law and I set the decision aside.


13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


14. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Nixon.


15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 2 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

