
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
EA/04020/2015

                                          EA/04021/2015

                                 EA/04022/2015

                                 EA/04023/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |        Determination & Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 29th January 2019                |        On 1st February 2019            |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                               AHTASHAM AZHAR
                               SADAF AHTASHAM
                                     MT
                                     FA

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Azhar in person and for all appellants
For the Respondent:    Ms K Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. The appellants sought  a  residence  card  as  extended  family
            members, dependent upon an EU national. Their applications were
            refused for reasons set out in decisions, served  individually,
            dated 10th December 2015.


         2. Their applications were considered under regulation  8  of  the
            2006 Regulations and they exercised their right of appeal under
            regulation 26.


         3. Mr Azhar is the cousin and brother in law  of  Waqas  Naeem,  a
            Pakistani national who is married to Claudia Fernandez who is a
            Spanish National exercising Treaty  Rights  in  the  UK.  Sadaf
            Ahtasham is his wife and is Waqas Naeem's sister; the other two
            appellants are their children.

         4. Ms Fernandez has been exercising Treaty Rights in the UK  since
            November 2009. Her marriage to Waqas Naeem took place in  April
            2014.

         5. Mr Azhar has been supported by Mr Naeem  and  lived,  with  his
            wife, as part of Mr Naeem's family household  in  Pakistan  and
            was supported by Mr Naeem. Mr Naeem came to the UK in  February
            2011. Mr Azhar and his family remained in the  family  home  in
            Pakistan, supported by Mr Naeem. Mr Azhar came to the UK  as  a
            student  in  November  2011  -  financially  supported  by  his
            cousin/brother in law. They lived in the same house in  the  UK
            for two months and then he moved to  other  accommodation  paid
            for by Mr Naeem. The other appellants  arrived  in  the  UK  in
            September 2012.  Mr  Naeem  continued  to  support  the  family
            financially although they did not live in the same household in
            the UK.

         6. The appellants assert they continue to be supported by Mr Naeem
            and Ms Fernandez. This is not accepted by the respondent.

         7.  The  application  for  residence  cards  was  refused  by  the
            respondent on the grounds:

              .  He had entered the UK in 2011 and his family in  2012  and
                prior to 2014 there was no relationship between them and Ms
                Fernandez, prior to their residence in the UK;
              . The financial evidence provided by the  appellants  to  the
                respondent had not shown that Ms Fernandez had the finances
                to be able to support them as claimed;
              . The appellants do not live as part of the EEA household  in
                the UK;
              . There is nothing to suggest that the EU national  would  be
                deterred from exercising Treaty Rights  if  the  appellants
                were returned to Pakistan;
              . There was insufficient evidence that  the  appellants  were
                dependant on the EU sponsor  either  at  the  date  of  the
                decision or prior to entering the UK.

         8. The appeal was  eventually  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal
            Judge Parkes and dismissed for reasons set out  in  a  decision
            promulgated on 26th June 2018.


         9. The appellants sought permission to appeal on the grounds that

              . The First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to have regard  to
                the detailed grounds of appeal  submitted  dated  28th  May
                2018;
              . That a relevant EEA national includes the spouse of an  EEA
                national and thus the respondent was incorrect  in  law  to
                find that the appellants could not meet the requirement  of
                being extended family members; the judge failed to  make  a
                finding regarding this;
              . That there was  adequate  evidence  before  the  First-tier
                Tribunal judge of the appellants' dependency  on  Mr  Naeem
                when he lived in Pakistan in the same  household  as  them,
                when he left to come to the UK, when  the  first  appellant
                came to the UK and since the whole family  has  arrived  in
                the UK;
              .  That  the  financial  and  emotional  dependency  of   the
                appellants is with Mr Naeem and Ms Fernandez and the First-
                tier Tribunal judge  failed  to  make  a  finding  on  that
                submission;
              . That regulation 8 requires dependency  on  either  the  EEA
                National  or  the  spouse;  because  the  appellants   were
                dependent on  Mr  Naeem  prior  to  his  marriage  that  is
                sufficient dependency to bring them  within  regulation  8;
                the judge failed to address this submission.


        10. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Alis  granted  permission  on  all
            grounds but drew attention to the  arguable  failure  that  the
            First-tier Tribunal judge failed to deal with the  last  ground
            of appeal and that given Rahman C-83/11 did not  consider  EFMs
            and dependency of those in the UK seeking leave to remain,  the
            judge ought arguably to have considered the submission.


        11. It is correct that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to
            consider and reach a decision on all of the  grounds  submitted
            before him. In paragraph 7 of his decision the judge said

                      ".... for these purposes I assume the Appellants were
                      dependant on Waqas Naeem when they lived in Pakistan
                      until 2011 and that they continued to be so on
                      arrival although this is not to be taken as a finding
                      of fact. This assumption is made for the purposes of
                      this decision only. Their dependency is disputed by
                      the Home Office but for the reasons given below it is
                      not necessary to decide any of the contentious points
                      raised."


            The judge goes on to say:


                      9. the  First  Appellant  seeks  to  argue  that  his
                      dependence on  his  brother  in  law/cousin  when  in
                      Pakistan is sufficient even though at the time  there
                      was no EEA element as Waqas Naeem did not  marry  his
                      spouse until 3 years after the Appellants came to the
                      UK. he argues that his dependency on his  brother  in
                      law/cousin is sufficient as his brother in law/cousin
                      is now a family member of an EEA  national  and  that
                      means that he meets the terms of regulation 8.
                      10. .... At the time of dependency before  coming  to
                      the UK the Appellant's brother in law cousin needs to
                      already be the family member  of  an  EEAA  national.
                      When the Appellants arrived in the UK  there  was  no
                      EEA family involved and so were  never  going  to  be
                      able to meet the requirements of  regulation  8.  The
                      subsequent marriage...some years later did  not  have
                      the effect of retrospectively engaging the  terms  of
                      the EEA Regulations. It was only  if  the  Appellants
                      could show  after  the  marriage  ...that  they  were
                      dependent outside the UK and then in the UK that they
                      could succeed, having left Pakistan  before  the  EEA
                      national married into the  family  they  could  never
                      meet the EEA regulations.


        12. The First-tier Tribunal judge does refer to the  other  grounds
            raised but it is correct that he fails to reach a  decision  on
            those grounds. Whether such a lack of decision  amounts  to  an
            error in law is dependant upon the outcome of  the  appellants'
            submission that dependency in  Pakistan  prior  to  Mr  Naeem's
            marriage is sufficient to bring them within the  definition  in
            regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations.

        13. Regulation 8 reads, in so far as is relevant, as follows:

                  8.- "Extended family member"
                  (1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means  a
                  person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
                  regulation 7(1)(a), (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the
                  conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
                  (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph  if
                  the person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or
                  his civil partner and-
                  (a) the person is residing in a  country  other  than  the
                  United Kingdom in which the EEA national also resides  and
                  is dependent upon the EEA national or is a member  of  his
                  household;
                  (b) the person satisfied the condition  in  paragraph  (a)
                  and is accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom
                  or wishes to join him there; or
                  (c) the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a),
                  has joined the EEA national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                  continues to be dependent upon him or to be  a  member  of
                  his household.
                  (3) ...
                  (4) ...
                  (5) ...
                  (6) In these Regulations "relevant EEA national" means, in
                  relation to an extended family member,  the  EEA  national
                  who is or whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of
                  the extended family member for the  purpose  of  paragraph
                  (2) ...

        14. Dauhoo (EEA Regulations  -  reg  8(2))  [2012]  UKUT  79  (IAC)
            considered  the  scheme  in  regulation  8(2)   of   the   2006
            regulations and concluded the four ways in which a  person  can
            succeed in establishing that he or she is an  'extended  family
            member'. The headnote summarises the four ways as follows:


                   i) prior dependency and present dependency;
                  ii)  prior  membership  of  a   household   and   present
                      membership of a household;
                 iii)  prior  dependency  and  present  membership   of   a
                      household;
                  iv)  prior  membership  of  a   household   and   present
                      dependency.
                 It is not necessary, therefore, to show prior  and  present
                 connection  in  the   same   capacity:   i.e.   dependency-
                 dependency  or  household  membership-household  membership
                 ((i) or (ii) above). A person may also qualify if  able  to
                 show (iii) or (iv).






        15. The appellants' submitted detailed  written  submissions  which
            were very ably amplified by Mr Azhar in his  oral  submissions.
            He referred in detail to the  legislative  and  jurisprudential
            framework relied upon. The underlying submission is  that  they
            fall within either (i)  or  (iv)  -  they  lived  in  the  same
            household as Mr Naeem in Pakistan prior to him coming to the UK
            and are now dependent or alternatively, they were dependent  on
            Mr Naeem while they were in Pakistan and, on coming to the  UK,
            they  remain  dependent.  As  the  spouse  of  an  EU  national
            exercising Treaty rights, the fact that  the  dependency  arose
            prior to and  continued  after  Mr  Naeem's  marriage  was  the
            critical factor rather than the fact  that  the  marriage  took
            place after the appellants had arrived in the UK.


        16. It is not in dispute that when the appellants were in Pakistan,
            Mr Naeem was not the spouse of an EU national exercising Treaty
            Rights. Nor is it in dispute that when Mr  Naeem  married,  the
            appellants were already in the UK. Nor is it  in  dispute  that
            they are related to Mr Naeem and, through Mr Naeem's  marriage,
            to an EU national.


        17. Rahman C-83/11 confirmed the obligation on States to facilitate
            in accordance with national legislation, the right of entry and
            residence for any other family members who are dependants of  a
            Union Citizen. It is within that context that the four criteria
            for establishing dependency are to be viewed.

        18. Regulation 8 is satisfied if an applicant is a relative  of  an
            EU national (which these appellants are) and fulfils the  other
            criteria  in  8(2).  The  operative  part  of  8(2)  for  these
            appellants is 8(2)(c). The appellants are living  in  the  same
            country as the EU national and  they  are  dependent  (for  the
            purpose of this appeal) upon the EU national and Mr Naeem.  But
            8(2)(c) refers to "continues" to be dependant. As [9] of Dauhoo
            states,

                      "...it  remains  that  in  order  to  qualify  as  an
                      extended family member/other family member under  reg
                      8(2) a person who is in the  UK  must  show  that  he
                      meets the requirements of both reg 8(2)(a)  and  (c).
                      He has to show a relevant  connection  with  the  EEA
                      principal both (a) prior to coming  to  the  UK  (the
                      essence of reg 8(2)(a)) (the "prior" test);  and  (b)
                      now he is here in the UK (the essence of reg 8(2)(c))
                      (the "present" test).

        19. The connection with the EEA principal did not occur  for  these
            appellants until after they had arrived in the  UK.  They  were
            not dependent upon the EEA principal or the spouse  of  an  EEA
            national and nor were they living in the household  of  an  EEA
            national or the spouse of an EEA national prior  to  coming  to
            the UK. That they are now dependant (which is taken to  be  the
            position for the purposes of this appeal) is insufficient. This
            is further confirmed, as stated in Dauhoo [12] where Article  3
            provides that the Directive applies to family members who  move
            to  or  reside  in  a  Member  State  and  the  family   member
            accompanies or joins them. These appellants have not joined the
            EEA national; they have  become  family  members  after  having
            resided in the UK prior to becoming family members.


        20. It follows that the appellants are not extended family  members
            of Mr Naeem and his EU wife.

        21. The conclusion drawn by the First-tier Tribunal is correct  and
            there is no error of law such that the decision should  be  set
            aside to be remade.

        22. It also follows that even though findings were not made on  the
            other grounds of appeal relied upon by  the  appellants,  those
            grounds were only of relevance if the appellants were  extended
            family members. There is no error  of  law  by  the  First-tier
            Tribunal  judge  in  failing  to  reach  conclusions  on  those
            grounds.

        23. Mr Azhar submitted that the  Tribunal  should  have  reached  a
            conclusion on an Article 8 human rights claim  which  had  been
            made in the covering letter. As I  explained  to  him,  in  the
            absence of a claim made in accordance with the Rules, there  is
            no jurisdiction to hear an Article 8 ground  of  appeal  -  see
            Amirteymour [2017] EWCA Civ 353.

      Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands.


                                    Date 30th January 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
