
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04771/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2019                      | On 22nd July 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mrs zohra el gana
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Joshi, Counsel, instructed by Kamberley
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For  ease  of  reference,  I  shall  refer  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal as the Secretary of State and  to
    the Respondent as the Claimant.

 2. This is a challenge by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Blake ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on  7
    March 2019, in which he allowed the Claimant's appeal. That appeal  was
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 22 June 2018, refusing  to
    issue the  Claimant  with  a  derivative  residence  card  pursuant  to
    regulations 16(5) and 20 of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the regulations").

 3. The Claimant, a Moroccan national, came to the United Kingdom in  2006.
    In 2014 she had made application for leave to remain based on article 8
    ECHR. This was refused and a subsequent  appeal  dismissed  in  January
    2015. That decision has no bearing on the current proceedings.

 4. In June 2015 the Claimant married Mr El-Mime ("the spouse"), a  British
    national. They have resided together ever since. By an application made
    on 22 February 2018, the Claimant sought a derivative  residence  card.
    The Secretary of State refused the application on the grounds that  the
    Claimant had not shown that she was her spouse's  primary's  carer,  or
    alternatively, that her departure from United Kingdom would not  compel
    him to leave.

The judge's decision

 5. The judge had  before  him  documentary  evidence  and  he  heard  oral
    evidence from the Claimant and her spouse. He regarded the evidence  as
    a whole to be reliable. On the basis of that evidence, the judge  found
    that there was a "very deep bond" between the couple,  and  that  there
    existed a "strong interdependency" in terms of emotional  support.  The
    judge accepted the spouse's evidence that  he  would  not  be  able  to
    receive the same level of treatment in another country as he  could  in
    the United Kingdom, and it he would have felt compelled to  leave  this
    country if the Claimant had to go. The judge accepted that the Claimant
    had taken on the role of her spouse's primary carer, a finding that was
    supported by a letter from the spouse's GP. The judge found that it was
    likely that the spouse would have to cease his full-time employment  if
    the  Claimant  were  to  leave  this  country.  Ultimately,  the  judge
    concluded that the spouse "would not be able to reside" in  the  United
    Kingdom if his wife was removed for an indefinite period.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The Secretary of State put forward two grounds. First, it is said  that
    the judge failed to apply the appropriate legal test, namely  the  high
    threshold of compulsion established by the case-law, including Harrison
    [2013] 2 CMLR 23. Second, it is said that  the  judge's  findings  were
    irrational.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  on
    1 May 2019.

The hearing before me

 8. Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds of appeal. He provided me with a copy
    of Patel [2018] 1 WLR 5245, and referred me to  paragraph  84.  It  was
    submitted, firstly, that the judge has simply not applied the high test
    established by Patel and other cases. Alternatively,  on  the  evidence
    before the judge and his findings, the conclusion that the spouse would
    be compelled to leave the United Kingdom was perverse.

 9. Ms Joshi relied on her rule 24 response. In summary, this  stated  that
    the judge had had the  benefit  of  receiving  oral  evidence  and  had
    clearly reached sustainable  findings  of  fact.  Those  findings  were
    consistent with the relevant test and I should not interfere  with  his
    decision. Ms Joshi emphasised the judge's  finding  that  there  was  a
    particularly strong relationship between the Claimant and her spouse.

10. In reply, Mr Whitwell suggested that the judge had treated  the  appeal
    more like an article 8 case than one involving the high test applicable
    in derivative rights cases.

Decision on error of law

11. I am acutely aware of the need to read the judge's  decision  sensibly,
    as a whole, and bearing well in mind the fact that he  had  heard  oral
    evidence. I should be  slow  to  interfere  with  a  properly  reasoned
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. However, in the particular circumstances of  this  appeal,  I  conclude
    that the judge has materially erred in law.

13. Regulation 16(1) and (5) of the regulations states:

         16.-     (1)  A person has a derivative right to reside during  any
             period in which the person-


                  (a)  is not an exempt person; and


                  (b)  satisfies each of the criteria  in  one  or  more  of
                  paragraphs (2) to (6).


             ...


             (5) The criteria in this paragraph are that-


                  (a)  the person is the primary carer of a British  citizen
                  ("BC");


                  (b)  BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and


                  (c)  BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or
                  in another EEA State if the person left the United Kingdom
                  for an indefinite period.


14. The  collective  effect  of  the  relevant  case-law  on  the  Zambrano
    principle (Ruiz Zambrano [2012] QB 265), including Harrison, Patel, K A
    v Belgium Case C- 82/16, and most recently MS  (Malaysia)  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 580 (this case post-dates the hearing  before  the  judge)  can  be
    summarised as follows (at least for the purposes of this appeal):

           i. the test is that of practical compulsion, not simply choice;


          ii. the test is an objective one;


         iii. in cases involving adult dependents (including a spouse),  the
              test  is   "very   demanding",   and   will   be   met   only,
              "exceptionally";


          iv. all cases are highly fact-specific.


15. Of course, the factual circumstances are primarily  a  matter  for  the
    judge. However, such findings must then be placed in the  proper  legal
    context. For the following reasons,  I  conclude  that  the  judge  has
    failed to direct  himself  to  the  very  high  threshold  set  by  the
    practical  compulsion  test  and  the  objective  assessment  that   it
    requires.

16. First, at no point in his decision does the  judge  provide  any  self-
    directions as to the applicable test. Citing authorities is  of  course
    not a requirement, but references to relevant binding authorities would
    provide an indication that  the  relevant  test  has  been  taken  into
    account and applied.

17.  Second,  substance  is  almost  always  more  important   than   form.
    Notwithstanding the absence of the citation of authority, there  is  no
    reference to "compulsion", exceptionality, or  any  indication  of  the
    importance of applying an objective standard.

18. The judge has referred to  the  wording  of  the  regulations  and  did
    conclude that the spouse would "not be able to reside"  in  the  United
    Kingdom without the Claimant. The point here is that  the  "compulsion"
    test has been the subject of important judicial interpretation and  the
    particularly  high  threshold  required  in  cases   concerning   adult
    dependents is not apparent on the face of regulation 16(5).

19. It is also right that the judge has  used  terms  such  as  "very"  and
    "strong" (see in particular paragraph 79). Viewed  in  the  context  of
    consideration of the evidence as  a  whole,  this  does  not  allay  my
    significant cumulative concerns as to the threshold that the judge  had
    in mind  when  reaching  these  conclusions.  Further,  these  findings
    related to subjective elements of the case and,  for  reasons  set  out
    below, there has been a failure to place them  in  the  context  of  an
    objective assessment.

20. I have considered whether other materials before  the  judge  may  have
    directed him to the appropriate test and its  high  threshold.  I  note
    that the skeleton argument relied on by the  Claimant  at  the  hearing
    makes no reference to any of the case-law, nor  does  it  set  out  the
    demanding test in any other form.

21. Third, what the judge has actually said indicates that he was  applying
    a subjective test only, or at least that the objective element was  not
    given adequate consideration. There is  an  emphasis  on  the  spouse's
    evidence as to what he would "feel" about leaving the United Kingdom if
    the Claimant had to go. The same applies to the spouse's view as to the
    level of treatment he might receive elsewhere. It  is  right  that  the
    judge relied on what the spouses GP said in the letter referred to  and
    cited in full at paragraph 68 of the decision. The "care"  referred  to
    in paragraph 78 must relate to the emotional support  provided  by  the
    Claimant to her spouse. The judge's finding that this type  of  support
    could not be provided by the NHS, even if justified,  was  to  a  large
    extent a subjective element  in  the  case.  That  did  not  render  it
    irrelevant, but it nonetheless required being placed within the context
    of a global objective assessment.

22. The error of approach in this case is clearly material and  I  set  the
    judge's decision aside on this basis.

23. Turning to the Secretary of State's second  ground,  and  although  not
    strictly necessary given my conclusion on the first ground, I find that
    this is an example of a relatively rare case in which it  can  properly
    be  said  that  the  judge's   ultimate   conclusion   is   irrational,
    notwithstanding the elevated threshold applicable  to  such  challenges
    and the fact-specific nature of case of this nature.

24. Having found the evidence as a whole to be reliable, the judge has made
    the following core findings:

           i. the spouse suffered from depression, trigerninal neuralgia  (a
              condition causing pain in the face), and hypertension;

          ii. the Claimant was her spouse's primary carer and  she  provided
              emotional support for him, resulting in a "very deep bond" and
              a "strong interdependency" between the couple;

         iii. the Claimant also undertook certain practical  tasks  such  as
              reminding him to take medication, cooking and doing laundry;

          iv. the spouse was under treatment from his GP and  felt  that  he
              would not get the same treatment in another country  (in  this
              case, Morocco);

           v. an NHS nurse could not provide the same emotional  support  as
              the Claimant;

          vi. the spouse held the view that if the Claimant left the  United
              Kingdom, he would have to go with her;

         vii. the spouse had played  a  role  in  helping  the  Claimant  to
              overcome mental health issues that she had in the past.;

        viii. the Claimant's departure  from  this  country  would  probably
              result in her spouse ceasing his full-time employment.

25. There was no finding that either the  NHS  or  social  services  (whose
    assistance the spouse would have been entitled to if his primary  carer
    - the Claimant had departed)  would  not  have  been  able  to  provide
    practical (as opposed to emotional) support in terms of medication  and
    certain household tasks. There was no finding  that  the  spouse's  own
    daughter would be unable to provide  any  sort  of  assistance  to  her
    father. Any differential level of medical treatment in Morocco was,  in
    the circumstances of this case, irrelevant to the compulsion test.  The
    same applies to the inability of the spouse to continue with his  full-
    time employment. Indeed,  the  fact  of  that  employment  must  be  of
    significance: the spouse had  been  working  for  many  years,  held  a
    managerial position, and was able to function for many hours away  from
    the Claimant during the working week. There was no independent evidence
    before the judge to indicate that the spouses  mental  and/or  physical
    health would be very severely compromised by the Claimant's  departure.
    The subjective elements in terms of the significant  bond  between  the
    couple and their emotional support for one another were certainly  very
    relevant, but setting the context of the other factors, they could not,
    by themselves, go to satisfy the very demanding  threshold  in  a  case
    such as this.

26. In my  view,  when  this  factual  matrix  is  set  against  the  "very
    demanding" threshold, the judge was  not,  wiht  respect,  entitled  to
    reach the conclusion that the compulsion test had been satisfied.

27. On this alternative basis, I set the judge's decision aside.

Remaking the decision

28.  Having  canvassed  their  respective  views  at  the   hearing,   both
    representatives agreed that I could and should remake the  decision  on
    the evidence currently before me.

29. Ms Joshi  submitted  that  the  evidence  did  satisfy  the  high  test
    applicable in cases concerning adult dependents and  derivative  rights
    of residence.

30. Mr Whitwell relied on his submissions made in respect of the  error  of
    law issue.

31. I remake the decision in this appeal with  reference  to  the  evidence
    that was before the judge, his findings made  thereon,  and  the  legal
    framework set out, above.

32. I do not propose to repeat what I have already set out in the error  of
    law decision. Put shortly, the test is "very demanding",  and  it  will
    only be in "exceptional" cases that it  can  be  shown  that  an  adult
    dependent will be compelled to leave the territory of the EU.

33. I now undertake a fact-specific evaluative assessment of the Claimant's
    case.

34. The Claimant has a very strong relationship with her spouse,  and  this
    has been created in part by her support for him, but also in respect of
    support that he has provided her in the past, support that has assisted
    her in overcoming mental health difficulties of her own. This factor is
    important, and clearly counts very much in the Claimant's favour.

35. I find that the Claimant is the primary carer for her spouse.  This  of
    course is not determinative, as it is only one limb of  the  assessment
    under regulation 16(5) of the regulations.

36. On the evidence before me I find that the Claimant does  not  currently
    suffer from mental health problems. The GP patient record  printout  at
    64 of the respondent bundle confirms that the PTSD "ended" in  February
    2016. It is of course impossible  to  say  what  might  happen  in  the
    future, but in my view it is unlikely that  significant  mental  health
    problems would re-occur even if her removal were to take place.

37. I find that the spouse suffers from the conditions set  out  previously
    my decision. He receives appropriate treatment from his GP but there is
    no evidence to  suggest  that  he  requires  specialist  Consultant-led
    input, and I find that he does not. He works, and has worked  for  many
    years, in a full-time job bearing managerial  responsibilities.  Whilst
    in no way seeking to denigrate his medical  conditions,  the  fact  and
    nature of his employment must go to indicate that his overall health is
    not so severely affected as to prevent at least a reasonable  level  of
    functionality on a day-to-day basis. The reference in the GP letter  to
    the spouse having difficulty with his concentration must be read in the
    context of the nature of his employment: any such difficulties are,  in
    my view, limited.

38. On the evidence before me, there is  nothing  to  show  that  practical
    assistance with such matters as the taking of medication, cooking,  and
    attending relevant appointments, could not be provided  by  either  the
    NHS or social services. The GP letter only goes so far as to state that
    emotional support could not be provided by an NHS nurse. I accept  that
    the same type of emotional support currently provided by  the  Claimant
    could not, for understandable reasons, come from such a person.  Having
    said that, I find that appropriate therapy from,  for  example,  a  CBT
    counsellor, could be put in place if necessary.  This  may  not  be  an
    equivalent to the Claimant's provision, but  it  would  nonetheless  be
    available and there is no sound reason  to  conclude  that  the  spouse
    would be simply unable to engage with such a  service.  The  GP  letter
    does not provide any analysis/reasons as to why any therapy/report from
    a third party would be practically impossible. The judge's findings  do
    not specifically address the issue of such alternative support (bearing
    in mind that I am not  considering  an  equivalent  type  of  emotional
    support to that provided by the Claimant, only a source that  would  be
    likely to offer meaningful assistance). The possibility of  alternative
    care is not a decisive  factor,  although  it  is  significant  in  the
    context of this case.

39. The GP letter does not give an  opinion  on  the  consequences  to  the
    spouses mental and/or physical health should  the  Claimant  leave  the
    United Kingdom. I find that there is no independent evidence to justify
    a conclusion that his overall health would be significantly jeopardised
    by the Claimant's departure. I take full account of the spouse's belief
    that he would not obtain the same level of medical treatment in Morocco
    as he is currently receiving in this country, but this cannot add  much
    to the Claimant's case.

40. Turning to the spouse's  daughter,  I  acknowledge  that  in  his  oral
    evidence he expressed the view that she would not be able to help  him.
    This particular point was not the subject of a finding  by  the  judge,
    although the spouse was found to be a credible witness. In the  absence
    of specific evidence from the daughter, I can see no sound  reason  for
    finding that she would be unable and/or unwilling to assist her father.
    She has a family of her own, but this of itself would not preclude  the
    possibility of some form of  assistance  whether  it  be  emotional  or
    purely practical. I do note that the spouse gave evidence that  he  was
    in touch with his daughter on a weekly basis.

41. The Claimant's departure would no doubt cause emotional upset,  require
    practical readjustments to be made, and quite  possibly  give  rise  to
    difficult choices to make in respect of the couple's future.  I  accept
    that the spouse may well feel compelled to leave  the  United  Kingdom,
    and I take this subjective element fully into account. It may  be  that
    the spouse would in fact decide to leave with  his  wife.  However,  it
    would be a choice (albeit a  difficult  one)  and  not  a  question  of
    compulsion.

42. In all the circumstances, the Claimant's appeal must fail.

43. I would add a final observation. This case has of course been concerned
    entirely with EU law: Article 8 ECHR has not played a part. There  have
    been findings of fact which may be supportive of an  Article  8  claim,
    although I in no way express an opinion on the prospects of success  of
    any such claim. Whether the Claimant wishes to pursue that avenue is of
    course a matter for her.

Anonymity

44. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and nor do I.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing Mrs El Gana's appeal.



Signed      [pic]            Date: 16 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
