
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04475/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 14th May 2019                    |On: 21st May 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     PO
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Ms Reville, Counsel instructed by Peer and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born in 1970.  He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge MA  Khan)  to
    dismiss his appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 ('the Regulations').

 2. The Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since  he  entered  as  a
    visitor in 2000 and remained unlawfully. In  2004,  2007  and  2008  he
    tried unsuccessfully to  establish  a  right  of  residence  under  the
    Regulations, on the basis that he was the husband of a French national,
    Ms N. In 2010 a fourth application,  made  on  the  same  grounds,  was
    successful. The Secretary of State issued him  with  a  residence  card
    valid for five years. On the 5th August  2015  the  Appellant  made  an
    application for recognition of his 'retained' right  of  residence,  on
    the grounds that although his marriage to Ms N had  now  ended  he  had
    already lived in the United Kingdom for the requisite period  of  time;
    this was initially refused but succeeded on appeal and a residence card
    was subsequently granted.

 3. On the 26th March 2018 the Appellant applied  for  permanent  residence
    under the Regulations.

 4. The refusal letter is dated the 11th June 2018.  The  Respondent  notes
    that Home Office records show that the Appellant  is  living  with  his
    Nigerian partner Ms V, and that they have three children together, born
    in 2010, 2011 and 2014. Given that these children were all born  during
    the  claimed  currency  of  the  Appellant's  marriage  to  Ms  N,  the
    Respondent was not prepared to confirm that he had accrued a  permanent
    right  of  residence.  The  Respondent  determined  that  in  fact  the
    Appellant had never been entitled to any right of residence as either a
    family member or a former family member, since his marriage  to  French
    national Ms N had been a marriage of convenience.

 5. The Appellant appealed and on the 7th  January  2019  the  matter  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The case was adjourned due to lack  of
    court  time.   On  the  24th  January  2019   it   was   re-listed   at
    Harmondsworth, coming before Judge Khan.  The  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer (HOPO) then  handed  in  a  bundle  of  documents  including  a
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lewis dating back  to  2006,
    and copies of some of the earlier refusals.  Although Counsel  for  the
    Appellant objected to the late service of these documents, the Tribunal
    decided to admit them on the grounds that they  were  relevant  to  the
    proceedings.

 6. The Tribunal heard oral evidence from the Appellant. He  said  that  he
    had met Ms N in 2003 and that they had lived together from  then  until
    2015.  He said that he had only embarked on a relationship with V after
    his marriage had broken  down.   Although  he  is  the  father  of  the
    children he and V had not been in a relationship  when  these  children
    were conceived; they had just been 'good friends' at the  time.     The
    determination notes that V did  not  attend  the  hearing.  Documentary
    evidence in the bundles indicated that the Appellant and V are  married
    (there being numerous references to Mr and Mrs 'O'), a matter denied by
    the Appellant.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal further had  regard  to  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lewis from 2006, in  which  Judge  Lewis  had
    rejected the Appellant's claim  to  be  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with Ms N. Judge Lewis had so found inter alia because  of
    numerous discrepancies in  the  evidence  given  at  interview  by  the
    alleged couple.  Judge Khan then heard evidence from Ms N herself.  She
    explained that when she had been interviewed by an immigration  officer
    back in 2006 he had not understood much of what she  had  said  because
    her English is heavily accented. She confirmed that she had been  aware
    that the Appellant had fathered three children with another woman,  and
    indeed that she had allowed the children to visit the matrimonial home.

 8. The Tribunal dismissed the appeal having found that the Respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proof and shown the  marriage  to  be  one  of
    convenience. The findings of Judge  Lewis  had  not  been  successfully
    challenged,  and  they  must  remain  the  starting  point.   She   had
    scrutinised the marriage interview  in  detail  and  had  come  to  his
    conclusion on "sound grounds". The Tribunal further found that:

      i) The Appellant had failed to provide evidence of  cohabitation  with
         Ms N despite terms of Secretary of State's refusal letter;

     ii) It was not credible that he would have three children with a  'good
         friend' during the currency of his marriage;

    iii) Ms N was given  five  days  post-hearing  to  produce  photographic
         evidence referred to in her testimony (of the children visiting the
         matrimonial home) yet none was produced;

     iv) The Appellant failed to  produce  any  corroborative  witnesses  to
         claimed relationship.




    The Grounds of Appeal

 9. The Appellant submits that the First-tier Tribunal decision  is  flawed
    for the following material errors of law:

      i) Legal Misdirection. The Judge  asks  himself  whether  this  was  a
         genuine and subsisting marriage, when in fact all he needed  to  be
         concerned with was whether it was, at its inception, a marriage  of
         convenience;

     ii) Procedural Unfairness (I).  The  Judge  gave  no  reasons  for  his
         decision to admit the bundle submitted by the HOPO on  the  day,  a
         late disclosure of material that prejudiced the Appellant's ability
         to present his case;

    iii) Misapplication of Devaseelan. The decision of Judge Lewis could not
         be relied upon because it was itself legally  flawed,  Judge  Lewis
         having placed the burden of proof on the Appellant;

     iv) Procedural Unfairness (II). If it could be said that  the  Tribunal
         should not have adopted Judge Lewis' findings (see  above)  but  it
         was nevertheless entitled to rely on her summary  of  the  evidence
         before her,  a  discrete  error  has  arisen,  since  the  marriage
         interview records relied upon by Judge Lewis  have  still  to  date
         never been supplied to the Appellant  and  he  has  therefore  been
         denied a fair opportunity to analyse and comment upon  the  answers
         recorded.

      v) Failure to give reasons. The Judge finds the  Appellant's  evidence
         not credible but does not explain why.

     vi) Failure to take relevant information into account.  The  Respondent
         had accepted that Ms  N  was  the  Appellant's  spouse  within  the
         meaning of the Regulations in 2010, 2011, 2017, and 2018.




    Discussion and Findings

10. The chronology of events is as follows:

    23.9.00      A's claimed date of entry to the United Kingdom

    April 03     Claimed meeting of Appellant and Ms N

    June 03      Claimed start date of cohabitation with Ms N

    30.7.04      Marriage to Ms N

    1.11.04      A sought a residence card as the family  member  of  Ms  N
                      (application #1)

    1.6.05 Marriage interviews take place

    5.10.05      Application rejected on the grounds that the marriage  was
                      one of Convenience

    9.3.06 First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Lewis)  dismisses  the  Appellant's
                      appeal

    3.7.07 A sought  a  residence  card  as  the  family  member  of  Ms  N
                      (application #2)

    12.12.07     Application rejected on the grounds that the marriage  was
                      one of Convenience

    25.4.08      A sought a residence card as the family  member  of  Ms  N
                      (application #3)

    17.3.08      Application refused

    23.9.10      A's first child born to V

    17.12.10     A sought a residence card as the family  member  of  Ms  N
                      (application #4)

    18.4.11      Residence card issued, valid for 5 years

    17.11.11     A's second child born to V

    18.6.14      A's third child born

    Jan 15 Appellant claims that he and Ms N separated

    27.5.15      Divorce between Appellant and Ms N finalised

    5.8.15 A sought a residence card as the former family member  of  Ms  N
                      ('retained' rights) (application #5)

    18.1.16      Application refused

    6.12.17      The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Ince)  allows  appeal  by
                      consent

    25.1.18      Residence card granted for 5 years

    9.3.18 A seeks permanent residence (application #6)

    11.6.18      Application for permanent  residence  refused  on  grounds
                      that marriage was a marriage of convenience

11. I deal first with ground (ii): whether the late  material  should  have
    been admitted.

12. There is  no  arguable  breach  of  procedural  fairness,  or  material
    unfairness, in the Tribunal  having  admitted  copies  of  the  earlier
    refusal letters,  and  the  determination  of  Judge  Lewis,  into  the
    evidence.  It is true that these should have been lodged in  compliance
    with directions, and at the very least at the aborted  hearing  on  the
    7th January. It is most unfortunate that they were not.  The  Procedure
    Rules are however clear that in the operation of the tribunal the judge
    must use is or her own discretion in deciding whether or not  to  admit
    material served not in accordance with directions. In this  case  there
    were  two  overriding  considerations.  First  that  the  material,  in
    particular the determination, was directly relevant to  the  matter  in
    hand, viz the parties' intentions at the time of the marriage in  2004.
    The decision of Judge Lewis, and the evidence  it  summarises,  is  the
    material closest situated to that  point  in  time.  It  was  therefore
    plainly important to the decision that the Tribunal here had  to  make.
    The second matter is that none of this was unknown to the Appellant. He
    was not ambushed by this material, since he knew full well that he  had
    lost that appeal, why he had lost it, and that he had been successively
    rebuffed in his attempts to obtain a residence card.    As  such  there
    was no prejudice at all.

13. I therefore turn to consider grounds (iii) & (iv), both  of  which  are
    concerned with the approach taken to the decision of Judge Lewis.

14. The matter in  issue  before  Judge  Lewis  in  2006  was  whether  the
    Appellant qualified for a residence card as the spouse of  Ms  N.   The
    Appellant claimed to have been in that  relationship  since  2003,  the
    couple having married on the 30th July 2004. They had been  interviewed
    by an immigration officer in June 2005. It  is  unclear  whether  Judge
    Lewis had before her the entire  transcript  of  those  interviews,  or
    whether she simply relied on extracts set out in the refusal letter.

15. Judge Lewis summarised  a  number  of  discrepancies  in  the  evidence
    arising from the interview record. For instance,  Ms N claimed that she
    had met the Appellant in an internet chat room and had corresponded  in
    this way for approximately 8 months before they met in person, when she
    went to his house for coffee; he denied this and said that they had met
    in the Fridge Bar in Brixton. She said that they had been together  for
    2 years at the date of interview; he said it was 18 months.    She said
    that at the time they met she was living in New Cross; he said she  had
    lived in Peckham.  She said that they had not lived together before the
    marriage; he said that they did. She said that the ceremony took  place
    at 2; he said it was at 3. She said that there were  4  people  at  the
    reception; he said that there were 15 of them.

16. The Appellant and Ms N both gave evidence  before  Judge  Lewis.    The
    Appellant said that he did not know why she would  have  mentioned  the
    internet chat room. He suggested it was because  her  English  was  not
    good and she may have misunderstood the question.  They  were  able  to
    give consistent details about the colour of their bathroom and  bedroom
    d�cor, and agreed about that they had both had for breakfast that  day.
    There was very limited evidence of cohabitation. The Appellant had been
    sent a certificate for a course he  undertook,  and  he  produced  five
    Christmas cards, three sent to his wife, and two to them both.

17. Having considered all of  that  evidence  in  the  round,  Judge  Lewis
    concluded as follows:

         "Accordingly I cannot be satisfied that on balance this couple were
         living together either at the date of decision or  currently.  They
         may stay together from time to time but  that  does  not  establish
         that they are actually living together on a full time  basis  as  a
         couple which I find is a basic  requirement  for  the  marriage  to
         exist and not be a marriage of convenience which is  prohibited  by
         the Regulations. I emphasise that the burden of  proof  is  on  the
         Appellant and he has not discharged it"

18. Judge Khan records Ms Reville's objections to this determination at his
    paragraphs 49-50. First, she  asked  the  Tribunal  to  note  that  the
    interview transcript, summarised and relied upon by  Judge  Lewis,  has
    not been made available to  the  Appellant.  As  such  he  -  and  more
    importantly  Judge  Khan  -  has  been  unable  to  see   whether   the
    discrepancies identified are  representative  of  the  interview  as  a
    whole. In the absence of the  entire  record  a  skewed  picture  could
    emerge: Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT
    00515 (IAC).  Second, it is clear that Judge Lewis found the burden  to
    lie with the Appellant:  we  now  know  that  this  was  the  incorrect
    approach (see for instance Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14). The burden lay  on
    the Respondent to establish that this was a marriage of convenience and
    it cannot be gleaned from Judge  Lewis'  findings  that  this  converse
    burden would have been discharged had she applied it.  It was therefore
    unsafe to rely in any way on Judge Lewis' findings.

19. Having directed itself to consider those  submissions,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal said this:

         "With respect to Ms Reville's submissions,  Judge  Lewis'  findings
         remain unchallenged, and the findings remain a starting  point  for
         this Tribunal. Judge Lewis scrutinised the appellant  and  his  EEA
         sponsor's marriage interview in detail and came to  the  conclusion
         on sound grounds.  Combined  with  the  appellant  and  his  ex-EEA
         sponsor's evidence before me and their evidence before judge Lewis,
         I find that the respondent  has  established  on  the  higher-level
         balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  appellant  entered  into  a
         marriage of convenience under regulation 2 of the  EEA  Regulations
         2016.   The  appellant  has  failed  to  provide  evidence  or   an
         explanation to satisfy me that his marriage to his  ex-EEA  sponsor
         was a genuine and subsisting marriage and not  one  of  convenience
         under Regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations".

20. Before me Ms Reville submits that this  reasoning  entirely  failed  to
    engage with her submissions, duly recorded at paragraphs 49-50.  I have
    to agree. The  primary  difficulty  with  the  reasoning  is  that  the
    Tribunal does not appear to have recognised that the law in respect  of
    the burden and standard of  proof  has  entirely  changed  since  2006.
    Whilst it was certainly correct to note  that  the  findings  of  Judge
    Lewis were the starting point, it failed to acknowledge that they could
    today only attract limited weight, given the  changes  in  approach  to
    allegations of marriages of convenience.  The  determination  of  Judge
    Khan simply indicates that they were weighed against the Appellant;  to
    what extent is not clear.  Is a material error shown?

21. The first task for this First-tier Tribunal was to  decide  whether  or
    not the Secretary of State had identified sufficient  evidential  basis
    for raising a doubt as  to  the  nature  of  this  marriage.    In  her
    submissions before me Ms Reville relied on Miah to point out  that  the
    Respondent's  case  rested  on  notes  from  an  interview  long  since
    forgotten and for which no transcript is ever likely to  be  available.
    There were considerable doubts as to  whether  those  notes  were  even
    reliable,  given  Ms  N's   consistent   evidence   that   there   were
    interpretation difficulties at the interview itself and  that  she  was
    misunderstood.  I accept all of that. In light of Miah it  is  doubtful
    whether the points raised in the refusal letter in 2006  can  be  given
    any significant weight today. That is not  however  the  only  evidence
    that the Respondent seeks to rely on. The primary ground for  suspicion
    is the fact that the Appellant has  had  three  children  with  another
    woman at a time when he claims to have been happily married  to  Ms  N.
    All three of those children were born prior to 2015,  declared  by  the
    Appellant to be the date that he and Ms N  went  their  separate  ways.
    This is the matter at the centre of the refusal  letter:  Judge  Lewis'
    determination had no part to play in raising the Secretary  of  State's
    suspicions.

22. The suspicion having been voiced, it was for the Appellant  to  provide
    an 'innocent explanation'.  He had clearly stated  in  his  application
    form that the marriage to Ms N had subsisted between 2003 and 2015, and
    he does not resile from that  today.  Whilst  Ms  Reville  is  entirely
    justified in emphasising, at her ground (i), that it  is  the  date  of
    marriage that must be the focus of enquiry, the First-tier Tribunal was
    plainly  entitled  to  evaluate  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his
    marriage as a whole.   If  the  evidence  about  the  relationship  was
    devoid of credibility, it would be logically permissibly to deduce from
    that that the marriage itself, from beginning to end, was a sham.

23. The explanation offered to the Tribunal was that prior to  2015  V  was
    simply a 'good friend' whom he impregnated on three separate  occasions
    whilst continuing to live with his wife.  The Tribunal was told that Ms
    N was well aware of this arrangement and indeed that the children  were
    brought to visit her.

24. That explanation having been offered, it was for the Tribunal to  weigh
    the  competing  evidence  and  evaluate  whether  the  Respondent   had
    discharged the overall legal burden of proof.

25. Ms Reville submits that in conducting that evaluation  of  the  current
    evidence (ie that distinct from the determination of Judge  Lewis)  the
    Tribunal failed  to  give  reasons  why  it  rejected  the  Appellant's
    'innocent explanation' as "not credible".   Reasons  are  necessary  so
    that the losing party can understand why he has lost. I do  not  accept
    that the Appellant is under any illusions as to why  Judge  Khan  found
    this evidence incredible. The Tribunal was perfectly entitled to reject
    as implausible evidence that the Appellant and  Ms  N  would  carry  on
    living together in  the  matrimonial  home  whilst  he  fathered  three
    children with a friend.  It is a scenario so out  of  the  ordinary  it
    could be said that no  elaboration  was  necessary,  but  in  fact  the
    Tribunal does give reasons.

26. Apart from the inherent  implausibility  of  the  account,  Judge  Khan
    identifies a lack of supporting evidence as material to  his  decision.
    Ms N insisted that photographic evidence of her relationship  with  the
    children would be produced; it was not. Despite the matter being at the
    centre of the refusal, there  was  no  corroborative  evidence  of  the
    appellant's claim to have lived with Ms N for 12 years until  2015.  No
    statements from friends, nor photographs of the  couple  together,  nor
    evidence of cohabitation.

27. The Judge further finds that  the  Appellant  has  "done  his  best  to
    conceal the existence of [V]  and  the  three  children".  This  was  a
    finding that was certainly open to the Tribunal to make. At  Q11.15  of
    the application form, completed on the 9th March 2018 and replicated in
    the Respondent's bundle, the Appellant is  asked  whether  he  has  any
    children of whom the sponsor is not the parent.  He  ticks  'Yes'.   At
    Q11.17 he is asked to explain why the children referred to at 11.15 are
    not being included in the application. In the text  box  the  Appellant
    has  simply  written  "there  are  no   children   included   in   this
    application".    At  Q11.22  the  Appellant  is  asked  whether  he  is
    currently in a relationship to which he replies 'no'.   Curiously,  the
    Appellant's bundle  contains  extracts  of  another  application  form,
    described in the index as the 'EEA (FM) Application'. This again  shows
    the Appellant to have disclosed the existence of his children,  but  to
    have offered no details bar stating that  they  are  "from  a  previous
    relationship".  None of that is  easy  to  square  with  the  case  now
    advanced. Whilst the Appellant might reasonably be able to point to his
    honest declaration that his children  exist,  there  is  no  reasonable
    explanation offered for his denial (in the  form  dated  9.3.18)  of  a
    current relationship when he was plainly  living  with  Vivian  at  the
    time. Nor is there any explanation, bar dishonesty, for his claim  that
    the children were born "of a previous  relationship".  That  is  wholly
    contrary to the case he now advances.

28. I am therefore satisfied that there was before the Tribunal  sufficient
    evidence to justify the Respondent's accusation; I am further satisfied
    that the Tribunal, in its final reckoning, was entitled to  reject  the
    Appellant's innocent explanation for the  reasons  that  it  gives.  Ms
    Reville's objections to the use of Judge Lewis' determination are  well
    made, but in the end are not material. The decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would have been the same even if all  of  that  reasoning  was
    expunged.

29. There remains ground (vi). It is accepted that  on  two  occasions  the
    Respondent has granted the Appellant a resident card on  the  basis  of
    his marriage to Ms N: in 2011 as a family member, and in  2018  on  the
    basis of retained rights. On at least one other  occasion  a  card  was
    refused without reference to any such allegation.  Ms  Reville  accepts
    that these grants did not raise any kind  of  estoppel.  She  submitted
    however that they were plainly relevant to the overall  assessment  and
    should have been taken into account. I find that those grants  were  of
    only marginal significance. The Secretary of State took  the  decisions
    on each applications on the  evidence  before  him  at  the  time.  The
    evidence on this occasion included information  from  Thurrock  Council
    that the Appellant, V and their three children were  seeking  emergency
    support. That was how it came to the Home Office's attention  that  the
    Appellant was in this relationship.   Had that matter not come to light
    no doubt the application would have been granted.  On  the  facts,  all
    that does is suggest that the earlier grants should not have been  made
    either. This is of no assistance to the Appellant.

30. In conclusion I am satisfied that the decision of  Judge  Lewis  should
    only have been given limited weight. It remains the case  however  that
    the Respondent had given clear reasons for making the  accusation;  the
    Appellant's explanation was lacking in credibility and  unsupported  by
    evidence; in those circumstances the Tribunal was entitled to find that
    the overall legal burden had been discharged.




    Anonymity Order

31. Although there is no reason to protect the identity of  the  adults  in
    this case, the Appellant is father to three children  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders  I  am  concerned  that  identification  of  the
    Appellant, his partner or ex-wife could lead to identification  of  the
    children and for that reason I consider it appropriate to make an order
    in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Decisions

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside.

33. There is an order for anonymity.




    [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               19th May 2019
