
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber   Appeal Number: EA/04627/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th September 2018          |                                |
|                                |On 24th October 2018            |
|                                |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

                       Gloria Judith Gordillo Ontaneda

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Maze, Direct Access.

For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal a determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S H Smith, which dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  2nd  May  2017  to
    refuse her a permanent residence card as  a  family  member  under  the
    European Economic Area (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 2. The Secretary of State asserted that the  appellant  had  not  provided
    adequate evidence to show that she was the family member of  a  person,
    who had been exercising Treaty Rights in the  UK  for  five  continuous
    years.

 3. Having noted, that the essential  issue  was  whether  there  was  such
    evidence that the Sponsor  was  economically  active  for  a  five-year
    period.  As the  representative  noted  the  case  would  turn  on  the
    documentary evidence [26].

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the following findings.

           (i) the tax returns taken in isolation were not proof of income.
            There were a number of other documents, many of which would  be
           readily available to a self- employed person and which one would
           expect to see accompany a  tax  return  in  order  to  establish
           income levels,  such  as  bank  statements  showing  receipt  of
           payments corresponding to  the  turnover  declared  to  HMRC  or
           simple accounts of the  self-employed  undertaking.  There  were
           none.

           (ii) At paragraph 29 the judge found

           'the particular documents produced by the appellant lack  weight
           because they are inconsistent with the  payslips  submitted.  As
           outlined in the table above, the appellant's case  is  that  her
           husband was a worker for a period of time, in 2012 and 2013. Yet
           during the same periods, her husband did  not  declare  to  HMRC
           that he was employed. On each of the tax returns  included  with
           the appellant's bundle, including those which cover the  periods
           covered by the payslips, the sponsor declared to  HMRC  that  he
           was not employed. On the face of the documents, therefore, there
           are significant inconsistencies. It is difficult to me to attach
           weight to documents which are inconsistent with other pieces  of
           evidence submitted on the appellant's behalf. Whichever way  one
           looks  at  the  documents  submitted  there   are   difficulties
           ascribing much weight to them due to these  inconsistencies.  It
           is clear that either the tax  returns  do  not  present  a  full
           financial picture on behalf of the appellant,  or  the  payslips
           outlined above are not reliable. It is  not  possible  to  place
           weight on both'

           (iii) At paragraph 30 the judge found

           'Even putting aside these concerns as to the reliability of  the
           documents submitted,  I  returned  (sic)  to  my  initial  point
           concerning the tax returns and national insurance  calculations.
           Taken in isolation, such documents do not  provide  evidence  of
           income. All they do is demonstrate that the person  declared  to
           HMRC that their income  reached  a  particular  level  during  a
           particular year.  In the case of receipts for payments  for  tax
           and insurance contributions, all those documents demonstrate  is
           that  the   individual   concerned   made   payments   to   HMRC
           corresponding to the liability arising  from  the  figures  they
           themselves had declared.  While such declarations  and  payments
           capable of attracting a degree of  weight,  taken  in  isolation
           that cannot be determinative of income of any particular  level.
           In the present context, where there is a complete absence of the
           sort of supporting  documentation  which  one  would  expect  to
           [ac]company self-employment,  those  concerns  apply  with  even
           greater force'.

    (iv) The judge did not consider that the documents were  reliable  [31]
    and concluded that the appellant  had  failed  to  establish  that  her
    husband had exercised treaty rights for the requisite period [32].

Application for Permission to Appeal


 5. The application for permission contended

    (i) the judge failed to consider the documentary evidence properly when
    he his findings were made. The appellant provided proof of her  sponsor
    self-employment and employment since 2011 included payslips, P60, self-
    assessment tax returns for more than 5 years, proof of paying  national
    insurance contributions. The decision was contrary to the Secretary  of
    State's EEA (PR) Guidance Notes Version  3.0  April  2017.   The  judge
    overlooked the evidence.

 6. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJM
    Hollingworth who noted that the judge at paragraph 7  had  stated  that
    had the representative prepared properly for the hearing the time which
    the judge had referred to in the preceding  paragraph  would  not  have
    been wasted.  The grant stated

           'It is arguable given the basis of the permission application in
           relation to the scope of the available evidence and taking  into
           account the observations of the judge  that  the  perception  of
           unfairness is capable of having been seen to have  arisen.   The
           judge has set out the chronology of the adjournments which  took
           place on the day of the hearing. At paragraph 6 of the  decision
           the judge refers to  the  difficulty  which  Nicholas  explained
           still existed'.

The Hearing


 7. Ms Victor Maze submitted that the judge had been biased and had come to
    his conclusions at the outset  of  the  hearing.   The  judge  had  not
    considered all the documentation.

 8. Mr Avery relied on the judge's findings that  the  documents  were  not
    reliable. The judge's findings were open to him.

Conclusions


 9. The assertion of bias was not a matter raised in  the  application  for
    permission and I find no evidence of the judge being either  biased  or
    impatient (as advanced by  Ms  Victor-Maze)  during  the  hearing.  The
    allegation is a serious one.  As set out in Alubankudi  (Appearance  of
    bias) [2015] UKUT  00542  (IAC),  one  of  the  important  elements  of
    apparent bias is that the hypothetical fair minded observer is properly
    informed and possessed of all material facts.   Ortega (remittal; bias;
    parental relationship) [2018] UKUT 00298 (IAC) confirmed  that  it  was
    necessary to be in the  position  of  a  "duly  informed"  hypothetical
    reasonable observer in order to assess whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision  discloses  an  absence  of  judicial  impartiality  or   real
    possibility of such.   Nothing  in  the  grounds  for  application  for
    permission nor in the submissions to me at the Upper  Tribunal  hearing
    support any allegation of bias.

10. The documentation on file was not helpfully organised  in  a  schedule.
    The judge commented at paragraph 7, and having granted two adjournments
    during the day, to enable the representative to  organise  her  papers,
    that time could have been saved had the file  been  prepared  properly.
    That is self-evident. Court  resources  are  an  important  factor  and
    relevant to the overriding objective of the Tribunal  Procedure  Rules.
    Nonetheless, that the judge granted two  adjournments  during  the  day
    which showed that he did not proceed in an impatient  manner  but  gave
    the appellant's representative time to organise the papers.   That  the
    judge made plain his view that time could  have  been  saved  does  not
    reflect bias in  the  actual  decision  making.   In  fact,  the  judge
    analysed all the information put before him and took time to set it out
    carefully in a tabulated schedule form.   It  is  simply  incorrect  to
    allege that the judge omitted a relevant piece of evidence. His comment
    that the matter could be determined on the papers was also a reflection
    of the representative's view.

11. It was submitted that the judge  failed  to  follow  the  Secretary  of
    State's EEA guidance at Annex G which set out the evidence required  on
    self-employment.  The appellant maintained that she  had  supplied  one
    piece of evidence for each tax year for the period from April  2011  to
    April 2016 which was the relevant requisite period.  It  was  contended
    the judge ignored this Guidance when looking for further  evidence  and
    it was not open to him to do  so.   The  Guidance  quoted  explains  as
    follows at page 25 onwards:

      'We accept any one of the following, covering the relevant  qualifying
      period:

       . proof of self-assessment with HMRC

      . business accounts

      . P60s, including tax and National  Insurance  contributions  for  the
      relevant qualifying period

      If you are able to send these, you do not need to  provide  additional
      evidence of self-employment.

      Please ensure that your evidence shows a UK address.

      If you are not able to send these, then you can instead provide one of
      the items from each of Categories 1, 2 and 3 below, for each  relevant
      financial year in which the business was trading.  Only if relevant to
      your business, you can also provide the evidence suggested  in  either
      Category 4, 5, 6 below.

      Category 1: Tax and National Insurance documents

      For any period in which you were/your sponsor was  self-employed,  you
      must show that you/they were registered with Her Majesty's Revenue and
      Customs (HMRC) and paying any relevant Income Tax, National  Insurance
      or Value Added Tax (VAT) as a self-employed person.

      Note: If you wish to use  tax  and  National  Insurance  documents  as
      evidence you should only provide one item from any of the groups below
      to cover each year of  your  self-employment  within  your  qualifying
      residence period:

       (a) Income Tax documents

      For each relevant financial year in which the business was trading:

           . copies or printouts of Self-Assessment tax returns (SA100) for
           the relevant period and evidence that they have been received by
           HMRC  (such  as  written  notification  or  printout  of  online
           confirmation)

           . statements of account  (SA300)  or  tax  calculations  (SA302)
           issued by HMRC

           . P60s showing tax and National Insurance paid for each relevant
           financial year (such  as  if  the  self-employed  person  was  a
           company director)

            . receipts or other written  confirmation  issued  by  HMRC  of
           relevant taxes paid

      If the self-employed person hasn't been trading long enough to pay tax
      or to send a Self-Assessment tax return, you must show  that  you/they
      have registered as self-employed with HMRC.  Please send  one  of  the
      following:

           . copy of form CWF1 or printout of their online registration  as
           a self-employed person with HMRC

           . evidence that HMRC has received their application  -  such  as
           letter or printout of online acknowledgement

           . notification from HMRC  of  their  national  insurance  number
           and/or unique taxpayer reference number

      (b) National Insurance documents

      For each relevant financial year:

           . stamped receipts showing payment of class 2 National Insurance
           contributions during the relevant period (if paid in  person  at
           the post office or over the counter at the bank)

           . evidence from  your/your  sponsor's  bank  statements  showing
           payment of National Insurance contributions  if  paid  by  BACS,
           CHAPs, online or telephone banking or (before July 2015)  direct
           debit (direct debits should show on bank statements as 'HMRC  NI
           - DD')

           . if you are/were or your sponsor is/was a company director  who
           receives/received wage slips, and these show payment of National
           Insurance contributions through the PAYE  system,  all  relevant
           wage slips

           . if  you  are/were  or  your  sponsor  is/was  a  self-employed
           subcontractor under the Construction Industry Scheme (CIS), send
           your/their CIS pay and deduction statements from the  contractor
           showing  unique  taxpayer  reference  (UTR)   number   and   CIS
           deductions for the relevant period

           . certificate of small earnings exception  issued  by  HMRC  (if
           you/your sponsor did not earn enough  during  the  relevant  tax
           year to pay National Insurance)

             .  any  other  written  confirmation  from  HMRC  of  National
           Insurance paid'.

12. For clarity I have underlined the sections which are relevant.   It  is
    correct that the judge appeared to err in his assessment  when  stating
    that there are a number of other documents expected to accompany a  tax
    return to establish  income  such  as  bank  statements,  however,  the
    guidance clearly states that the person/or sponsor must show that  they
    were paying 'any relevant Income Tax' in order to be residing in the UK
    in accordance with the EEA Regulations.

13. Crucially the judge found he was not satisfied with the reliability  of
    the documentation because the husband's payslips  which  were  provided
    showed that he had earned employed income in the tax  year  2012  -2013
    and yet stated in his tax return for that year that  he  had  not  been
    employed.  That conclusion was open to the judge and indeed he sets out
    the payslips in  the  bundle  of  evidence  which  he  tabulated.   The
    examples he gives of payslips are dated 5th April 2012, 29th June 2012,
    23rd September 2012,  21st  October  2012,  18th  November  2012,  13th
    January 2013, February 2013, and 14th March 2013.  All  these  payslips
    are with either Ocean Contract or Office and General Environmental  and
    fall within the period when the appellant's sponsor was said to be self-
    employed and the description he gave to  the  HMRC.   Specifically,  he
    declared he was not employed.  As the judge set out  'the  tax  returns
    did not present a full financial picture on behalf of the appellant, or
    the payslips outlined above  were  not  reliable'.  That  fundamentally
    undermined the evidence provided  and  led  to  the  finding  that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated that her  sponsor  had  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with treaty rights.

14. The Guidance emphasises that  when  evidencing  self-employment  it  is
    important to demonstrate that the sponsor was  paying  relevant  income
    tax.  The judge found that the documents were unreliable  and  was  not
    satisfied that tax  returns  were  accurate.   The  findings  were  not
    contrary to the Guidance.

15. In these circumstances the judge's findings were open to  him  and  the
    decision discloses no arguable error of  law.    The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge will stand.


Signed           Helen Rimington             Date  16th October 2018



Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



