
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/04513/2017
     EA/04514/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UT(IAC) Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On : 19 November 2018                      |On : 29 November 2018           |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                   jil [m]
                                 hashum [s]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman, instructed by Morgan Pearse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants, nationals of the Netherlands, are mother and son born on  14
June 1964 and 18 March 1991 respectively. They claim to have entered the  UK
on 14 April 2006.

On 27 April 2011 the first appellant applied for a Registration  Certificate
and included the second appellant in her application as  her  dependant.  On
22 June 2011 the appellants were issued with Registration  Certificates.  On
18 November 2016 the first appellant applied for permanent  residence,  with
her son included in her application as her dependant.

The appellants' applications were refused by  the  respondent  on  21  April
2017 under the EEA Regulations 2016. With regard  to  the  first  appellant,
the respondent considered that she had not  provided  adequate  evidence  to
show that she was a qualified person as either  a  worker,  a  self-employed
person, a student, a jobseeker, or a self-sufficient person in the UK for  a
continuous five-year  period.  When  she  was  issued  with  a  Registration
Certificate in 2011 it was accepted  that  she  was  exercising  her  treaty
rights as a job seeker with the  Jobcentre  plus.  However  in  the  current
application she had stated that she  was  a  ceased  worker  who  could  not
return to work on the basis of being personally incapacitated since  October
2006 as she cared for her disabled son. It was not  accepted  that  she  met
the requirements as a ceased worker as she had not resided  in  the  UK  for
two years prior to her incapacity, she had worked for less  than  12  months
prior to ceasing activity and she had failed to  demonstrate  that  she  was
incapacitated as the result of  an  accident  at  work  or  an  occupational
disease that entitled her to a pension payable in full  or  in  part  by  an
institution  in  the  UK.  The  respondent  then  assessed  the  appellant's
application on the basis  that  she  was  self-sufficient  under  regulation
15(1)(a) with reference to regulation 6 and 4 but considered that she  could
not meet the requirements on that basis as she  had  not  provided  evidence
that she and her son had  had  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  for  five
years, her bank account statement did  not  show  that  she  had  sufficient
resources to support herself and her son so that she was  not  a  burden  on
the state, her bank account statements showed transactions relating  to  the
receipt of public funds and she had provided evidence from DWP that she  was
in receipt of public funds.

The respondent also considered whether the first appellant could  be  issued
with a Registration Certificate in line  with  the  second  appellant  as  a
student, but there was insufficient  evidence  of  the  exercise  of  treaty
rights for five years and no evidence of comprehensive  sickness  insurance.
There was no evidence that  the  first  appellant  was  dependent  upon  the
second appellant and the contrary was stated. The second  appellant  was  in
education  and  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  he  was  not  permanently
incapacitated to the point that he could never  work.  The  respondent  also
considered the appellant's application under  derivative  rights  but  there
was insufficient evidence that she would qualify and  she  could  not  claim
permanent residence from derivate rights.

With regard to the second appellant the respondent considered  that  he  had
failed to provide evidence that he had resided in the UK in accordance  with
the Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

The appellants' appeal against  the  Respondent's  decisions  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot. The evidence before  the  judge  was  that
the first appellant had worked as a cleaner from  April  to  September  2006
and had then become a jobseeker for five years until 2011. She then  started
receiving income support. She had not  worked  or  been  a  jobseeker  since
then. Her son, the second appellant,  was  severely  disabled.  He  suffered
from Erb's Palsy, epilepsy and learning difficulties and required  full-time
care which she provided. He was in receipt of  Disability  Living  Allowance
and the first appellant had  been  receiving  Carers  Allowance  since  June
2008. There was no-one else who could care for the second appellant and  the
first appellant cared for him as her full-time  job.  It  was  submitted  on
behalf of the first appellant that she should  be  regarded  as  a  "worker"
under the EEA Regulations in view of her occupation  as  a  full-time  carer
for her son for which she received remuneration in the form  of  her  Carers
Allowance. The appellant relied on the cases of Lawrie-Blum  v  Land  Baden-
Wuerttemberg. [1986]  EUECJ  R-66/85,  D.M.  Levin  v  Staatssecretaris  van
Justitie.  [1982]  EUECJ  R-53/81,  R.  H.  Kempf  v  Staatssecretaris   van
Justitie. [1986] EUECJ R-139/85 and Kurz  (ne  Yuece)  (External  relations)
[2002] EUECJ C-188/00 in that regard, whilst the respondent argued that  the
first appellant received a benefit and not a salary or wage.

Judge Talbot found that the interpretations provided by  the  ECJ  in  those
cases  were  not   analogous   to   the   interpretation   the   appellant's
representative was inviting him to give in the appellant's case. He did  not
accept that the first appellant was a worker for the  purposes  of  the  EEA
Regulations and he dismissed the appeals.

The appellants  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision.  The
grounds asserted that the judge had had only scant regard to  the  case  law
cited in the skeleton argument and had failed to give adequate  reasons  for
his conclusions. He had not stated whether or  not  he  found  the  role  of
being a full-time carer in  receipt  of  Carers  Allowance  as  constituting
"genuine and effective work" and had contradicted himself  by  referring  to
the value of the first appellant's work. He had  not  clarified  whether  he
found that the first appellant met the first stage of the  test  in  Lawrie-
Blum for being a worker and if not, why not. He had  not  stated  why  there
was no direct supervision by the State. He had not  given  reasons  why  the
funds the first appellant received  did  not  amount  to  remuneration.  The
grounds asserted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  engage  with  the  legal
submissions made and had failed to give reasons for his findings.

Permission was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Buchanan  on  10
October 2018.

At the hearing Ms Gherman relied on the  grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted
that the judge had failed to engage with the substantial arguments  made  at
the hearing and had failed to explain  why  he  did  not  agree  with  those
arguments. Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge had considered the  case  law
relied upon by the appellant but had found that it was not analogous to  the
first  appellant's  situation.  He  had  given  adequate  reasons  for   his
conclusion, but even if his reasoning was inadequate that was immaterial  as
the judge's conclusions were right. It could not be  said  that  receipt  of
Carers Allowance was remuneration whilst receipt of other benefits  such  as
job seekers allowance was not. Mr Lindsay referred to the cases relied  upon
by the appellant and submitted that none of them assisted her.

Consideration and discussion

Contrary to Ms Gherman's  submission,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  judge's
decision, albeit concise, took account of all the arguments  made,  included
consideration of the case law relied upon and provided  proper  reasons  for
rejecting the appellants' arguments.

At [13] the judge had regard to the test set out Lawrie-Blum, which  he  set
out in full, noting the particular context of that case. Ms Gherman set  the
test  out  at  [9]  of  her  grounds  seeking  permission,  namely  that  an
individual can be classed as a worker if they are  engaged  in  (a)  genuine
and effective work; (b) under the direction of another; and  (c)  in  return
for remuneration. The judge considered each limb of the test.

With regard to "effective and genuine" work, the judge considered  the  case
of D.M. Levin v Staatssecretaris van  Justitie.  [1982]  EUECJ  R-53/81  and
other  cases  following  a  similar  reasoning  and   concluded   that   the
interpretations provided by the ECJ  for  "work"  in  those  cases  was  not
analogous to the appellant's situation. Ms Gherman's grounds  asserted  that
the judge contradicted himself by referring at [14]  to  the  value  of  the
first  appellant's  work,  but  I  do  not  consider   there   to   be   any
contradiction. The judge meant no more  than  that  the  importance  of  the
first  appellant's  care  should  not  be  underestimated.  That   was   not
inconsistent with a conclusion that the work was not genuine  and  effective
for the purposes of the EU jurisprudence. As  the  judge  rightly  observed,
the reasoning of the Court in D.M Levin, which Ms  Gherman  relied  upon  in
her skeleton argument at [9], that income lower than  the  minimum  required
for subsistence may  still  be  classed  as  work  if  it  was  genuine  and
effective, was not particularly relevant to the  issue  in  the  appellant's
case. Likewise, the case of Kempf  was  also  about  the  level  of  income,
concluding that the fact that the  applicant  claimed  financial  assistance
payable out of the public funds of the state  in  order  to  supplement  the
income he received did not exclude him from the provisions of community  law
relating to freedom of movement for workers. As Mr Lindsay submitted,  there
was no suggestion in Kempf, however,  that  receipt  of  benefits  could  be
classed as "work"  and  therefore  again  that  case  was  not  particularly
relevant  to  the  appellant's  circumstances.  Accordingly  the  judge  was
perfectly entitled to conclude that none of the  cases  relied  upon  by  Ms
Gherman were analogous to the appellant's situation. Indeed, as  Mr  Lindsay
submitted, the case of Barry v London Borough of Southwark [2008]  EWCA  Civ
1440 undermined rather than supported the appellant's case in its  reference
to work being subsidiary or ancillary, and  thus  not  of  genuine  economic
value, if done pursuant to  some  other  relationship  between  the  parties
which was not an employment relationship. Mr Lindsay's submission  was  that
since the relationship between the parties was mother and son,  it  was  not
an employment relationship and the  'work'  was  therefore  not  of  genuine
economic value. That was clearly consistent with the judge's findings.

In regard to the second limb, the judge considered at [14]  that  the  first
appellant was not working under the direction or supervision  of  the  state
providing the benefit and that the person receiving  the  first  appellant's
services, namely the second appellant,  was  not  providing  the  money  she
received. Ms Gherman's submission was that that was not the  case  and  that
the first appellant was  working  under  the  direction  of  the  state.  In
support of her argument she relied, in  her  skeleton  argument  before  the
First-tier Tribunal, upon the case of Kurz at [46].  Whilst  the  judge  did
not specifically refer to that case, it is clear to me that once  again  the
circumstances in that case were entirely different. The  reference  at  [46]
of Kurz to public funds received for work undertaken was not a reference  to
state benefits, as in the appellant's case, but to  the  funds  received  by
the applicant in the case of Birden (External  relations)  [1998]  EUECJ  C-
1/97, for undertaking public utility work. That  is  also  relevant  to  the
third limb of the test  in  Lawrie-Blum  in  relation  to  the  question  of
remuneration, which Ms Gherman submitted was satisfied  by  the  receipt  of
Carers Allowance. Judge Talbot, at [14] of  his  decision,  considered  that
the first appellant was not  receiving  remuneration  but  was  receiving  a
benefit from the state as a means of social assistance. I  find  nothing  in
the case law cited by Ms Gherman to  undermine  such  a  conclusion  and  it
seems to me that the judge was perfectly entitled to conclude as he did.

In the circumstances I find no merit in the grounds of challenge. The  judge
had regard to all the matters relied upon by  the  appellants  and  provided
reasons for rejecting the arguments made. In so far  as  his  findings  were
concise and did not specifically refer to  all  the  arguments  made  by  Ms
Gherman, I find that nothing  material  arises  from  this,  as  Mr  Lindsay
submitted, since the appellant could not succeed in any  event.  I  find  no
support from the EU jurisprudence for the claim that the  first  appellant's
care for the second appellant and  the  receipt  of  Carers  Allowance  fell
within the three-stage test set out in Lawrie-Blum and  amounted  to  "work"
for the purposes of the EEA Regulations, even on  the  broad  interpretation
advocated in that jurisprudence (Kempf at [13]). That  was  the  only  basis
upon which it was argued that the Applicant was  a  qualified  person  under
the EEA Regulations

Accordingly the judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  appellants  could
not meet  the  requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations  for  entitlement  to
permanent residence and made no errors of law in his decision in  concluding
as such. I therefore uphold the judge's decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 23
November 2018
