
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04785/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 September 2020                          |On 21 September 2020          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 WASIF BUTT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 12 October 1983 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State  dated  21  August  2019  refusing  him  an  EEA
    residence card as confirmation of his right of residence in the  United
    Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal, in the decision  promulgation  on  25
    November 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Directions were made by Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith  on  21  July  2020
    indicating that the judge had reached  the  provisional  view  that  it
    would be appropriate to determine the matters of error  of  law/setting
    aside the First-tier Tribunal decision without a hearing. Both  parties
    have responded in writing to those directions.  Significantly,  neither
    party has requested an oral initial hearing. I have considered all  the
    papers very carefully. Having regard to  the  overriding  objective,  I
    consider that the question of error of law  may  be  determined  justly
    without a hearing and by reference to the detailed written  submissions
    filed by both parties and to all the  material  which  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I have, therefore, proceeded to determine that the
    appeal without a hearing.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the appellant asserts that  the
    judge incorrectly referred to Mr Younas (hereafter referred to as  'the
    sponsor') as a 'distant' cousin; evidence indicated  that  the  sponsor
    was the first cousin of the appellant. The appellant asserts  that  the
    judge, as a result of this error,  'applied  a  stringent  standard  in
    relation to the evidence required to show  dependency.'  The  appellant
    claims that, by misunderstanding the nature of  the  relationship,  the
    judge demanded more detailed evidence of dependency than he would  have
    sought had he understood  that  the  relationship  was  that  of  first
    cousin. As a consequence, the appellant claims that the judge has dealt
    with his case on an incorrect and unfair basis.

 4. At [22], the judge  noted  that,  'the  appellant's  case  has  changed
    somewhat after the refusal letter which pointed out that the sister was
    not an EEA citizen whilst the appellant was in Pakistan  and  therefore
    could not claim to be dependent upon an EEA citizen before he left  his
    homeland; he now claims dependency upon  his  cousin  (no  family  tree
    provided or no DNA evidence to show relationship) who is married to the
    sister.'  The  judge  went  on  to  say  that,  'whilst  I  accept  the
    appellant's and sponsor's evidence can be accepted on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the sponsor is married to a distant cousin, to claim
    dependency on a distant  family  member  requires  cogent  evidence  of
    dependency as for a distant cousin to provide for a  fully  able  young
    man you are studying abroad and to accept this persons dependency  upon
    them would need to substantial evidence of financial  transactions  and
    the like  to  show  that  the  dependency  exists  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities. (sic)' That sentence  does  not  constitute  elegant  or
    clear prose by any standard. However, I consider that  the  meaning  is
    sufficiently clear even though the first of two references made by  the
    judge to a 'distant cousin' appears to be  to  the  appellant's  sister
    which, on the facts of this case, makes no sense. What is clear is that
    in this paragraph and elsewhere in  the  decision  is  that  the  judge
    correctly refers to the relationship  being  simply  that  of  'cousin'
    which I take in its usual meaning as an abbreviated version  of  'first
    cousin'. Moreover, I am not satisfied that what the judge says in  this
    paragraph about the tribunal requiring 'cogent evidence of  dependency'
    and 'substantial evidence of financial  transactions...  to  show  that
    dependency  exists  on  the  balance  of  probabilities'  represents  a
    threshold or test which is any more stringent than the  tribunal  would
    expect to be met in respect of an appeal by any extended family member.
    Although the decision could have been better clearly  expressed,  I  am
    satisfied that it is adequately cogent and  also  that  the  judge  has
    understood the nature of the  claimed  relationship  in  assessing  the
    evidence of dependency.

 5. The second part of ground one states that the judge made a  mistake  by
    referring to  remittances  received  by  the  appellant  prior  to  his
    departure from Pakistan as having been made 'to a person who is not the
    appellant in Pakistan.' It is asserted that the remittances  'were,  in
    fact, in the appellant's own name.'  I  have  considered  the  evidence
    which was before the First-tier  Tribunal.  At  page  81,  there  is  a
    Western Union document which is illegible. On pages 82  and  83,  there
    are two further Western Union documents which show an  individual  with
    the appellant's name as the receiver of payment. On pages  85  and  86,
    there are details of numerous transfers  via  Moneytrans.  The  earlier
    transfers in 2009 and 2010 are in the name of a Wasif Butt but the vast
    majority of subsequent payments do not show the appellant as recipient.
    The assertion made in  the  grounds  and  written  submissions  of  the
    appellant that the payments 'were in fact the appellant's own name' are
    not,  therefore,  confirmed  by  an  examination  of  the   documentary
    evidence. The judge's comment that 'most' of the  transfers  are  to  a
    person other than the appellant is, upon my  reading  of  the  evidence
    before the tribunal, wholly accurate.

 6. The second ground of appeal asserts that the judge had  found  at  [24]
    that there 'may be some element dependency at the date of the  hearing'
    given evidence that sponsor an appellant are now living together in the
    United Kingdom. The appellant  asserts  that,  on  the  basis  of  that
    finding, the judge should have  allowed  the  appeal  by  reference  to
    regulation 8 (2) (b) (ii) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016. The problem with that submission is that the case had
    never been advanced before the First-tier Tribunal  on  such  a  basis;
    indeed, at  [18],  the  judge  had  recorded,  after  setting  out  the
    provisions of regulation 8, that 'Mr Martin [counsel for the appellant]
    correctly conceded that the appellant cannot  satisfy  the  regulations
    even on his own account.'

 7. In the light of  what  I  say  above,  I  find  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed. I accept that the decision is, in part, not  well  expressed
    but I am satisfied that the judge was aware of the  relationship  which
    the appellant claimed he had with the sponsor and  upon  the  basis  of
    which he had made his application. I do not find  that  the  judge  has
    imposed too high a threshold or standard of proof having  misunderstood
    the  nature  of  the  relationship;  rather,  I  find  that  the  judge
    determined this appeal in full understanding of the basis upon which it
    was put before him. I find that the judge was not wrong to  state  that
    'most' of the money transfers  which  are  copied  in  the  appellant's
    bundle showed a recipient other than the appellant.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


         Signed                                                     Date  16
September 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

