
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04531/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2020                  |On 9 September 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                ANDON QERKEZI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION



    1. The appellant ,a citizen of Albania, appeals with permission from the
       decision of the First tier  (Judge  Stedman)  dismissing  his  appeal
       against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
       residence card as confirmation  of  a  right  of  residence   as  the
       unmarried partner of the sponsor.

    2. The grounds of appeal submitted that there was procedural  unfairness
       on the part of the FtTJ who had heard the appeal in  the  appellant's
       absence. It was stated  that  the  appellant  had  not  attended  the
       hearing because he had not received notice of the hearing nor did his
       legal representatives. Thus, he should be given  the  opportunity  to
       present his case as he would have attended the hearing of his appeal.

    3. Permission was granted by the FtT (Judge Grant-Hutchinson) on  the  5
       May 2020. The FtTJ considered that it was arguable  the  decision  of
       the FtTJ disclosed the making of an error on a point of law based  on
       the procedural irregularity set out in the grounds.

    4. In the light of the present need  to  take  precautions  against  the
       spread of Covid-19, and the overriding  objective  expressed  in  the
       Procedure Rules[1], directions were sent out to the parties  that the
       Upper Tribunal's provisional  view  was that it would be  appropriate
       to determine the following questions without a hearing:

        a)  whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
           involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

        b) whether that decision should be set aside.

    5. That decision also set out directions. It was sent out the parties by
       way of email.

    6. In compliance with those directions,  submissions  were  provided  on
       behalf of the appellant by email on the 2 July 2020. In  those  short
       submissions, it was stated that the appellant could not  present  his
       case  because  he  did  not  receive  the  notice  of  hearing.   The
       submissions state that his circumstances had changed between the Home
       Office decision to refuse his application and the appeal hearing date
       and with new circumstances his appeal would  most  likely  have  been
       successful. It was submitted also that he had everything to  gain  by
       attending the hearing in January 2020 and there was no incentive  for
       not attending but for the fact that he did not  receive  the  hearing
       notice nor  did  his  legal  representatives.  The  submissions  make
       reference  to  a  sworn  affidavit  from  the  legal  representatives
       concerned in which it is stated that the hearing went  ahead  without
       the appellant and without his legal representatives and that they had
       not received the hearing notice.  The  affidavit  set  out  the  post
       procedures at paragraphs 8 - 10 and that there would be no reason why
       any letter delivered, if it had been, would go missing.

    7. The submissions stated that they requested a hearing as the appellant
       was not able to present his case  because  he  did  not  receive  the
       notice of hearing, and that without the benefit of a new hearing, the
       appellant would continue to suffer the  consequences  of  the  appeal
       hearing he missed and lost, he had everything to  gain  by  attending
       the hearing and had no incentive for not attending. It is  also  said
       that his circumstances had changed between the decision to refuse his
       application and the appeal hearing date in January and that with  the
       new circumstances his appeal would most likely have been  successful.
       It is now said that his partner has become his  wife  post  the  Home
       Office decision.  There  is  also  reference  to  a  new  application
       submitted on the 16 January 2020 and resubmitted  on  13  March  2020
       with no decision received at the present time.

    8. There has also been a response from the respondent dated 6 July  2020
       which indicated that she accepted  that  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ
       contained material errors of law and therefore  did  not  oppose  the
       application for permission to appeal and invited the  Upper  Tribunal
       to determine the appeal by setting aside the decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal (Judge Stedman).

    9. In those submissions, the respondent sets out that on the face of the
       decision the judge appeared to confirm that the notice was  not  sent
       to the appellant  but  only  to  the  representatives  but  that  the
       decision also suggested that no enquiries were made by  the  tribunal
       itself about the absence of  the  parties.  At  paragraph  5  of  the
       submissions, it is stated that on the basis that this is an  accurate
       summary of the circumstances relating to the service of  the  hearing
       notice and the extent to  which  the  tribunal  made  enquiries,  the
       Secretary of State accepts that there was procedural unfairness.  The
       submissions further go on  to  say  at  paragraph  6  that  it  would
       normally be the case that the appellant will be served with a  notice
       of their own hearing but that does not appear  to  have  happened  in
       this case and that even if the situation stemmed from  a  failing  on
       the appellant's part,  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
       tribunal should have attempted to make contact with  the  appellant's
       representatives or the appellant in order to establish the reason for
       absence. On the basis that the decision  records  that  no  enquiries
       were made, the Secretary of State accepted that the disposal  of  the
       hearing was unfair, and on that basis should be set aside.

   10. As to  the  assertion  made  in  the  further  submissions  that  the
       appellant is now a family member through marriage, the  Secretary  of
       State was not able to make further submissions on this because it had
       not been evidenced nor was it relevant to the reason why the Tribunal
       had erred in law in January 2020.

   11. The respondent therefore sets out that the  decision  should  be  set
       aside in its entirety and the matter  reheard  substantively  in  the
       FtT.

   12. There has been no further correspondence from the  appellant  or  his
       legal representatives since those submissions were  filed  and  there
       has been  no  reply  to  the  submissions  filed  on  behalf  of  the
       respondent as summarised above.

   13. Having had full regard to the Pilot Practice  Direction:  Contingency
       arrangements in the First -Tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal,  the
       Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020 and all documents  submitted  by
       the  parties,   including  the  representations  made  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal for the application for permission to appeal and the parties
       respective submissions  I have reached the decision  on  this  appeal
       should be made without a hearing.

   14. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule 2(2) explains that dealing with a case fairly and  justly
       includes: dealing with it in  ways  that  are  proportionate  to  the
       importance of the case, the complexity of the issues,  etc;  avoiding
       unnecessary formality and seeking  flexibility  in  the  proceedings;
       ensuring, so far  as  practicable,  that  the  parties  are  able  to
       participate fully in the proceedings; using any special expertise  of
       the Upper  Tribunal  effectively;  and  avoiding  delay,  so  far  as
       compatible with proper consideration of the issues.

   15. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.

   16. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34.-"

           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
           make any decision without a hearing.

           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
           by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing  to  consider
           any matter, and the form of any such hearing.

           (3)    In immigration judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
           Tribunal must hold a hearing  before  making  a  decision  which
           disposes of proceedings.

           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
           Tribunal to-"

                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)
                or 8(2);

                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;

                (c)    determine an  application  for  permission  to  bring
                judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or

                (d)     make  a  consent  order  disposing  of  proceedings,
                pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

   17. In the preceding paragraphs I have set out the  submissions  advanced
       on behalf of the appellant in the original application for permission
       to appeal. No issues have been raised other than those  addressed  in
       the written submissions.  In my judgment and  in  the  light  of  the
       issues set out in the respondent's  written  submissions  which  have
       been resolved in favour of the appellant there is no complexity which
       necessitates an oral hearing to ensure fairness and that the decision
       is one which can properly and fairly be made  on  the  papers  taking
       into account the overriding objective as  set  out  in  the  Tribunal
       Procedure Rules which  includes  the  issue  of  delay.  I  therefore
       consider  in  light  of  all  the  available  material  that  it   is
       appropriate in all the circumstances of this case to exercise my   to
       determine the issue of whether the Judge has made  an  error  of  law
       material to the decision to dismiss the appeal on the papers. I  find
       this is in accordance with the overriding objectives. It has not been
       made out it will deny any party the opportunity to have  this  matter
       considered in a fair and just manner at this stage.

   18. In a reply from the respondent dated 6 July 2020,  it  has  now  been
       conceded by the respondent that the decision of the FtTJ involved the
       making of a material error of law and should be set aside.

   19. Having considered the papers and  in the light of the submissions  of
       the parties and the submissions made on behalf of the  respondent  in
       which it is conceded that the decision of Judge Stedman  involve  the
       making of a material error of law, I am satisfied that  the  decision
       should be set aside. The  FtTJ  made  reference  to  the  appellant's
       failure to attend the hearing at paragraphs 5 and 6. He recorded that
       neither the appellant, his partner or legal  representative  attended
       on his behalf and that the file indicated that  notification  of  the
       hearing had been sent to the  appellant's  solicitors  who  had  been
       instructed from at least 24 August 2019, having completed the  appeal
       forms and had submitted documents. At paragraph  6,  the  judge  also
       recorded that he had received no  information  from  the  appellant's
       solicitors or from the appellant and therefore reached the conclusion
       that the appellant had decided not to attend and support his appeal.

   20. The file does indicate that a notice  of  hearing  was  sent  to  the
       appellant's solicitors on 20 September 2019. It also appears to state
       that the hearing notice was sent to the appellant on the same date. I
       have considered the sworn affidavit of the legal representatives  and
       the principal solicitor of that firm and the  evidence  contained  at
       paragraphs 8 - 10 which describes the location of the office and that
       all letters are opened either by him or his assistant in his presence
       and thus there was no reason why any letter that had  been  delivered
       would ever go missing. It is also stated that there were good reasons
       for the appellant to  attend  his  hearing.  In  the  light  of  that
       evidence and taken together with the point made in  the  respondent's
       grounds that the tribunal did not  take  any  steps  to  contact  the
       appellant or the appellant's legal  representatives  to  confirm  the
       position, I consider that not all steps were taken to  ascertain  why
       the appellant and his legal  representatives  had  not  attended  the
       hearing. Consequently, it had been procedurally unfair  to  determine
       the appeal in the absence of the appellant in the  circumstances  set
       out above. I therefore set aside the decision of the FtTJ.

   21. As to the remaking of the appeal I have taken into consideration  the
       basis upon which the decision has been set aside. The whole basis  of
       the grounds of  appeal  relate  to  a  procedural  unfairness  having
       occurred whereby the First-tier Tribunal determined the appeal in the
       absence of the appellant.

   22. I have therefore considered whether the appeal should be remitted  to
       the FtT for a further hearing. In reaching that decision I have given
       careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal  of  appeals
       in this Tribunal.

           "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
           proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting  the  case
           to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           satisfied that:-

           (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before
           the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity
           for that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-
           tier Tribunal; or

           (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is
           necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made
           is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule
           2, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal."

   23. Having considered the practice statement in the light of the  grounds
       and the reasons for setting aside the decision, in my  judgement  the
       appeal falls within subparagraph (a) as the effect of the  error  has
       been  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  a  fair  hearing  and  for  an
       opportunity for his case to be put in to be considered by the FtT.

   24. Whilst the written submissions submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
       make reference to a change in his circumstances since the hearing  in
       January, namely that he has now married, the decision letter  of  the
       respondent set out reasons why the Secretary of State considered  the
       relationship between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  was  one  of
       convenience,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  obtaining  an  immigration
       advantage and that the relationship was not genuine  and  subsisting.
       This was based on  the  inconsistencies  between  the  appellant  and
       sponsors answers in interview. In the light of the issues  raised  in
       the decision letter and on the basis that  the  judge  recorded  that
       there had been no bundle of documents on behalf of the appellant,  in
       my judgement the appeal will require a rehearing on the  evidence  to
       deal with those evidential issues and in the  interests  of  fairness
       for the appellant. The appellant's solicitors should ensure that  the
       Tribunal is given the up-to-date address of the appellant  to  ensure
       that any further hearing is served to the correct  address  and  upon
       the appellant as well as the legal representatives.



Decision:

   25. Accordingly, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of  law  and  is  set  aside,  and  the
       decision is remitted to the FtT for a hearing.


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds Dated:  4 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds





           ______________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).


