
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04810/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 15 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               Kebba Sark Njie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer of
                    the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia whose date of birth is  14  August
    1980.  The Appellant made an application for permanent residence  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. He  asserted
    that he qualified for a retained right of residence under Regulation 10
    and permanent residence  under  Regulation  15.   The  application  was
    refused on 4 April 2016 because the Appellant  was  unable  to  provide
    evidence that the EEA Sponsor was a qualified person  at  the  material
    time, the point of divorce.  The Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  by
    Judge of the FTT Wyman in a decision that was  promulgated  on  31  May
    2018 following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 9 May 2018.  The  Appellant
    appealed  against  that  decision.   Permission  was  granted  to   the
    Appellant by First-tier Tribunal ("FTT") Judge PJM Hollingworth.

2.       The Appellant was married to a Polish national. He  was  granted  a
    residence card as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights which was valid until 8 May 2012.  They are divorced. The Decree
    Absolute is dated 9 March 2012.  They have a son,  born  on  6  January
    2007.  The Appellant has contact with his son following a court  order.
    The Appellant in evidence before Judge Wyman stated that he was  unable
    to provide evidence relating to his ex-wife's  employment  because  she
    refused to assist him.  The Appellant was not able to produce  evidence
    confirming that the EEA national Sponsor was exercising treaty  rights.
    The appeal was dismissed because the judge was not satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had established that the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights
    at the time of the divorce.

3.   At the  start  of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Wyman  the  Appellant's
    representative Ms Choudhury made an application for an  adjournment  to
    enable the  Secretary  of  State  to  request  evidence  from  HMRC  to
    establish that the EEA national was exercising treaty rights and if  so
    for what period.  Judge Wyman refused the application stating  at  [22]
    as follows:

         "I explained to Ms Choudhury that I was not prepared  to  grant  an
         adjournment in this case to accede to her request.   In  any  event
         there was no Presenting Officer present in court.  The decision  in
         this matter was dated April 2016  and  the  matter  was  previously
         adjourned back in October 2017.  There had already been  a  lengthy
         delay in hearing this case.  I pointed out that the burden of proof
         is on the Appellant, and not on the Respondent."

4.   The Appellant  was  not  represented  before  me.  There  were  several
    documents in the Appellant's bundle which Mr Mills  helpfully  drew  my
    attention to.  The Appellant's appeal was dismissed on similar  grounds
    in 2013 by Judge Courtney. Mr Mills drew my attention to [26] of  Judge
    Courtney's decision which reads as follows.

         "It was open to Mr Njie to have applied under Rule 50 of the Asylum
         and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  for  a  witness
         summons requiring his ex-wife to attend and  give  evidence  as  to
         whether or not she was and had been working.  He  did  not  do  so.
         Nor did he seek a direction under Rule 45 requiring  the  Secretary
         of State to provide any information necessary for the determination
         of his appeal."

5.       The hearing was  originally  listed  on  6  October  2017.  It  was
    adjourned by FTT Judge NMK Lawrence.  I not entirely sure why,  but  it
    was not a matter raised at  the  hearing  before  me.    The  Appellant
    through his solicitors wrote the FTT on 7 September 2017.   He  applied
    for a direction under Rule 45  requiring  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    provide  employment  information  relating  to   the   Sponsor.    This
    application was refused by a Duty Judge in the following terms:-

         "... the Appellant's representative must  provide  a  copy  of  the
         determination of 19 February 2013 and full  details  of  the  name,
         date of birth, nationality and other helpful  information  relating
         to the Appellant's former partner before  the  requested  direction
         can be considered."

6.    The  Appellant's  solicitors  provided  the  FTT  with  the   required
    information in correspondence on 13 September 2017.   The  response  of
    the Duty Clerk was as follows: -

         "Thank you for your fax letter dated 13 September 2017.  The  above
         appeal file has been taken to the Duty Judge for instructions.  The
         instructions are as follows: -


         'No directions made.  This matter was determined by Tribunal  Judge
         Courtney on 19 February 2013'."

7.     Mr Mills indicated that the Secretary  of  State  received  a  letter
    from the Appellant's solicitors a few days before  the  hearing  before
    Judge Wyman requesting them to make the necessary enquiries with  HMRC;
    however, insufficient time was given to enable the Secretary  of  State
    to act on this.  Mr Mills confessed that he struggled with the logic of
    the second decision of the Duty Judge. Mr Mills conceded that there was
    a procedural irregularity giving rise to unfairness in the light of the
    circumstances of this case. Mr Mills stated that  whether  a  direction
    was made or not the intention of the Secretary of State was  to  obtain
    the necessary evidence. He stated that the necessary enquiries would be
    made. He confirmed that the Respondent has the necessary details of the
    Sponsor to make enquiries. He asked that the matter  is  not  re-listed
    within six weeks to enable the enquiries to be made.

8.   In the light of the concession made  by  Mr  Mills  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, I set aside the decision of Judge Wyman to  dismiss
    the Appellant's appeal  on  the  basis  that  there  was  a  procedural
    irregularity amounting  to  unfairness  arising  from  the  refusal  to
    adjourn the case. I am not sure that Judge Wyman was made aware of  the
    correspondence Mr Mills referred me to. If not, had she been made aware
    of it, it is likely she would have granted the adjournment.  This would
    have been a fair outcome in the light of the decision of the  judge  in
    2013 and the more recent correspondence between the Appellant  and  the
    FTT.

 9.      Having set aside the matter I adjourned the hearing.   However,  it
    is clear to me that contrary to the indication that I gave the  parties
    at the hearing, this matter should be remitted to the  FTT  for  a  re-
    hearing.  I have had regard to Paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement of
    25 September 2012 states: Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal.  I  am
    satisfied that the  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    Appellant of a fair hearing.

10.      It is not strictly necessary because of  Mr  Mills  concession  and
    his agreement to make the necessary enquiries, but I make the following
    directions under Rule 5 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008: -

          1. The Secretary of State is to make enquiries with HMRC relating
             to the EEA national and  whether  she  was  exercising  treaty
             rights at the time of the Decree Absolute and if so over  what
             period.


          2. The appeal will be heard by the  FTT  not  before  6  November
             2018.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT to dismiss the appeal is set aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the FTT for a re-hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date  9 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam






