
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04005/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2018                 |On 13 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                             MR TERRY OWUSU TAY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jibowa, Counsel for MJ Solomon & Partners,
Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 1 May  1982.   He  appealed
    the respondent's decision dated 10 February 2016 refusing  to  issue  a
    residence card to enable him to qualify for permanent residence in  the
    United Kingdom under  a  retained  right  of  residence  following  his
    divorce from an EEA national, under  the  Immigration  EEA  Regulations
    2016.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  James
    on 16 April 2018 and dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on  15  May
    2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Grimmett on 23  July  2018.
    The permission states that it is arguable that there was  a  procedural
    error as it appears the Judge had before  him  a  bundle  of  documents
    lodged in respect of appeal number EA/09495/2016  which  the  appellant
    had withdrawn.  A correct bundle was on file but  seems  to  have  been
    overlooked.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.



The Hearing

 4. Counsel submitted that the hearing was dealt  with  by  the  First-Tier
    Judge on the papers.  He submitted that the First-Tier Judge relied  on
    evidence produced for the claim EA/09405/2016 which had been  withdrawn
    by  the  appellant  instead  of  the  correct  evidence   relating   to
    EA/04005/2017.  He submitted  that  the  Judge  therefore  ignored  the
    supporting submissions and bundle of documents for the paper hearing as
    well as the schedule of the supporting documents.

 5. The grounds refer to  the  Judge  stating  that  there  was  no  decree
    absolute before him but that was  not  the  case  as  item  11  of  the
    appellant's bundle of documents refers to a  decree  absolute  and  the
    same error is reiterated in paragraph 13 of the decision.  He submitted
    that the appellant has shown that he is  now  divorced  but  the  Judge
    found that the appellant had not demonstrated that he had been  engaged
    in employment since the date of the divorce up until the  date  of  the
    new application.

 6. Counsel submitted that the date of the decree absolute is  24  February
    2015 and the application was made on 26 September 2016.  I was referred
    to the bank statements and the tax returns and Counsel  submitted  that
    there is evidence of the appellant working  from  February  2015  until
    September 2016 and then up to April 2017.  He submitted  that  had  the
    Judge looked at the correct bundle the appeal would have succeeded  and
    this must be a  material  error  of  law  and  the  First-Tier  Judge's
    decision should be set aside.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that there was an  administrative  mix
    up but there  is  no  evidence  of  the  original  appeal  having  been
    withdrawn.  He submitted however that the appeal before  the  Judge  is
    EA/04005/2017 and the Judge appears to have considered the wrong bundle
    from the appellant and he submitted that this is an error  of  law  and
    what has to be decided is whether it is material.

 8. He submitted that the Judge states that the EEA national's P60 for 2015
    was not decipherable and the copy before the Judge was a bad copy.   He
    submitted that it was therefore not clear whether the EEA national  was
    exercising Treaty Rights at the date of the divorce and so  the  appeal
    for a permanent right of residence would have  been  dismissed  anyway.
    He submitted that based on both bundles there is no evidence of the EEA
    national working for five continuous years.  He submitted that although
    there is an error it is not a material error.

 9. Counsel submitted that it is not clear whether  the  original  P60  was
    before the Judge. Her submitted that the original  is  in  the  correct
    bundle. The original P60 is not in the correct bundle before  me,  only
    the illegible copy. He submitted that  the  issue  is  the  appellant's
    employment.  I was referred to the refusal letter dated 27  March  2017
    which states that the respondent accepts that the EEA national  sponsor
    was exercising Treaty Rights at the point of the divorce on 24 February
    2015.  He submitted that it is clear from the evidence  in  the  bundle
    that the appellant has been working for Uber and I was referred to  the
    tax returns in the bundle. Counsel submitted that these  are  supported
    by the bank statements.  He submitted that the appellant  has  provided
    proof of his work from February 2015 to  April  2017  so  he  has  been
    working from the date of the divorce.  He submitted that there are HMRC
    documents in the correct bundle and  his  earnings  are  shown  in  his
    Nationwide bank statement.  He submitted that the evidence  covers  not
    only the appellant working at the date of divorce but also working from
    March 2015 to April 2016 and from May 2016 until September 2016.

10. He submitted that what is necessary  for  this  appeal  to  succeed  is
    evidence that the appellant has been working  since  the  date  of  the
    divorce and before the date of the application  as  the  respondent  is
    satisfied that the sponsor was working until the date of  the  divorce.
    He submitted that  there  is  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  been
    residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with the  Regulations  for
    five continuous years and he should be granted a  right  of  residence.
    He submitted also that the appellant has continued to work.

11. I was asked to take into  account  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
    granted a residence permit from 2010 and when the P60s  are  considered
    along with the bank  statements  and  tax  returns  the  appellant  has
    actually demonstrated that he has been working  for  7  years,  so  the
    burden has been discharged beyond the required  standard  and  had  the
    Judge considered the correct bundle at the  paper  hearing  that  would
    have been clear.

12. The  Presenting  Officer  made  his  submissions  submitting  that  the
    appellant may have a retained right of residence but based on what  the
    Judge considered there was insufficient evidence to show that he should
    be granted a right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom.

13. Counsel submitted that Regulation 15(1)(f) has  been  satisfied  and  a
    permanent right of residence should be granted  to  a  person  who  has
    resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for  a
    continuous period of five years.  He submitted that the original permit
    was granted in 2010 and the appellant has been working since then.   He
    submitted that Regulation 15(1)(f) must have been satisfied.

14. I was referred to the case of  OA  (Nigeria)  [2010]  UKAIT  00003  and
    headnote 5 thereof which states that  Regulation  15(1)(f)  provides  a
    route for acquiring permanent residence based in  part  on  a  retained
    right of residence.  Under Regulation 15(1)(f) the family member has to
    show that he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years and  at  the  end  of
    that period he has a retained right of residence.

15. Counsel asked me to set the First-Tier Tribunal's  decision  aside  and
    remake the decision.



Decision and Reasons

16. It is accepted by both  parties  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    relied on the wrong evidence by considering a  bundle  which  had  been
    submitted for case number EA/09405/2016 which the appellant  states  he
    has withdrawn.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that this is an error of  law  but  it
    may not be a material error of law.

18. I have considered the evidence which should have been before the Judge.
    The refusal letter makes it clear that the respondent has accepted that
    the sponsor was exercising her Treaty Rights up to the date of divorce.
     There was a divorce decree on file before the Judge. What  I  have  to
    consider is whether the  appellant  has  satisfied  the  terms  of  the
    Regulations and  the  relevant  Regulation  is  15(1)(f)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.

19. I have noted the appellant's P60 documents from 2010 until 2014 and the
    bank statements which show entries from Uber  and  Gymkhana  Restaurant
    until 12  March  2015.   Evidence  has  also  been  provided  that  the
    appellant has continued working and there is 7 years' worth of evidence
    on file satisfying this.  I have noted his tax returns and I find  that
    based on this evidence the  appellant  satisfies  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 15(1)(f) of the Immigration EEA Regulations 2016  as  he  has
    resided in the UK for a continuous period of 5 years and has a retained
    right of residence by virtue of his divorce in line with Regulation 10.



20. With regard to a permanent right of residence, as  this  appellant  has
    resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for  a
    continuous period of five years he has retained a  right  of  residence
    and I find that the terms of Regulation 15(1)(f)  have  been  satisfied
    and this is a route for the appellant to acquire a permanent  right  of
    residence based in part on his retained right of residence.

21. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-Tier  Judge's
    decision. He considered the wrong bundle of  evidence  and  because  of
    that he dismissed the appeal. Had he considered the correct bundle  and
    the additional evidence therein, I find that his  decision  would  have
    been different.



Notice of Decision

As there is a material error of law in the First-Tier Tribunal's decision  I
am remaking that decision and I am setting the First-Tier  Judge's  decision
promulgated on 15 May 2018 aside.

This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 5 November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
