
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04057/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 November 2016                        |On 14 December 2016              |
|Extempore                                  |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           ms doris awulah-mensah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kempton promulgated on 1 July 2016  dismissing  her
    appeal under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations") against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    to refuse her application for a residence card as a confirmation of her
    right to reside in the United Kingdom on a permanent basis.

 2. The appellant's case is that she was married  to  a  Belgian  national,
    that marriage having taken place in 2009 by proxy; that she resided  in
    the United Kingdom from 25 July 2011; that her husband had been at  all
    relevant times either exercising treaty rights through being  a  worker
    or on the basis that his  residence  was  lawful  having  acquired  the
    permanent right of residence by operation of law; and, that accordingly
    she was entitled to ta residence card as confirmation of her  permanent
    right of residence.

 3. The respondent refused the application on a  number  of  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State was not satisfied by the documentary evidence  shown
    that:

          i) The appellant was validly divorced;

         ii) The appellant had been working post the date  of  divorce,  as
             required by reg. 10 (6); or

        iii) The appellant's husband had been exercising treaty rights.

 4. It was noted also in the refusal that  when  she  had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 26 July 2015 that the  husband  had  been  living  in
    Belgium for the last five years.

 5. The appellant did not elect to have an oral hearing and the matter  was
    dealt with on the papers which included a number of documents submitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal subsequent to the decision.   These  include
    P60s  for  the  appellant's  former  husband,  copies  of   the   birth
    certificate of her child and  the  marriage  and  divorce  certificates
    issued in Ghana.  In addition, the appellant also adduced a  number  of
    wage slips for herself.  The judge noted that there  were  difficulties
    with the documentation, in particular it was unclear  where  they  were
    living.  The judge noted that the appellant had produced:

    (i)  Photocopy P60s for her husband covering the tax years from 5 April
         2012 until 5 April 2015.

    (ii) Weekly payslips for herself for the months of March to April 2016,
         there being no P60 for her from either of her employers.

    (iii)    Evidence of employment for the ex-husband up to and  including
         5 April 2015.

 6. The  judge  concluded  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  husband
    exercising treaty rights for the first year for a five year  period  up
    until 5 March 2011, there being no P60 for  that  tax  year,  and  that
    there was insufficient evidence to show that  he  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights for the full five year period required.

 7. The judge also concluded that the appellant had  not  demonstrated  she
    had been working from the date of divorce 18 August 2015 until February
    2016.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Regulations 15(1)(f), 10(5) or 10(6) and it was open to
    her to make a fresh application.

 8. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge:

    (i)  Had failed to note that  the  ex-husband  had  acquired  permanent
         residence in the United Kingdom.

    (ii) Had ignored the length of  the  marriage  and  had  erred  in  not
         concluding that the requirements to  show  that  she  had  retained
         rights of residence had been met.

    (iii)     Had  erred  in  concluding  that  the   appellant   had   not
         demonstrated that she was currently working.

    (iv) The judge had acted unfairly in noting that she had  not  provided
         original documents on the basis that they had been retained by  the
         respondent.  The  same  applying  to  the  wage  slips  which  were
         supplied by email and had in that case been verified.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  on
    20 October 2016, the judge noting that Judge Kempton may  have  applied
    an incorrect test in deciding the appeal as basically whether  in  this
    case the appellant's husband should  be  considered  as  being  an  EEA
    national with permanent residence.

10. When the matter came  before  me  there  was  no  appearance  from  the
    appellant nor was there any explanation for her failure to  attend.   I
    am satisfied from the court file that due notice of the time, date  and
    venue of the hearing was sent to the  appellant  at  the  address  most
    recently given by her.  I deferred  the  consideration  of  the  matter
    until after 11.30 by which point there was still no appearance  by  the
    appellant.  In all the circumstances of the case I am satisfied that it
    was appropriate for me to  proceed  to  determine  the  appeal  in  her
    absence.

11. In order to acquire a  permanent  right  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom the appellant needs to have shown that she had lived  here  and
    that  her  husband  had  lived  here  for  a  period  of   five   years
    continuously.  It is clear from Regulation 15 that she  needs  to  show
    that her husband was here lawfully under the  Regulations.   It  is  of
    course open to her to show that he was here lawfully either because  he
    was exercising treaty rights and was thus a qualified  person  or  that
    for all or some of the relevant five-year  period  he  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.

12. The appellant in this case submits that her husband had indeed acquired
    a permanent right of residence and that the judge  had  erred  in  that
    respect.  It is unclear from the documentation that the husband had  in
    fact acquired a  permanent  right  of  residence.  The  residence  card
    certificate produced for him does not state that, contrary to how it is
    described.  Whilst of course that is merely declaratory of  the  matter
    it is equally the  case  that  the  evidence  in  this  case  does  not
    establish that the husband had acquired a permanent right of residence.



13. Further, even  if  the  husband  had  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence that does not assist the appellant.  That is because  on  her
    own account she entered the United Kingdom on  25  July  2011.   It  is
    necessary for her to show that she had  been  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a five-year period which in this case would end on 25  July
    2016.

14. Even if the husband had acquired a permanent right of  residence  prior
    to the divorce, the appellant does not meet the five  years'  residence
    requirement set out in reg. 15 as she could not on any view  have  been
    resident for a five-year period as the family member of an EEA national
     on any basis as the divorce was in 2015. In order to show a  five-year
    period of lawful residence, she would have to show  that  she  met  the
    requirements of Regulation 10(6) in the period after the  date  of  the
    divorce, that is but for the fact that she is not an EEA  national  she
    would nonetheless be a qualified person.

15. In this case whilst I accept that the  judge  may  have  erred  in  not
    considering the possibility of the husband meeting the  requirement  of
    lawful residence through having acquired permanent residence that error
    is incapable of affecting the  outcome  because  even  if  he  had  had
    permanent residence the appellant  was  not  resident  for  five  years
    whilst he was married to her.  She ceased to be a family member  of  an
    EEA national on 18 August 2015, the date of her divorce.

16. Having considered the material produced whilst it is correct  that  the
    judge may have erred in  putting  to  one  side  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant only of being employed on the basis that it was a photocopy I
    am not satisfied even taking these documents at full  face  value  that
    they established that the appellant did indeed meet the requirements of
    Regulation 10(6) of the EEA Regulations.   On  that  basis  the  appeal
    could not possibly have  succeeded  as  there  is  simply  insufficient
    evidence to show that the appellant met the requirement  of  Regulation
    10(6) for the period following the divorce which  became  final  on  18
    August 2015.

17. It follows therefore that despite the apparent error  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error  of  law
    capable of affecting the outcome and accordingly I uphold the decision.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it


Signed                                  Date:  13 December 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
