
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04899/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:      |
|On 8 March 2018                      |On 9 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                           ALEKSANDRAS MIKALAUSKAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented and not in attendance.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aziz.  The  Judge  had  allowed  Mr
         Mikalauskas's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State
         informing of his liability to detention and removal pursuant to the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

      2. The Secretary of State's grounds are put  in  clear  terms,  namely
         that the Judge had allowed the appeal based on Regulation 26(3)  of
         the 2016 Regulations, but the Secretary of State's decision and the
         appeal emanating from it was in respect of Regulations 23(6)(a) and
         32(2). Regulation 26(3) is connected to "misuse of rights"  whereas
         the correct Regulations referred to someone who  does  not  have  a
         right to reside in the United Kingdom or who has ceased to  have  a
         right to reside in the United Kingdom.

      3. The Appellant had not attended today in readiness for  the  hearing
         at 10am.  Indeed, I note that he did not attend the hearing at  the
         First-tier Tribunal.  I also noted from the Tribunal file that  the
         Appellant had been served with the notice of hearing. When I got to
         the end of my list and there was  still  no  attendance  by  or  on
         behalf of the Appellant, I decided to proceed with the hearing.  Mr
         McVeety was content to rely on the grounds of appeal.

      4. It is clear to me that there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
         Judge's decision. The Judge's task was made more difficult with the
         manuscript and difficult-to-read original grounds of appeal to  the
         Tribunal (against the Respondent's rejection of  his  application),
         but ultimately,  the  Judge  decided  the  case  on  the  incorrect
         Regulations and thereby came to the wrong findings and conclusions.



      5. In the circumstances, there is no  alternative  but  to  find  that
         there is a material error  of  law  in  the  Judge's  decision.  Mr
         McVeety said that if I was to find a material error of law then the
         appropriate course would be  for  the  Appellant  to  be  given  an
         opportunity to present his arguments, if any,  in  respect  of  the
         correct Regulations and that therefore that would  necessitate  the
         matter having to be remitted for a  re-hearing  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. In my judgment, that is the appropriate and fair  course.
         The re-hearing shall be on all issues. None of the current findings
         shall stand.

    DECISION

    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

    There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: Abid Mahmood   Date: 8 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

