
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04883/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 13th May 2021                 |On the 22nd June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                          MR Rana Mudassar Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by HC395 Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a remaking of Mr  Hussain's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision dated 29 August 2019 refusing an application for  a  residence
    card confirming his status as the extended family member  (EFM)  of  Ms
    Natalja Krivula, a Lithuanian national.

    Background

 2. The appellant came to the UK on 1 April 2004 on a work permit  and  had
    leave to enter valid until February 2005.  He stayed beyond that  leave
    and therefore became an overstayer.  In 2008 he met a British national,
    married and obtained leave to remain on the basis of the marriage on  2
    June 2014.  He was granted further leave on the basis of  the  marriage
    until 2018.  The marriage broke down in March 2018,  however,  and  the
    appellant applied for a divorce.  He was issued with a decree  absolute
    on 14 November 2019.

 3. Ms Krivula came to the UK in approximately 2007 and it is not  disputed
    that she has worked here ever  since,  exercising  Treaty  Rights.  The
    appellant and Ms Krivula maintained that they met in 2009 at a friend's
    birthday party. They became friends. Ms Krivula's marriage  broke  down
    in 2018. She and the appellant became closer in January  2019  as  they
    were both were going through separation and divorce.  The appellant and
    Ms Krivula developed a relationship and she moved in with  him  in  May
    2019.  Ms Krivula obtained a decree absolute on 23 August 2019.

 4. The appellant and Ms Krivula maintain that they have been in a  durable
    relationship since May 2019.   On  that  basis,  on  31  May  2019  the
    appellant applied for a residence card showing him to be an EFM  of  Ms
    Krivula as defined  in  Regulation  8(5)of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the EEA Regulations).

 5. The respondent refused the application on 29 August 2019. It was  found
    that limited evidence of  cohabitation  had  been  provided.   Even  if
    cohabitation could be show, that did not mean that the appellant and Ms
    Krivula were in a relationship. Further, the couple had not been living
    together for a sustained period, their case at its highest  being  that
    they had begun living together as a couple in May 2019, the same  month
    that they applied for a residence card.  That could not be said to be a
    "durable" relationship.

 6. In addition, in his application the appellant had relied on two sets of
    water bills, one issued on 13 September 2018 and the other on 12  March
    2019.  Both of these bills were  addressed  to  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Krivula. The respondent  found  that  these  documents  undermined  the
    application as the couple claimed to have been residing  together  only
    since May 2019 so Ms Krivula should not have been named  on  the  water
    bills from September 2018 and March 2019.  The respondent found:

         "This casts doubt on the validity of the  documents  submitted  and
         suggests that your sponsor's  name  may  have  been  added  to  old
         utility bills for the purpose of this application."

 7. The respondent also considered that  photographs  and  chat  logs  were
    insufficient evidence of a durable relationship  and  that  they  could
    have been created merely to support the  application.   The  respondent
    also considered that various witness statements from claimed family and
    friends were also insufficient to show a durable relationship.

 8. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and the appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore on 5  November  2019.   The
    appellant relied on two  bundles  of  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, referred to in this decision as AB1 (550 pages) and  AB2  (32
    pages).

 9. In a decision dated 20 November 2019, Judge Shore refused  the  appeal.
    The key dispute was whether the appellant and  Ms  Krivula  were  in  a
    genuine, durable relationship. Judge Shore did not find that they were,
    for a number of reasons.

10. In paragraph 61 the judge set out that the relationship  could  not  be
    shown to be "durable" as the couple had only been cohabiting since  May
    2019, at best.

11. Further, the  judge  did  not  find  the  claim  to  be  in  a  genuine
    relationship was credible, setting out the reasons for that finding  in
    paragraph 63.  That  conclusion  was  reached  even  though  the  judge
    accepted that the appellant and  Ms  Krivula  had  remained  consistent
    after being cross-examined at some length and had  "stood  up  well  to
    thorough cross-examination"; see paragraph 63.9. The judge  found  that
    the water bills undermined the credibility of the appellant's evidence.
     No attempt had been made to clarify the  anomaly  in  those  documents
    notwithstanding the fact that it had been raised  in  the  respondent's
    refusal letter.  Ms Krivula maintained that the utility bills had  been
    obtained in order to register at a GP practice but no evidence had been
    produced from the GP  showing  that  to  be  so.  The  judge  found  it
    inconsistent  that  the  couple  did  not  indicate  in  their  witness
    statements that they  intended  to  get  married  but  at  the  hearing
    maintained that they did plan to get married in 2020.  The  judge  also
    found the evidence of a witness, Mr Ashfaq, was highly confused  as  to
    the living arrangements in the home of the appellant and Ms Krivula and
    that this undermined the claim to be in a durable relationship.

12. The judge's conclusion, set out in paragraph 64, was that the  evidence
    at its highest showed only that the couple lived at the  same  address.
    On the balance of probabilities, the evidence did not  show  that  they
    were cohabiting. It was not credible even if they did cohabit that they
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship that could be found to be
    a durable relationship for the purposes of Regulation 8(5) of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

13. The appellant appealed against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  22
    April 2020.

14. The appeal came before me on 17 September 2020.  In a  decision  issued
    on 8 October 2020 I found an error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal and set it aside to be remade.

    Preliminary Issues

15. It is expedient to set out here that at the error of law hearing on  17
    September 2020 the appellant produced  a  further  bundle  of  evidence
    (AB3) which was served on 16 September 2020. Bundle AB3 was intended to
    provide up-date evidence in the event that re-making was  required.  An
    error of law was found and announced at the  hearing  on  17  September
    2020. Re-making  could  not  proceed  that  day,  however,  because  Mr
    Lindsay, who was also the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer on that
    hearing, had not been provided with AB3 even though there was  evidence
    that it had been served on the respondent. He also did not have a  copy
    of AB1 and AB2, the materials  that  had  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The re-making of the appeal was adjourned in order for these
    bundles to be provided to the respondent's representative at  the  next
    hearing.

16. On 2 December 2020 the Upper Tribunal  issued  a  direction  (dated  24
    November 2020) for the remaking of the appeal.  The  Tribunal  directed
    that if the appellant wished to submit any further written evidence  an
    application for permission to do so should be made  no  later  than  21
    days after the directions.   It  was  also  directed  that  if  it  was
    intended that the appellant and his partner give further oral  evidence
    an application to do so should be made no later than 21 days after  the
    directions were sent out.  Further,  a  witness  statement  capable  of
    standing as evidence-in-chief should be provided.

17. The appellant did not comply with those directions. Instead,  at  18:30
    on  11 May 2021, well out of time and, in  effect,  a  day  before  the
    hearing, he submitted a  further  bundle  of  evidence  (AB4).  At  the
    hearing on 13 May 2021 he sought permission for those materials  to  be
    admitted. He also sought permission to  adduce  further  oral  evidence
    from himself and Ms Krivula. He maintained that he had only  instructed
    solicitors on 10 May 2021 and that this explained why the new materials
    and application to give oral evidence were not provided  in  line  with
    the time limits in the directions of 2  December  2020.  He  maintained
    that the respondent was not prejudiced.  Bundle AB4 was small and  only
    updated what had been submitted previously.

18. For the respondent, Mr Lindsay objected  to  the  new  materials  being
    admitted where they had not been served in line  with  directions.  The
    respondent  also  objected  to  the  appellant  and  Ms  Krivula  being
    permitted to give further oral evidence where permission to do  so  had
    not been sought and a witness statement to stand as evidence  in  chief
    not  provided,  both  those  matters  being  further  breaches  of  the
    directions issued on 2 December 2020.

19. Mr Lindsay also noted that the appellant and sponsor were intending  to
    give evidence from the same flat in Harrogate and  was  concerned  that
    their evidence might not be given independently where there could be no
    observation of whether one of them could hear the other's evidence.  Mr
    Lindsay also expressed a concern that the appellant had  raised  a  new
    matter,  the  marriage,  and,  relying  on  s.85  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, declined  to  consent  to  this  issue
    being admitted to the litigation.

20. Further, Mr Lindsay indicated that he was in difficulty as he had still
    not been provided with AB1 from the proceedings before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

21. In response, Mr Bazini maintained that the respondent could be expected
    to have provided Mr Lindsay with AB1 as that was the sole  reason  that
    the re-making of the appeal had been adjourned on  17  September  2020.
    Some seven months on, a further adjournment on this basis could not  be
    in the interests of justice or in line with the principles set  out  in
    Rule 5 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  regarding
    delay, use of resources and costs.

22. I rose to consider these preliminary issues.  My  conclusion  was  that
    the hearing should proceed, that bundle AB4 should be admitted and that
    oral evidence  from  the  appellant  and  Ms  Krivula  should  also  be
    permitted.

23. My reasons for so finding are as follows. The  respondent  was  put  on
    notice at of the error of law hearing on 17  September  2020  that  she
    needed to provide her representative with AB1.  The  re-making  hearing
    did not go ahead on 17 September 2020 for that sole reason. It  is  not
    my judgment that the unaccountable failure to provide Mr  Lindsay  with
    AB1 for a second time should lead to a further adjournment.  I  reached
    that conclusion aware of the difficulty in which it  left  Mr  Lindsay.
    Notwithstanding that difficulty, it did not appear to me to be  in  the
    interests  of  justice  to  adjourn  again  given  the  further  delay,
    resources and costs that would arise. At some point  there  had  to  be
    finality and in my judgment that point had been reached.

24. Also, Mr Lindsay had copies of AB2, AB3  and  AB4  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision which contained details of the previous  written  and
    oral evidence. The witness statements from the First-tier Tribunal were
    in AB2, for example. The details of the disputed water  bills  were  in
    the respondent's refusal letter and the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
    He was some way from being wholly  unsighted  as  the  history  of  the
    evidence and the material issues, therefore. The key issue remained the
    same,  the  genuine  nature  of  the  relationship.  Further,   it   is
    unexceptional in this jurisdiction for a Senior Presenting Office of Mr
    Lindsay's experience to deal with a limited bundle  served  immediately
    before or even at hearing as was the case here with AB4.  He  could  be
    (and was) afforded time to consider the materials that he did have.  It
    was  my  conclusion  that  Mr  Lindsay,  notwithstanding  his   limited
    instructions, could be expected to represent his client  and  that  the
    case would be still be dealt with fairly and justly.

25. When reaching these conclusions I was mindful of the  clear  breach  of
    directions on the part of the appellant in failing to  provide  AB4  in
    line with directions and failing to confirm in time that oral  evidence
    was to be adduced and to provide additional witness statements to stand
    as evidence in chief. Considering the case as  a  whole,  however,  and
    where the new materials and oral evidence was limited and only intended
    as an update and where representatives in this  Tribunal  are  used  to
    dealing with late evidence, it was  my  judgment  that  AB4  should  be
    admitted and the appellant and  Mr  Krivula  permitted  to  provide  an
    update in their oral evidence where they could also  be  cross-examined
    on that evidence by Mr Lindsay.

26. It was also my conclusion that the appellant and Ms Krivula  should  be
    permitted to give evidence  remotely  from  their  flat  in  Harrogate.
    Remote evidence in these circumstances has had to become the norm since
    March 2020. They were given a formal direction by me on the  importance
    of their evidence being independent and they were reminded of  this  by
    Mr Bazini. It was agreed that Ms Krivula would leave  the  room  whilst
    the appellant evidence. In the event, everything I  observed  indicated
    that she did so. In all the circumstances, it  was  my  view  that  the
    hearing could proceed fairly  and  justly  on  that  basis.  In  cross-
    examination, Ms Krivula was asked by Mr Lindsay whether she  had  heard
    the appellant's oral evidence. She stated that she  could  hear  voices
    but that she could not hear exactly what  was  said  albeit  she  could
    recognise when Mr Lindsay was questioning the appellant  and  when  the
    appellant was answering.  She said that was inevitable given the nature
    of the construction of their flat and the thickness of the  walls.  She
    confirmed that she had not heard any of the details of what  was  being
    said.  Her response appeared to me to be frank and credible and it  was
    my view that the manner in which the  appellant  and  Ms  Krivula  gave
    their evidence did not undermine the lawfulness of the proceedings.

27. I  nevertheless  assessed  the  oral  evidence  given  at  the  hearing
    carefully given Mr Lindsay's  concerns  as  to  whether  it  was  given
    independently but I did not discern any attempt by Ms Krivula  to  copy
    what had been said by the appellant.  They were asked similar questions
    and gave consistent responses but using very  different  languages  and
    forms of expression. Nothing indicated that Ms Krivula  had  heard  the
    appellant's oral evidence and had attempted to duplicate  or  fabricate
    her evidence.

28. It was also not my view that the inclusion of the marriage  certificate
    in AB3 amounted to a formal "new matter" on which  formal  consent  was
    required from the respondent. The question of the couple  marrying  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal in 2019 at which time they  were  cross-
    examined on their  intentions.  The  respondent  was  informed  of  the
    intention to marry  when  the  couple  applied  for  a  certificate  of
    approval and provided with the marriage certificate when the  appellant
    made a further residence card application on the basis of the  marriage
    on 10 March 2020 prior to the error of  law  hearing  on  17  September
    2020. The marriage certificate was provided to the respondent again  at
    that hearing in AB3. This remains a case concerning Regulation 8 and  a
    durable relationship and no assessment of whether the couple were in  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage was required.

    Findings

29. A significant part of the respondent's case concerned the  water  bills
    dated 13 September 2018 and 12 March 2019 which contained the appellant
    and Ms Krivula's names when it was their evidence  that  she  had  only
    begun to live at the address in  May  2019.  At  page  31  of  AB3  the
    appellant included an email from Essex and Suffolk Water dated 17  June
    2020 which stated:

         "Dear Mr Hussain

         I write further to your telephone contact with us on 11 June  2020.



         From reviewing your account I am aware we made an  error  where  we
         issued bills prior to 14 May 2019 which appeared as if we had added
         your partner to the account from an earlier date.  I am  sorry  for
         this error.

         I have sent a letter in the post to confirm  our  error  which  you
         will receive by 1 July 2020.  A copy of the letter  has  also  been
         attached to the email.

         Sorry once again for any inconvenience this may have caused."

30. A copy of that letter referred to in the email was included in  AB3  at
    page 1.  The letter was dated 17 June 2020 and read as follows:

         "Dear Mr Hussain

         I write further to your contact with us on 11 June  2020  regarding
         the name on your account.

         Following your contact with us on the 14 May 2019  I  am  aware  we
         added Ms Krivula to your account as requested.

         In error we issued two copy bills dated 13 September  2018  and  12
         March 2019 which showed Ms Krivula (sic) name in error.

         I can confirm that Ms Krivula was not liable for charges  prior  to
         14 May 2019.  Due to an error on our  behalf  her  name  showed  on
         bills of an earlier date.

         I am sorry for any inconvenience we may have caused by the matter."

31. Also, Ms Krivula's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that the
    water bills had been obtained in order to assist in registering with  a
    GP. Bundle AB3 at page 27 contained a letter dated 5 May 2020 from  the
    couple's GP in London. The letter stated that Ms Krivula had registered
    in September 2019 and that "the proof of address used to register  with
    this practice has been destroyed due to confidentiality."

32. My conclusion was that, albeit at first  view  the  water  bills  might
    appear to be of concern, the evidence as  a  whole  indicated  that  no
    adverse inference could be  drawn  from  them.  The  appellant  and  Ms
    Krivula have been consistent throughout in written  and  oral  evidence
    and after cross-examination as to the chronology of their  relationship
    and to her moving in with the appellant only in May 2019. In  AB3  they
    provided documents from the water company explaining the anomaly of  Ms
    Krivula's name being included on the bills for dates when she  was  not
    actually  living  at  the  address.  The  explanation  came   from   an
    independent source and the email and letter from the water company were
    not challenged by the  respondent.  The  appellant  also  provided  the
    letter from the GP  which  indicated  that  he  had  gone  further  and
    attempted to find evidence that  the  water  bills  had  been  used  to
    register Ms Krivula with the practice but that his attempt had not been
    successful for reasons of confidentiality. I found that these parts  of
    the evidence were sufficient to show  that  the  water  bills  did  not
    undermine the claim that the couple had lived together  from  May  2019
    onwards in a genuine relationship.

33. The main issue arising since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    was that the couple had married and, since the error of law hearing  on
    17 September 2020, had moved to  Harrogate.   The  consistent  evidence
    provided by the appellant and Ms Krivula on this point  was  that  they
    had moved to Harrogate  as  the  appellant  was  now  running  his  own
    business and the premises that he needed to do so were much cheaper  in
    Harrogate.  The couple also gave consistent evidence on  the  appellant
    still owning the London flat  but  intending  to  sell  it  after  some
    renovations had taken place.  They  gave  very  similar,  even  if  not
    identical, details for their address in London.

34. When asked why they had not provided copies of their  decree  absolute,
    both the appellant and Ms Krivula indicated that they had already  done
    so in order to obtain the respondent's certificate of approval to marry
    and had also provided those documents in support of an application  for
    a residence card on the basis  of  marriage  made  in  2020.  They  had
    understood that the respondent therefore  had  copies  of  the  decrees
    absolute already and had not realised that they needed to provide  them
    again in these proceedings.  The appellant also stated that  where  the
    respondent had rejected evidence from  family  and  friends  and  phone
    messages as capable of carrying weight in the refusal letter there  had
    seemed little point in bringing updated evidence from the same  sources
    for the appeal.

35. It was my  judgment  that,  as  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant and Ms Krivula were highly consistent in  their  evidence  on
    all the matters they were asked to address. Their evidence appeared  to
    me to be reliable as a result. I found  it  credible  that  they  would
    assume that it was accepted that they had divorced legally  where  they
    had been allowed  to  remarry  and  the  respondent  had  already  been
    provided with copies of the decrees absolute in order for the  marriage
    to be allowed. I found it credible that they would not  seek  to  bring
    further evidence from family and friends  where  earlier  documents  of
    that kind were rejected as of no evidential value.

36.  I  accept  that  there  are  concerns  about  the  history   of   this
    relationship. The application  for  a  residence  card  was  made  very
    shortly after the couple claimed to have  begun  to  cohabit  and  only
    shortly after their marriages had broken  down.  The  cohabitation  and
    application for a residence card occurred at a time when the  appellant
    could no longer rely on his marriage to a British  national  to  obtain
    further leave.  I also noted the highly unusual evidence of the witness
    before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Ashfaq. I have considered all of the
    evidence before me carefully where those concerns are present.   It  is
    my conclusion that the evidence given by the appellant and Ms  Krivula,
    both oral and written is  substantial  and  highly  consistent.   Their
    evidence that they met in 2009 and had  been  friends  for  some  years
    appeared to  me  to  be  a  factor  capable  of  explaining  how  their
    relationship developed so quickly in 2019,  additionally  so  when  the
    evidence  also  indicated  that  they  found  themselves  in   similar,
    difficult circumstances at that time as both  of  their  marriages  had
    broken down. As before, it  is  not  disputed  that  they  were  cross-
    examined extensively in the First-tier Tribunal and that their evidence
    remained consistent. They have provided  documents  over  a  period  of
    years showing that important documents are sent to  them  at  the  same
    addresses.  The recent evidence showed  them  both  registered  on  the
    tenancy in Harrogate and both  responsible  for  council  tax  at  that
    address. I found that the evidence that the appellant  and  Ms  Krivula
    had moved to a new city together indicated that  they  were  a  genuine
    couple and have been so since May 2019.

37. My conclusion, therefore, is that the appellant has shown that he is in
    a  genuine,  durable  relationship  with  Ms  Krivula  and  meets   the
    requirements of Regulation 8 (5) of the EEA  Regulations.   It  remains
    for the  respondent  to  conduct  the  "extensive  examination  of  the
    personal circumstances of the applicant" required Regulation 17(5).



Notice of Decision

38. The appeal is allowed under the EEA Regulations 2016.


Signed:  S Pitt   Date: 15 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
