
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04044/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2017                            |On 06 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                          Mr Segun Abdullahi Hassan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and  his  date  of  birth  is  20
    February 1982.  He made an application for  a  residence  card  on  the
    basis of his marriage to an EEA citizen, Ms  M  Kebbeh  Samangari,  and
    this application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of
    16 March 2016.  He appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  was
    determined on the papers at his request and dismissed by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Heynes in a decision that was promulgated on 6 July
    2016.

2.   I am satisfied that there is a procedural  irregularity  which  amounts
    to a material error in this case because it is clear from the  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Heynes that he did not have  before
    him evidence that had been submitted by the appellant in support of his
    appeal. The unrepresented appellant submitted  grounds  of  appeal  (in
    reality his witness statement), together with a covering letter  and  a
    payslip relating to his wife (the EEA national) dated June 2016.  These
    were sent to the Tribunal on 30 March 2016. There was  also  a  further
    statement from the appellant that was submitted on 2 June 2016 together
    with a certificate of registration relating to the  appellant  and  his
    wife's private health insurance, a letter relating to  the  appellant's
    wife's treatment at St George's Hospital and further payslips  relating
    to the appellant.

3.   Whilst I appreciate that there was in fact no  witness  statement  from
    the appellant's wife before the First-tier Tribunal and that this was a
    paper case, there was a considerable amount of evidence that the  judge
    did not take into account and I cannot conclude with certainty that had
    that evidence been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and taken  onto
    account, he would have reached the same conclusion.

4.   I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations. Because of the nature  of
    the error (the appellant  has  effectively  been  deprived  of  a  fair
    hearing), I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
is set aside and the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  re-
hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 1 February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

