
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/04356/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th April 2019                       |On 25th June 2019                 |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                            TETIANA DUSHENKIVSKA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms T. Dushenkivska, in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    Judge Kaler promulgated on 14th January 2019.  The FtT Judge  dismissed
    the appeal of the appellant against  the  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 23rd May 2018, refusing her application for a residence  card  to
    confirm that she  is  a  former  family  member  of  an  EEA  national,
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.


 2. The application was refused by the respondent because  the  application
    was not accompanied or joined by a  valid  national  identity  card  or
    passport in the name of the EEA  national  as  required  by  Regulation
    21(5) of the Immigration (Economic Area) Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
    Regulations').   In  the  decision,  the  respondent  noted  that   the
    appellant had only supplied a copy of the EEA national's passport,  and
    the respondent went on to say:


         "In addition, the photocopy provided of your EEA sponsors  passport
         is a copy of a passport that was reported lost  or  stolen  to  the
         relevant authorities on 10 August 2015. As such, even the  original
         document itself could not be relied upon to  qualify  as  proof  of
         your sponsors identity."


The decision of the FtT Judge


 3. The decision of the FtT Judge was one  that  was  made  on  the  papers
    without a hearing.  The Judge noted, at [3],  that  a  person  who  has
    ceased to be a 'family member' of an EEA national  can  qualify  for  a
    right of permanent residence on the termination of a marriage, provided
    certain conditions are met. The Judge referred, at [4] to Regulation 21
    of the 2016 Regulations, that set out the "Procedure  for  applications
    for documentation" and noted that Regulation 21(5) provides as follows.


         "(5) where an application for documentation under this part is made
         by person who is not an EEA national on the basis that  the  person
         is or was the family member of  an  EEA  national  or  an  extended
         family  member  of  and  EEA  national,  the  application  must  be
         accompanied or joined by a valid national identity card or passport
         in the name of that EEA national"


 4.  At  paragraph  [5],  the  Judge  noted  Regulation  42  of  the   2016
    Regulations, which makes provision for alternative evidence of identity
    and nationality where the person is unable to  obtain  or  produce  the
    required document due to circumstances beyond the persons  control.  At
    paragraphs [7] and [8] of the decision, the FtT  Judge  summarises  the
    factual matrix and notes the appellant's claim that she has been unable
    to provide the EEA national's identity documents due  to  circumstances
    beyond her control. The Judge also notes the claim by the appellant the
    she was unaware that the copy passport she had managed to  obtain,  had
    been reported lost or stolen.  At paragraph [9] of  the  decision,  the
    FtT Judge concludes as follows:


         "The only issue before me is whether the  application  should  have
         been refused because it was not accompanied  by  a  valid  identity
         card of the EEA national, the appellant's former spouse. I need  to
         consider whether the exception in Regulation 42 applies.  Where  an
         applicant is unable to supply a valid passport or identity card  of
         the EEA national, the Secretary of State  "may  accept  alternative
         evidence  of  identity  and  nationality".  The  only  "alternative
         evidence" provided is a copy passport which has been reported  lost
         or stolen. That is not a copy of a "valid document", and so  it  is
         not a valid alternative evidence of his identity  and  nationality.
         If there had not been the added complication of the fact that  this
         document is null and void, I may have accepted this  as  satisfying
         Regulations 42 and 21."


 5. In the grounds of appeal, the  appellant  claims  that  the  FtT  Judge
    failed  to  consider  the  documentary  evidence  provided   with   the
    application, and on appeal, to demonstrate the efforts that she made to
    obtain the required evidence, from an individual  who  was  simply  not
    prepared to cooperate.


 6. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT  Judge  Garratt  on  1st  March
    2019.  The matter comes before  me  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
    decision of the FtT Judge involved the making of a  material  error  of
    law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


 7. Before me, Ms Dushenkivska accepts that she had been unable to  provide
    the national identity card or  passport  in  the  name  of  her  former
    partner, as required by Regulation 21(5) of the 2016 Regulations.   She
    submits that there had been an acrimonious breakdown of  the  marriage,
    and  her  inability  to  obtain  the  relevant  document,  is  due   to
    circumstances entirely beyond her control.  In the evidence provided to
    the FtT, the appellant had provided evidence of the steps taken by  her
    representatives to  obtain  the  required  document.   There  was  also
    evidence concerning the breakdown of a  relationship  with  her  former
    partner, and the ongoing difficulties, requiring the involvement of the
    police.  When she made her application on 15th March 2018, what she was
    able to provide was a  copy  of  the  passport  issued  to  her  former
    partner, as a British citizen, on 2nd April  2009.  That  passport  was
    said to be valid until 20th May 2019.  In  broad  terms,  she  contends
    that the FtT Judge's  conclusion  at  paragraph  [9]  of  the  decision
    is Wednesbury unreasonable and irrational.


 8. The respondent's decision of 23rd May 2018, by which the appellant  was
    notified of the decision stated that ".. The photocopy provided of your
    EEA sponsors passport is a copy of a passport that was reported lost or
    stolen to the relevant authorities on 10 August 2015. As such, even the
    original document itself could not be relied upon to qualify  as  proof
    of your sponsors identity.".  In that decision, the respondent does not
    appear to have considered whether there was alternative evidence  of  a
    valid national identity card  or  passport  in  the  name  of  the  EEA
    national.


 9. At paragraph [9] of the decision, the FtT Judge noted that  she  needed
    to consider whether the exception in Regulation 42  applies.   Although
    there was a wealth of evidence  before  the  FtT  Judge  regarding  the
    breakdown of the appellant's relationship with her former partner,  and
    the steps taken by the appellant to obtain the  documents  required  to
    support the application, the FtT Judge notes  at  paragraph  [9],  "the
    only "alternative evidence" provided is a copy passport which has  been
    reported lost or stolen. That is not a copy of a "valid document",  and
    so it  is  not  a  valid  alternative  evidence  of  his  identity  and
    nationality.".  The FtT Judge was satisfied that the appellant had been
    unable to obtain or produce the required document due to  circumstances
    beyond her control, but  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    provided "...a copy of a "valid document", and so it  is  not  a  valid
    alternative evidence of his identity and nationality".


10. The requirement in Regulation 21(5) is that  the  application  must  be
    accompanied or joined by a valid national identity card or passport  in
    the name of the EEA national. The exception in Regulation  42  provides
    for  "alternative  evidence  of   identity   and   nationality".    The
    alternative evidence of identity and nationality  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant here, was a copy of a passport that had been reported lost or
    stolen.  Although it was not a copy  of  a  'valid  passport',  it  was
    nevertheless alternative evidence of identity and nationality. Here, it
    was in fact a passport issued by the Identity and Passport Service to a
    British citizen, and although that passport itself may well  have  been
    reported lost or stolen, the respondent should have been  readily  able
    to confirm the identity  and  nationality  of  the  appellant's  former
    partner. The respondent rejected the application on the basis that  the
    appellant had produced a  photocopy  of  the  passport,  and  the  copy
    provided is a copy of passport that was reported lost or stolen on 10th
    August 2015, but did not consider whether that evidence was capable  of
    amounting to alternative evidence of identity and nationality.


11. In my judgment, the FtT Judge erred in her consideration of the  issue.
    Regulation 42 did not require the appellant to  provide  a  copy  of  a
    'valid national identity card or passport', but  required  'alternative
    evidence of identity and nationality'.  The FtT Judge  states  that  if
    the copy of the document relied upon were not null and  void,  she  may
    have accepted the document relied upon as satisfying Regulations 42 and
    21.  It may have been reported  lost  or  stolen,  but  it  was  in  my
    judgement, nevertheless, capable of amounting to  alternative  evidence
    of identity and nationality, that could readily have been confirmed  by
    the respondent.


12. A finding made by the FtT may be set aside for  error  of  law  on  the
    grounds of perversity if  it  is  irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the
    Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by  the  evidence.
    In my judgement, the FtT Judge erred in application  of  Regulation  42
    and the decision must be set aside.


13.  The  focus  of  the  appeal  before  FtT  Judge  Kaler  was,   perhaps
    unsurprisingly,  upon  the  question  of  whether  Regulation   42   is
    satisfied.  In order  to  succeed  in  the  appeal,  I  accept  as  the
    respondent submits, that the appellant must establish  that  the  other
    requirements to establish an entitlement to a residence card to confirm
    that the appellant is  a  former  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK, must be met.   These  were  matters
    that were no addressed by the FtT Judge.


14. In the circumstances, as to the disposal of the appeal, in my judgment,
    the appropriate course is for the matter to be remitted to the FtT  for
    hearing afresh. I have decided that it is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    appeal back to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having  taken  into  account
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th
    September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature  and
    extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will  be  extensive.  The
    parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
    in due course.


Notice of Decision


15. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Kaler is set aside.


16. The appeal is remitted the FtT for a fresh hearing of the  appeal  with
    no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date          19th May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal before me has  been  remitted  for  rehearing  to  the  FtT,  and
whether it is appropriate to make a fee award will be determined by the  FtT
following the rehearing of the appeal.


Signed                                  Date          19th May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

