
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/04274/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |     Decision & Reason  Promulgated  |
|On 12 April 2018                     |         On 18 April 2018            |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|       |THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT          |             |
|       |                                                        |Appellant    |
|                                                                              |
|And                                                                           |
|       |AKWASI KYEI BAFFOUR-AGYEKUM                             |             |
|       |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                              |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr M West, of Counsel, instructed by Danbar
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background facts:


 1. The issue in this appeal is whether Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Majid materially erred in law in allowing the  appeal  of  Mr  Baffour-
    Agyekum (hereafter the "claimant"), a national of Ghana born on 11  May
    1966, against a decision of the Secretary of State of 21 March 2016  to
    refuse to issue  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereafter the  "EEA  Regulations")  as
    the family member of a Ms Matilda Akpaloo  (hereafter  the  "sponsor"),
    said to be an EEA national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The Secretary of State had refused to issue the residence card  because
    she was satisfied that  the  marriage  between  the  claimant  and  the
    sponsor was a marriage of convenience.

 3. The grounds contend that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons
    and that the judge's decision mostly contained generic paragraphs  that
    had no relevance to the case at all.

 4. Mr West accepted that there the judge's decision does contain  a  legal
    error, in that, the reasoning was scant such  that  the  reasons  given
    were inadequate. However, he submitted, in summary,  that  the  judge's
    overall conclusion was sustainable on the evidence that was before him.
    Mr West then proceeded to take  me  through  the  documents  that  were
    before the judge  in  detail.  In  his  submission,  the  evidence  was
    voluminous and  conclusive.  He  asked  me  to  note  that,  since  the
    decision, a son has been born to the claimant and the  sponsor,  on  24
    January 2017.

 5. Mr West therefore invited me to re-make the decision in the  claimant's
    favour.

Assessment

 6. In making my decision as to whether the judge had materially  erred  in
    law by giving reasons that are inadequate such as to amount to an error
    of law, as explained in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,  I  take  into
    account the (unreported) decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  (Mr  C  M  G
    Ockelton, Vice President and UTJJ O/Connor and Smith) in MM v SSHD  and
    others (appeal number AA/06906/2014), in which the Tribunal  considered
    the decisions of the judge in  14  appeals.  The  Tribunal  highlighted
    several errors in the 14 decisions such as to lead it to state at  para
    47 as follows:

         "47.     We regard the body of his work that we  have  examined  in
             the course of these appeals as  wholly  failing  to  meet  the
             standards that are demanded by  the  office  of  a  judge  and
             expected by the parties.   As  a  result,  every  one  of  the
             decisions under appeal shows  error  of  law,  in  most  cases
             serious error, in most cases multiple serious errors.  Whether
             the decisions are looked at together or separately, they  show
             that nobody should assume that Judge  Majid  has  an  adequate
             knowledge of the law or of  his  task  as  a  judge.   If  his
             decisions continue to have the features we have identified  in
             the  foregoing  examination,  they   are   clearly   open   to
             criticism."

 7. In my judgment, the judge's decision  in  the  instant  case  shares  a
    number of the same errors that were found in the 14 appeals in  MM.  By
    way of example only, I noted the following:

    i.     Para 1 refers to the decision being a refusal of leave to remain
         under the EEA Regulations. In fact, the decision was a refusal of a
         residence card. The judge did not apparently understand that  leave
         to remain is not granted under the EEA Regulations.

    ii.    The first sentence of para 12, where the judge  states  that  he
         has kept in mind "the legal principle which allows him to deal with
         the EEA citizen leniently" makes no sense. There is no  such  legal
         principle in relation to the issue that was before the judge,  i.e.
         whether the marriage between the claimant and  the  sponsor  was  a
         marriage of convenience.

    iii.   At paras 14, 20, 21 and 23, the judge referred to the ECHR which
         has no relevance in this case.

    iv.    None of the "principles" set out in the list of "principles"  at
         para 15 are recognisable as legal  principles.  Furthermore,  every
         single paragraph is irrelevant.

    v.     At  para  22,  the  judge  refers  to  Hansard  as  a  guide  to
         interpretation of legislation but does not explain what legislation
         he was interpreting, what he found in Hansard to assist him and how
         it helped him decide the issues in the case.

    vi.    Many of the remaining paragraphs are likewise irrelevant.

    vii.   In the concluding  paragraph,  the  judge  states  that  he  was
         persuaded that the claimant comes within the  relevant  Immigration
         Rules and should have the benefit of discretion. However, there was
         no discretion to be exercised and the appeal was not brought  under
         the Immigration Rules.

 8. Mr West submitted that the judge's  reasons  at  para  13  sustain  his
    decision, in particular, what he identified as the "knock -out  reason"
    for allowing the appeal, i.e. the fact that the marriage  has  resulted
    in the birth of a child in January 2017.

 9. In my judgment, a  decision  that  falls  so  far  below  the  standard
    demanded by the office of a judge as the decision in the  instant  case
    does, in the same way as was found by the Tribunal to be  the  case  in
    the 14 appeals in MM, cannot be allowed to  stand  without  undermining
    the reputation of the First-tier Tribunal.

10. I am therefore satisfied that the decision of the judge  is  materially
    and fatally vitiated by error of law. I set it aside in its entirety.

11. I therefore proceed to re-make the decision.

12. In this respect, Mr Kotas informed me that he was content for me to re-
    make the  decision  by  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision. In light of the claimant's  evidence  as
    contained in the bundle,  he  said  that  he  could  not  see  how  the
    Secretary of State could discharge the burden  of  proof  upon  her  to
    establish that  the  marriage  was  a  marriage  of  convenience.  This
    amounted to a concession on the Secretary of State's  behalf  that  the
    claimant's appeal should be allowed.

13. I therefore allow  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision under the EEA Regulations.




Decision

    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Majid materially  erred  in  law.  His
    decision to allow the claimant's appeal is set aside in its entirety.

    I re-make the claimant's decision on his appeal against  the  Secretary
    of State's decision by allowing  it  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 16 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
