

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/04535/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 6th February 2018                  |         On 5th March 2018            |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                 Saima Bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Syed Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 23rd  July  1984.
    The Appellant visited the UK as a spouse, her husband being  a  British
    citizen, between 2004 and 2008 when the Appellant was obliged to return
    to Pakistan with her two daughters.  In 2015 the Appellant divorced her
    husband who had remained living in the UK.  The Appellant  subsequently
    applied for an EEA family permit in order to accompany  her  daughters,
    ZB and FB, to the UK as their sole carer.  That application was refused
    for the reasons given in a Notice of Decision dated  22nd  March  2016.
    The Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Black (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House on 4th July  2017.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his  Decision
    dated 12th July 2017.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision and on 22nd November 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The appeal before the Judge concerned the derivative rights of a parent
    of children who are British citizens under the provisions of Regulation
    15A(4A) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.
    The Judge considered the decisions in MA and SM (Zambrano: EU  children
    outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC) and Chavez  -  C-113/15.   The
    Judge dismissed the appeal  because  he  found  it  probable  that  the
    Appellant's former husband and the father of  the  children  was  still
    resident in the UK, and that the Appellant had  relatives  in  the  UK.
    Therefore the Judge was not satisfied that if  the  Appellant  was  not
    admitted to the UK, her children would be unable to  reside  there  and
    thereby denied their Treaty  rights.   The  Judge  also  dismissed  the
    appeal as regards the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights  on  the  basis
    that the best interests of  the  children  were  to  remain  living  in
    Pakistan with their mother.

 4. At the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Ahmed  referred  to  the  grounds  of
    application and submitted that the Judge had erred in law in coming  to
    this conclusion.  He argued that there  was  clear  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's former husband had had no contact  with  his  children  and
    that he would not be able to care and provide for his children  in  the
    UK.  Therefore it must be the case that the children  would  be  denied
    their Treaty rights if their mother could not bring them to the UK.  Mr
    Ahmed added  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights as he had not considered the Zambrano
    principle.

 5. In response, Mr Mills submitted that there was no such  error  of  law.
    He referred to the decision in Patel v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2028  where
    it was decided at paragraph 72 that the  decision  in  Chavez  did  not
    widen the scope  of  the  Zambrano  principle  which  only  applied  to
    expulsion cases.  As the  Judge  explained  from  paragraph  9  of  the
    Decision onwards, he did  not  accept  much  of  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant.   In  particular,  the  Judge  found  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities that there had been contact between  the  Appellant,  her
    former husband, and the children after 2008.  The Judge was entitled to
    come to that conclusion on the evidence  before  him.   The  Judge  was
    therefore not in error in finding that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    discharge the burden of showing that the  refusal  of  her  application
    would result in her children being denied Treaty rights.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which I do not  set
    aside.

 7. The Judge made a finding that the two children of the  Appellant  could
    come to the UK and reside  there  either  with  their  father  or  with
    relatives of their mother and  therefore  would  not  be  denied  their
    Treaty rights if their mother was not allowed to accompany them.   This
    is a finding of fact made by the Judge which he was entitled to make on
    the evidence before him and which he fully explained at paragraph 9  of
    the Decision.  The Judge applied  the  correct  standard  of  proof  in
    making that finding of fact.  He did not  rely  upon  speculation,  but
    made findings on the balance of probabilities.  He dealt with  all  the
    relevant evidence.  The Judge therefore did not err in finding that the
    Zambrano principle did not assist the Appellant in her appeal.

 8. As regards the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights, the Judge found  that
    the best interests of the children were a paramount  consideration  and
    amounted  to  the  children  remaining  living  with  their  mother  in
    Pakistan.  There was no suggestion that the Appellant would come to the
    UK without them.  The Judge was therefore correct to  find  that  there
    were  no  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  relating  to  the
    Appellant, and therefore that Article 8 ECHR was not engaged.

 9. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the  Judge.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date 28th February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
