
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
ea/04963/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 September 2017                       |On 04 October 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                              vladimir borovsky
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Stevens, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who was born on 29 July 1980, is a national of  Slovakia
    who appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 8 March 2017 to
    remove him from the United Kingdom under Regulation 26(6)(c) of the EEA
    Regulations on the ground that he had been misusing  his  rights.   The
    basis of the decision was the respondent's belief that he had not  been
    exercising treaty rights in this country.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan, sitting at Harmondsworth  on  15
    June 2017.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 30 June 2017,  Judge  Khan  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal, finding that he  had  not  been  exercising  treaty
    rights in recent years.  At paragraph 27, giving the  reason  for  this
    finding, Judge Khan found as follows:

         "There is no evidence that he has been exercising treaty rights  in
         recent years or that he has qualified for a permanent residence  in
         accordance with the EEA Regulations".

 4. It is stated within the grounds of  appeal  at  paragraph  2  that  the
    appellant had in fact been working from May 2011  until  May  2016  and
    thereafter until November.  He had been receiving jobseekers allowance.
     Of crucial relevance as set out at  paragraph  4  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal is that the appellant had provided no less than 122 payslips  as
    evidence of his employment in the United Kingdom.

 5. On behalf of the  respondent,  Mr  Kotas  accepted  that  a  number  of
    payslips and letters from the appellant's employers  had  been  in  the
    appellant's bundle and had accordingly been before the judge and so the
    judge's statement that there was no evidence  that  the  appellant  had
    been exercising treaty rights in recent years  was  unsustainable.   It
    was accepted on behalf of the respondent that this was a material error
    of law and I agree.

 6. Both parties invite this Tribunal to remit  this  appeal  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing and I agree also that  this  is  the
    appropriate course to take, as the appellant has  not  had  his  appeal
    properly considered.  In these circumstances I  will  direct  that  the
    appeal be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton  Cross
    to be re-heard by any judge other than Judge Khan, and that no findings
    will be retained.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan is  set  aside  for  material
error of law and the appeal will be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
sitting at Hatton Cross, to be re-heard by any judge other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Khan.   No findings will be preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                 Date: 29 September 2017


