
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04796/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote video means)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th July 2021                             |On 17th August 2021           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            Chaiwat buppasirikul
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett of Counsel, instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using  Teams.  There
    were no audio or visual difficulties during the course of the  hearing.
    A face to face hearing was not held to  take  precautions  against  the
    spread of Covid-19 and as all issues  could  be  determined  by  remote
    means.  The file contained all of the papers in hard copy.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor promulgated on  3  February  2020,  in
    which Mr Buppasirikul's appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  his
    application for an EEA permanent residence card dated  30  August  2019
    was allowed.  For ease I continue to refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, with Mr Buppasirikul as  the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Thailand, born  on  22  June  1987,  who
    entered the United Kingdom with leave as a student on 6  May  2010  and
    having married an EEA national (the "Sponsor") on  16  September  2011,
    applied for and was then issued with  an  EEA  Residence  Card  as  her
    spouse on 8 December 2011.  On 21 June 2019, the Appellant applied  for
    an EEA Residence Card on the basis that he  had  acquired  a  permanent
    right to reside in the United Kingdom following the termination of  his
    marriage (with divorce proceedings commencing on  11  May  2015  and  a
    decree absolute issued on 7 September 2016).

 4. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the  Sponsor  was
    not a qualified person as defined in the Immigration (European Economic
    Area)  Regulations  2016  (the  "EEA  Regulations")   at   either   the
    commencement or conclusion of divorce proceedings.  The Sponsor was not
    employed, nor was she a jobseeker as her award of Jobseeker's Allowance
    ("JSA") had  ended  prior  to  the  date  of  commencement  of  divorce
    proceedings and in any event she had exceeded the 91 day period for the
    same.  The Sponsor's later  receipt  of  Employment  Support  Allowance
    ("ESA") was not evidence that the Sponsor was exercising treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom.

 5. Judge Taylor allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 3 February
    2020.  The First-tier Tribunal recorded that  the  only  issue  in  the
    appeal was the status of the Sponsor at the date of  divorce.   It  was
    found that the Sponsor was not a jobseeker at the  relevant  time,  her
    JSA having ended prior to the commencement of divorce proceedings;  had
    exceeded the time limit of 91 days and there was no evidence  that  the
    Sponsor was looking for work.  There was no suggestion before the First-
    tier Tribunal that the Sponsor was a worker at the relevant  time,  nor
    even that she had retained worker status.  The Tribunal went on to find
    as follows:

         "11.  The DWP records show that the sponsor was receiving  benefits
         for the tax years ending April 2016 and April 2017, and the  letter
         dated 14th June 2019 from the DWP confirms that she  was  receiving
         ESA from 25th June 2015 to date.  On the basis of this  evidence  I
         am satisfied that the sponsor was receiving ESA very shortly  after
         the application for the divorce and was still receiving ESA at  the
         date of the decree absolute on 7th September 2016. ... On the basis
         that the respondent has not raised an issue that the  marriage  was
         genuine  and  lasted  for  three  years  in  accordance  with   the
         Regulations, I find that the sponsor has a history  of  working  in
         the UK, which is supported by the  HMRC  statement.   In  order  to
         qualify for benefits the sponsor  must  have  shown  that  she  had
         qualified status to remain in the UK.  ESA is a benefit for  people
         who are unable to work due to illness or injury, this Tribunal  has
         not been told which level of the benefit the sponsor has  received.
         On the basis that the sponsor has been on the  benefit  since  June
         2015,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  has  been  through  an
         assessment process and been found to qualify for the benefit,  both
         in terms of her status in the UK and the level of  her  disability.
         Depending on her level of disability she would either have to  show
         that she was available for work related activity,  or  so  severely
         disabled that she would be exempt.

         12. Although the Tribunal may now consider the position as  at  the
         date of the application for divorce, the position remains that  the
         Tribunal may consider the position as at the  date  of  the  decree
         absolute.  I am satisfied that the sponsor was in receipt of ESA as
         at the date of the decree  absolute,  which  demonstrates  she  had
         immigration status in the UK and would have been available for work
         but for her disability.  No evidence was available as to the  state
         of the sponsor's benefits for the period 6th May to 25th June 2015,
         but given  the  long  term  nature  of  the  sponsor's  receipt  of
         benefits, I am satisfied that  there  was  no  material  change  of
         circumstances from the date of the application  for  divorce  until
         the state of ESA a few weeks later."

 6. Finally, the Tribunal noted that it is  a  matter  for  the  Respondent
    whether the Sponsor had acquired permanent residence to decide  on  the
    basis of that information whether the Appellant qualified for permanent
    status or otherwise.  It was  further  noted  that  in  any  event  the
    Appellant is in a new relationship with a different  EEA  national  and
    therefore has an alternative method of obtaining an EEA Residence  Card
    in the United Kingdom.

The appeal

 7. The Respondent appeals  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    misdirected itself in law, in particular in its approach to the Sponsor
    being in receipt of ESA.  In the written  grounds  of  appeal,  it  was
    stated that a person could only qualify under the  EEA  Regulations  as
    someone who is temporarily unable to work if they  are  in  receipt  of
    income-related ESA, but there was no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of which type of  ESA  the  Sponsor  was  in  receipt  of  and
    therefore a speculative finding was made.  At the hearing, Ms  Everrett
    was unable to explain further the significance of income-related ESA as
    opposed to contributions based ESA for the purposes  of  this  type  of
    appeal.

 8. At the hearing, I raised a concern with the parties more  broadly  that
    the First-tier Tribunal did not appear to  assess  on  what  basis  the
    Sponsor was a qualified person for the purposes of regulation 6 of  the
    EEA Regulations, nor make any specific finding  that  she  was  such  a
    person (apart from the finding that she was not a jobseeker  and  there
    was no suggestion that she was a worker either).  Although not strictly
    within the detail of the grounds, this was a  Robinson  obvious  point.
    The issue goes beyond the question of which type of ESA the Sponsor was
    in receipt of, although that may still be relevant due to the different
    conditions applicable to each type of ESA.

 9. Mr Burnett submitted that the Sponsor being in receipt of ESA showed as
    an initial first step that she was  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  was
    unable to identify any basis upon which receipt of  the  benefit  meant
    that the Sponsor was also a qualified person at the requisite time.  In
    particular, if ESA was  relied  upon  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    evidence of incapacity to work, that in itself would not be  sufficient
    as that could only be relevant to whether a person retains status as  a
    worker or self-employed person under regulations 5  or  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and on the facts of this case, there is no suggestion  that
    the Sponsor was either.

10. The parties agreed that the  failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    identify the basis upon which the Sponsor was a qualified person at the
    relevant time was a material error of law such that the  decision  must
    be set aside and further, neither were able to identify any basis  upon
    which an award of ESA (of either type) would demonstrate that a  person
    was at that time a  qualified  person.   In  these  circumstances,  the
    parties further agreed that the appeal should be remade dismissing  the
    appeal.

11. Mr Burnett raised one further concern that the Respondent had still not
    disclosed whether the Sponsor had acquired permanent residence  in  the
    United Kingdom which would be an alternative way in which the Appellant
    could satisfy the requirements for his own application.

Findings and reasons

 1. For  the  reasons  agreed  by  the  parties,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in failing to assess or make any clear  finding
    that the Sponsor was, at the requisite time  of  divorce,  a  qualified
    person for the purposes  of  the  EEA  Regulations  or  a  person  with
    permanent residence as required for the Appellant's own application for
    a residence card under regulation 10 of the EEA Regulations.

 2. As quoted above, in  paragraph  11  of  the  decision,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found that in order to qualify for benefits the  Sponsor  must
    have shown that she had qualified status to remain in the UK and ESA is
    for those who are unable to work due to  illness  or  injury.   As  the
    Sponsor has been through an assessment  process,  she  must  have  been
    found to qualify for the benefit in terms of her status in the  UK  and
    the level of her disability.  Further, in paragraph 12, the  First-tier
    Tribunal found that the Sponsor's receipt of ESA demonstrated that  she
    had immigration status in the UK.  The latter is  not  necessarily  the
    same as being a qualified person or a person with permanent  residence,
    but may be on the evidence.

 3. The difficulty with these findings  is  that  the  basis  for  them  is
    entirely  unexplained  by  reference  to   the   specific   eligibility
    conditions for ESA or otherwise, and has no  regard  to  the  different
    conditions applicable for the two  different  types  of  ESA  in  2015.
    Social security benefits (including different components  of  the  same
    benefit such as the two types of ESA) have  different  requirements  in
    relation to residence, presence and immigration status and the  parties
    have not been able to identify that the Sponsor was  in  receipt  of  a
    benefit for which she had to satisfy a condition that  equated  to  her
    being a qualified person (or had permanent residence,  but  the  appeal
    was not argued on that basis as there was no positive evidence that the
    Sponsor had acquired this).

 4. The basis for the finding could not have come from the Appellant's case
    as put to the Tribunal, as  that  was  that  the  disclosure  from  DWP
    indicating the Sponsor was in receipt of ESA showed  that  during  this
    period she was a qualified person because ESA is paid to supplement  an
    income, such that she must have been  employed.   The  difficulty  with
    that is that there was no  evidence  from  HMRC  or  otherwise  of  any
    employment at the relevant time and that is contrary to the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reference to the benefit being for those who are  unable  to
    work due to illness or injury, which  has  not  been  disputed  by  the
    parties at the hearing before me.

 5. In these circumstances, and specifically without any  evidence  of  the
    type of ESA that the Sponsor was in receipt or, nor  identification  of
    the relevant eligibility criteria for the same that would equate to her
    being a qualified person for the purposes of the EEA  Regulations;  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in finding  that  receipt  of  one  or
    other type of ESA was sufficient to find that the Sponsor had  'status'
    or 'immigration status' in the United Kingdom such that the Sponsor was
    residing in accordance with the requirements of the EEA Regulations  at
    the time of divorce.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  must
    therefore be set aside and for essentially the  same  reasons,  on  the
    evidence that is available, the appeal must be dismissed.

 6. There is possibly still an issue of whether the  Sponsor  had,  at  the
    requisite time of divorce, acquired permanent residence in  the  United
    Kingdom which is a matter which should be within the  information  that
    the Respondent holds if the Sponsor had made  an  application  for  the
    same from which a Residence  Card  was  issued.   However,  it  is  not
    compulsory for any such application to have been made  by  the  Sponsor
    and if  no  such  application  was  made,  the  information  which  the
    Respondent holds may go no further than what was before the  First-tier
    Tribunal in this appeal.  On the  basis  of  that  information,  it  is
    difficult to see how it could  be  established  that  the  Sponsor  had
    exercised treaty rights continuously for the requisite five year period
    and there is nothing to suggest any such submission was  made  on  this
    evidence to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    Overall, this is a matter upon  which  the  Respondent  should  satisfy
    herself on the basis of information held about the Sponsor  outside  of
    the strict confines of this appeal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  re-make  it  as
follows:

The appeal is dismissed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         1st August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

