
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04576/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 March 2021                    |On 7 April 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                             HAFIZ TALAT RASHID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Bukhari, Bukhari Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Chana ("the  judge")  promulgated  on  24  January  2020
      dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent dated  15
      August 2019 refusing to issue him with a residence card as an extended
      family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  the  Immigration   (EEA)
      Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").

   2. The issue in contention before the judge  was  whether  the  appellant
      entered into a durable partnership of  convenience  with  his  partner
      ("the sponsor").

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   3. The judge found that although the  appellant  and  sponsor  have  been
      living together for several years (and the sponsor genuinely  believes
      she is in a durable relationship) there is not a durable  relationship
      because the appellant is using the sponsor to gain immigration status.
      At paragraph 65 the  judge  described  the  appellant  as  having  the
      "intention to dupe" the sponsor.

   4. The reasons given by the judge for reaching  this  conclusion  are  as
      follows:

        a. The appellant previously entered into a marriage of  convenience
           with a (different) EEA national (paragraphs 54-55).


        b.  The  appellant's   credibility   was   damaged   by   providing
           inconsistent evidence about when he divorced  the  EEA  national
           with whom he entered into a marriage of  convenience  (paragraph
           56).

        c. The sponsor and appellant gave inconsistent evidence about  when
           they began living together (paragraph 58).


        d. The appellant divorced his former wife when his  application  to
           the respondent was refused and "started looking for another  EEA
           national who could be his sponsor" (paragraph 59).


        e. The appellant did not "naturally" meet the  sponsor  but  rather
           "immediately  joined  a  dating  website  to  meet  another  EEA
           national on the  Internet,  having  previously  met  his  French
           national wife on the Internet and marrying her on the telephone"
           (paragraph 60).

        f. The sponsor's evidence that she went on a dating website to meet
           people who can  speak  English  was  not  credible  because  her
           evidence was that before  she  met  the  appellant  she  had  no
           intention of coming to the UK and it is not  credible  that  she
           would go on a dating website to learn English and not to meet  a
           man (paragraph 61).

        g. The appellant  did  not  tell  the  sponsor  that  he  had  been
           suspected by the respondent of entering  into  a  sham  marriage
           (paragraph 63).

        h. The evidence of the witnesses (that they believe  the  appellant
           and sponsor are in a durable relationship) is  "consistent  with
           the  appellant's  intention  to  dupe  [the  sponsor]  and   the
           respondent into believing he is in a durable  relationship  with
           [the sponsor] (paragraph 65).

   5. At paragraph 66 the judge stated:

           If  the  appellant  and  [the  sponsor]   are   in   a   durable
           relationship, there is no credible evidence before me as to  why
           they cannot return to Pakistan and continue  their  relationship
           in that country. The appellant and [the sponsor] claim that both
           sets of their respective parents and families, have no objection
           to their relationship and therefore [the sponsor]  can  relocate
           to Pakistan with the appellant to continue their family life, if
           the appellant genuinely believes he is in a durable relationship
           with [the sponsor], which I find he is not.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

   6. The grounds make several discrete criticisms of the decision under the
      over-arching contention that the decision was irrational. The  various
      points made include:

        a. The judge sought to establish the intention of the appellant and
           sponsor separately rather than look at their  circumstances  and
           the evidence of the relationship together.


        b. The judge's reasoning revolves around the  appellant's  previous
           marriage and her belief that it was a marriage of convenience.

        c. The judge did not take account of the fact that the reference to
           the appellant and sponsor starting to live together in  November
           2015 in the application form  was  a  mistake  by  the  previous
           representatives of the appellant.

        d. The judge "seems to be very old-fashioned" in rejecting the idea
           that the appellant and sponsor would want only a  friendship  on
           the "Badoo" website, where they met.

        e. The judge stated that the appellant began  looking  for  another
           EEA national after his application as a spouse was refused on 11
           January 2015, but the appellant met the sponsor before then,  in
           June 2014.

        f. The judge erred by finding that it was not "natural" to meet the
           woman online, as opposed to in-person in the UK.

        g. The judge failed to give any reasons for rejecting the  evidence
           of the witnesses.

   7. A further argument in the grounds is that the finding at paragraph  66
      that the appellant and sponsor could live in Pakistan is irrelevant.

   8. At the hearing, Mr Bukhari argued that the judge's  decision  was  not
      open to her because the evidence given by the sponsor,  appellant  and
      witnesses all pointed in one direction, which is  that  the  appellant
      and sponsor, who have been cohabiting since 2016, are, and have  been,
      in a genuine relationship.

   9. Mr Bukhari submitted that the judge appears to have not liked the fact
      that the appellant and sponsor met on the internet. He stated that, at
      the start of the hearing, the judge stated: is this the appeal of  the
      guy who looks for EEA wives on the internet? He  maintained  that  the
      judge, having taken an initial view that the relationship was a  sham,
      improperly discounted evidence that showed the contrary  to  be  true.
      Although these points were raised, it was not argued that the decision
      was procedurally unfair: Mr Bukhari's argument was that  the  decision
      was irrational, not that it was procedurally unfair.

  10. Mr Lindsay submitted that this is a  rationality/perversity  challenge
      and that the high threshold in such cases has not been met. He  argued
      that the judge gave adequate reasons for finding the appellant  lacked
      credibility, and it was not sufficient for the appellant to  challenge
      some of the  findings  when  other  significant  credibility  findings
      remain unchallenged and are sufficient to support the  conclusion  the
      judge reached.

Analysis

  11. This appeal concerns whether the  appellant  entered  into  a  durable
      partnership of convenience, as defined in regulation  2  of  the  2016
      Regulations, which provides:

           "durable partner" does not include-
           (a)  a party to a durable partnership of convenience; or
           (b)  the durable partner ("D") of a person ("P") where a spouse,
           civil partner or durable partner of D or P is already present in
           the United Kingdom and where that marriage, civil partnership or
           durable partnership is subsisting;
           "durable partnership of convenience" includes a durable
           partnership entered into for the purpose of using these
           Regulations, or any other right conferred by the EU Treaties, as
           a means to circumvent-
           (a)  immigration rules applying to non-EEA nationals (such as
           any applicable requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to
           enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or
           (b)   any  other  criteria  that  the  party  to   the   durable
           partnership of convenience would otherwise have to meet in order
           to enjoy a right to reside under these  Regulations  or  the  EU
           Treaties;

  12. In my view, the judge was entitled, based on the evidence before  her,
      to find that the appellant was a party to a  "durable  partnership  of
      convenience", for the following reasons:

        a. Firstly, the appellant previously entered  into  a  marriage  of
           convenience.  The  judge  assessed   the   marriage,   and   the
           respondent's reasons for finding it to be one of convenience, in
           paragraphs 53 - 56. Although the appellant does not concede that
           his previous marriage  was  one  of  convenience,  he  does  not
           challenge  the  analysis,  or  findings,  in  paragraphs   53-56
           concerning that marriage. The judge was entitled  to  find  that
           the previous marriage of convenience undermined his credibility.


        b. Secondly, as found at paragraph 63, the appellant never told his
           sponsor that he was previously found by the respondent  to  have
           entered into a marriage of convenience. The judge  was  entitled
           to find this damaging to his credibility.

        c.  Thirdly,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  have  regard   to   an
           inconsistency in dates between the application form and  witness
           evidence. It was a matter for the judge, who had the benefit  of
           hearing  the  oral  evidence,  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
           discrepancy was significant.

        d. Fourthly, the appellant joined a dating site and met his partner
           shortly after his application as a spouse was refused. The judge
           did not  err  in  finding  this  to  be  the  case  because  the
           appellant's first application as a  spouse  was  refused  on  17
           February 2014 and he met his partner over the internet  in  June
           2014. The judge  was  entitled  to  infer  from  this  that  the
           appellant sought a relationship with another EEA  national  when
           he was unable to obtain a residence card as the  spouse  of  his
           previous wife.

        e. Fifthly, it was not irrational to find that the evidence of  the
           witnesses added little because they could do  little  more  than
           confirm cohabitation.

  13. This  is  a  case  in  which  there  was  evidence  pointing  in  both
      directions. On the one hand, the appellant and sponsor had been living
      together for several years and two of their friends gave  evidence  to
      support the claim that the relationship is genuine. On the other hand,
      there were several factors, as summarised above in paragraph 12, which
      could rationally lead to  the  conclusion  that  this  was  a  durable
      partnership of convenience. I therefore reject the submission that the
      decision was irrational. I am fortified in  my  conclusion  by  having
      regard to recent Court of Appeal authorities, including in  particular
      Lowe v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA  Civ
      62,  which  emphasise  the  caution  that  must  be  exercised  before
      interfering with evaluative decisions of first instance judges.

  14. It is unclear why, in paragraph 66, the judge discussed relocation  to
      Pakistan when this was irrelevant to the issues before  her.  However,
      as paragraph 66 has no bearing on the durable  partnership  issue,  it
      does not undermine the decision.

Notice of Decision

  15. The appeal is dismissed.

  16. The grounds of appeal do not identify a material  error  of  law.  The
      decision stands.



|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 1 April 2021                |




















