


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/04897/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |          Determination & Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 15 December 2017                    |          On 12 February 2018           |
|                                       |                                        |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                             Mr ANVARJON AHMEDOV
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hone, Counsel, instructed by LS Legal
Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a national of Uzbekistan. On 6  November  2015,  he
       made an application for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  his
       right to reside in the UK as the spouse and family  member  of  Ella
       Simonova, a national of Estonia and thereby an  EEA  national.  That
       was refused by the respondent. His appeal came before  Judge  Austin
       of the First tier Tribunal who dismissed it on the papers without  a
       hearing  on  25  January  2017.  He  was  successful  in   obtaining
       permission to appeal and in a  decision  sent  on  23  October  2017
       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman set aside the decision of  Judge
       Austin for material error or  law.  DUTJ  Chapman  held  that  Judge
       Austin had not applied the correct test when assessing  whether  the
       sponsor's employment was genuine and effective.  DUTJ  Chapman  made
       several directions aimed at obtaining further particulars  from  the
       appellant regarding tax and national insurance records  relating  to
       his sponsor.


    2. By the time the  case  came  before  me  in  order  to  re-make  the
       decision, the appellant had submitted, albeit somewhat late, further
       documentation relating to the sponsor's employment. Through Mr  Hone
       the appellant sought an adjournment because his sponsor had  had  to
       go to Estonia  to  visit  her  sick  grandmother.  This  application
       dovetailed with the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Tarlow's,
       request which was for more  time  to  check  the  latest  employment
       documentation which had been provided late in the day. I granted the
       joint application with an  oral  direction  that  Mr  Tarlow  submit
       within 7 days the  Home  Office  response  to  the  new  documentary
       evidence, noting that it  may  well  be  that  this  response  would
       obviate the need for a further hearing.


    3. On 18 December 2017 Mr Tarlow  duly  sent  a  letter  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal stating that the Secretary of State had had opportunity  to
       examine the  additional  evidence  provided  in  the  form  of  copy
       payslips pertaining to the sponsor's claimed employment  during  the
       relevant period. The letter concluded:


       "For the Secretary of State, I accept that the evidence  shows  that
       the sponsor was economically active and exercising treaty rights. In
       the light of this I would  ask  that  the  tribunal  determine  this
       appeal without a further hearing."


    4.  Having regard to the above response from Mr Tarlow on behalf of the
       Secretary of State, I am in a position to re-make  the  decision  in
       this appeal by allowing the appellant's appeal against the  decision
       of the respondent refusing him a residence card as the spouse of  an
       EEA national exercising Treaty  rights.  The  respondent  no  longer
       raises any dispute to the factual basis for the appellant's right to
       reside based on his relationship as the family member  of  a  spouse
       exercising Treaty rights.


    5. For the above reasons:-


       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge has already  been  set
       aside for material error of law.


       The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.


                               Signed   [pic]
                                   Date: 7 February 2018


                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
