
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04554/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 19th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                          olanrewaju amudat bakare
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P V Thoree, Thoree & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 16 May 1979. She  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler promulgated  on
    6 February 2019 dismissing her appeal against the decision to revoke  a
    permanent residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  as  a
    family member of an EEA national.

2.   The Appellant did not attend the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and she submitted a letter from  the  Belvedere  Medical  Centre  which
    stated as follows:

         "This is a letter to certify that the above patient will not be fit
         enough to take her exam on 30th January. She was seen by myself and
         is complaining that she still has pain in the back  radiating  down
         to left leg with several days history. There are no red  flags  but
         paracetamol is not helping. I have prescribed co-codamol.  She  has
         a court hearing on 31st January please could  you  take  this  into
         consideration and allow her an exemption from her exam.  I  advised
         her that she can self-certify and add cover letters if she wishes."


3.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided a good reason for her non-attendance. The judge noted that the
    Appellant was represented and telephoned her representative speaking to
    Mr Olugan of SLA Solicitors. He stated in an email:

         "We refer to our telephone conversation of this even date regarding
         our non-appearance at the Tribunal for the hearing  of  the  appeal
         against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  revoke  the
         permanent residence card of Mrs Bakare.  The situation is  that  we
         advised the appellant with regards to evidence required  to  enable
         us to prepare a bundle as well as the cost implication.  Thereafter
         she instructed us that she would seek alternative legal  advice  in
         preparation for the hearing.  We  spoke  to  her  partner  on  29th
         January 2019 and he stated that the final decision whether we  will
         represent the Appellant rests with her. We made  attempts  on  30th
         January 2019 but we were unable to speak with  her.  The  appellant
         did not put us in funds neither did she  perfect  her  instructions
         with regards to evidence required to prepare a bundle. We apologise
         for our non-appearance no discourtesy of the Tribunal is intended."


Judge's findings

4.   There was no request for an adjournment and the judge proceeded in  the
    Appellant's absence. He set out Regulation 24 of the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulation 2016 and made the following findings:

         "10. The Appellant born on 16 May 1979 is female and is  a  citizen
             of Nigeria.  She was  issued  with  a  residence  card  on  25
             October  2011  as  the  spouse  of  Mario  Luis  Goncalves,  a
             Portuguese national. She was issued with a permanent residence
             card on 13 September 2017.


         11.  The evidence received from the Portuguese  authorities  stated
             that the Sponsor is not entitled to Portuguese nationality due
             to the fact that both of his parents were foreigners  a  (sic)
             the time of his birth.  Therefore,  the  Portuguese  documents
             were issued in error at the time.


         12.  The documents in the Respondent's  bundle  contain  the  email
             exchange  passing  between  the  Portuguese  Counsel  and  the
             Respondent. The  exchange  confirms  that  the  documents  the
             Sponsor was issued with had  been  annulled  and  he  was  not
             entitled to Portuguese nationality.


         13.  In Nkrumah (OFM - annulment of residence permit) Ghana  [2011]
             UKUT 00163 (IAC) the Tribunal said that


             (i)  Where a residence card has been issued in a  passport  on
                  an application duly made it becomes a valid document if it
                  has not been cancelled before it is  communicated  to  the
                  applicant;


             (ii) An application for a residence card  cannot  be  lawfully
                  refused if it has already been issued; and


             (iii)    A residence card may be revoked if it is  shown  that
                  was issued by mistake to someone not entitled to it.


         14.  In Samsam (EEA: revocation and retained rights)  Syria  [2011]
             UKUT 00165 (IAC) the Tribunal said that where the Secretary of
             State revokes a  residence  card  before  the  expiry  of  its
             validity it falls on her to justify such revocation.


         15.  In Sannie and Hussein  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1638 it was held that the Secretary
             of State for the Home Department had been entitled to revoke a
             residence card where  the  applicant  for  the  card  had  not
             fulfilled the relevant statutory criteria. It was implicit  in
             the EEA Regulations 2006 that if the card was issued in  error
             there was an  implied  power  to  revoke;  such  a  power  was
             concomitant with the power to issue.


         16.  I am satisfied on this  evidence  that  the  Sponsor  was  not
             entitled to Portuguese nationality. He had  been  issued  with
             nationality as the result of an administrative  or  procedural
             error. The Appellant was issued with a residence card  because
             of this error. The case law satisfies me that  the  Respondent
             is entitled in these circumstances  to  revoke  the  residence
             card issued to the Appellant."


5.   Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that the refusal  of  an
    adjournment was unfair because it was clear from  the  evidence  before
    the judge that the Appellant  was  unwell  and  could  not  attend  the
    hearing. She did not have any representatives. Regulation 24(1) did not
    apply and reliance on the cases in the decision related to a  residence
    card not a permanent residence card. It appears from the  grounds  that
    the submission made was that if the card was  issued  in  error  by  an
    administrative mistake there was no reason why  it  should  be  revoked
    even if the holder has no right  of  residence.  The  grounds  rely  on
    paragraph 25 of the decision of Sannie quoting the decision of Samsam:

         "A residence card can clearly be revoked  on  broader  grounds  and
         conduct making cancellation of the card and  removal  from  the  UK
         appropriate. If a card is obtained by fraud  and  misrepresentation
         then it will be open to the issuing authority  to  cancel  it  but,
         again, the onus would be on the Secretary of State. But if it could
         be shown that a card was issued in error by administrative mistake,
         we see no reason why it should be revoked even if the holder has no
         right of residence."


6.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on  29
    March 2019 on the ground it was arguable that unfairness had arisen  in
    failing to grant the adjournment.  P J M Hollingworth stated:

         "It is arguable in the light of the inferences that  the  Appellant
         was not sufficiently fit to attend court to give  evidence.  It  is
         arguable that an adjournment  should  have  been  granted.   It  is
         arguable that the email produced at paragraph  5  of  the  decision
         confirmed the relative position and that the attempts by the author
         of 30th January did not result in success in seeking to speak  with
         the Appellant."


Submissions

7.   Mr Thoree relied on the grounds and submitted that the judge had  acted
    unfairly in failing to grant the adjournment. There was ample  evidence
    before him that the Appellant was sick. She was  unable  to  attend  an
    exam the previous day and therefore the evidence showed that she  would
    also be unable to attend the appeal hearing. He accepted that there was
    no specific evidence that she was not fit to attend  the  hearing,  but
    given that she was unable to attend an exam on the previous day,  there
    was sufficient evidence for the judge to make such an inference. It was
    unfair to refuse the adjournment given that the Appellant  had  a  real
    prospect of success. She had married a Portuguese national and had been
    granted permanent residence having been successful on an appeal.

8.   The Appellant's husband was Portuguese at the relevant time. After  the
    permanent residence card was issued, the Respondent received  an  email
    stating that the Appellant's husband was not Portuguese. The Respondent
    was not able to revoke the residence card because he had already  given
    permanent residence to  the  Appellant  after  her  divorce.   She  had
    children and was settled in the UK and the  situation  that  she  found
    herself in was not due to any fault on her part. The  judge  had  acted
    unfairly and the Appellant should be given an opportunity to be  heard.



9.   Ms Everett submitted that the  medical  evidence  did  not  go  to  the
    issue. The doctor did not say that the Appellant was  unfit  to  attend
    the hearing and it was not clear what more the judge could  have  done.
    There were no credibility findings required in this case and  therefore
    her attendance would have made no difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal. There was nothing  to  rebut  the  Respondent's  evidence.  The
    Appellant may be totally innocent but given the nature  of  declaratory
    rights her situation could not be remedied through the EEA  Regulations
    even if she had a strong basis to remain in the UK.

10.  Mr Thoree submitted that there was  insufficient  evidence  before  the
    judge to show that the Appellant's  ex-husband  was  not  a  Portuguese
    national. He submitted that the email was not  enough  and  the  appeal
    should be reheard in the interests of fairness.

Conclusions and reasons

11.  Regulation 24(4) states, "The Secretary of State may revoke  or  refuse
    to renew a document  certifying  permanent  residence  or  a  permanent
    residence card if the holder of the certificate or card has  ceased  to
    have or never had a right of permanent residence under Regulation 15."

12.  The email chain  referred  to  in  the  judge's  decision  was  in  the
    Respondent's bundle. The Respondent  had  produced  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's ex-husband was not entitled to Portuguese  nationality  and
    had not been so entitled at the time she was granted a  residence  card
    and at the time she was granted a permanent residence card. Whilst this
    situation is very unfortunate for the Appellant, because it is  not  of
    her own  making,  she  does  not  acquire  any  rights  under  the  EEA
    Regulations. She, notwithstanding her belief, was not married to an EEA
    national at the time she was granted  a  residence  card  or  permanent
    residence. The email chain was sufficient to support  the  Respondent's
    decision to revoke her permanent residence card under Regulation 24(4).



13.  I am not persuaded by the submission that  once  a  residence  card  is
    granted it is not possible to revoke it as submitted in the grounds  of
    appeal. The Appellant could not succeed under the EEA  Regulations  and
    the judge rightly dismissed her appeal. The refusal of  an  adjournment
    was not arguably unfair because had the Appellant attended the  hearing
    it would have made no difference to the outcome. There was no  evidence
    contradicting the emails. It was clear from the refusal  letter,  dated
    11 June 2018, the basis upon which the residence card was revoked.  The
    Appellant had ample  opportunity  to  produce  evidence  to  rebut  the
    Respondent's assertion and failed to do  so.   Her  oral  evidence  was
    unlikely to have changed the position. While she  may  well  have  been
    able to give evidence about her situation currently in the UK,  Article
    8 was not arguable in this context and it is open to the  Appellant  to
    make an application on Article 8 grounds if she wishes.

14.  Accordingly, I  find  that  the  refusal  of  an  adjournment  was  not
    arguably unfair and there was no error of law in the judge's conclusion
    that the Respondent was entitled to revoke  the  residence  card  under
    Regulation 24(4). The judge properly directed himself in  law  and  his
    conclusion that the Sponsor was not entitled to Portuguese  nationality
    was open to him on the evidence before him. I find that  there  was  no
    error of law in the judge's decision promulgated on 6 February 2019 and
    I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

15.  Given the late application for permission to appeal and the fact  that,
    even if the judge had granted the adjournment,  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed on its facts, I am of the view that permission to appeal should
    not have been granted in this case by First-tier Tribunal Judge P  J  M
    Hollingworth.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

