
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/04160/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination and Reasons Promulgated|
|On Monday 25 February 2019           |On 27th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                           MISS BRENDA TABOT AYUK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ononeme, solicitor, Moorehouse solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge LSL Mensah promulgated on 21 September 2018 ("the Decision"). By
      the Decision the Judge dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision dated 24  May  2018  refusing  the  Appellant  a
      residence card as  the  adult  family  member  (daughter)  of  an  EEA
      national.

2.    The Appellant elected to have her appeal dealt  with  on  the  papers.
      The Judge took  account  of  documents  which  were  provided  to  the
      Respondent with  the  application  but  recorded  that  "[n]o  further
      evidence has been filed to counter  what  was  said  in  the  decision
      letter" ([8] of the Decision).  Expressly, at [10] of the Decision she
      stated that "[n]either the appellant nor her  mother  have  filed  any
      written statement for themselves or any other person who would say the
      appellant was living with her Mother in the  UK  or  any  evidence  of
      dependency." She therefore rejected the Appellant's case that she  was
      dependent on her mother and, at [11] of the  Decision,  also  rejected
      the case that the Appellant's mother was exercising Treaty  rights  in
      the UK.

3.    The essence of the Appellant's grounds  challenging  the  Decision  is
      that the Judge failed to consider documentary evidence which was filed
      with the Tribunal on 16 August 2018 and  therefore  should  have  been
      before the Judge when she decided the appeal on 22 August 2018.

4.    By his rule 24 statement, the Respondent  accepts  that  a  bundle  of
      evidence was sent to the Home Office and received on 17  August  2018.
      The file includes a bundle of documents which are recorded as received
      by the Tribunal on 16 August 2018. The  Respondent  accepts  that  the
      Judge has not considered those documents.

5.    The Respondent says though that the documents make  no  difference  to
      the Decision and, since there could be no different outcome,  I  ought
      to refuse to set aside the Decision in the exercise of my  discretion.
      That therefore was the issue on which I heard submissions.

6.    Mr Ononeme submitted that there were documents which showed  that  the
      Appellant was living with her mother.  He relied in particular  on  an
      IS96 which was issued by the Respondent giving her address as that  of
      her mother.  He said that this established dependency.  As  I  pointed
      out, that document alone could not establish dependency without  more.
      Mr Melvin also pointed out that the document probably  does  not  even
      establish that the Appellant lived at that address since  the  address
      given would be that  which  the  Appellant  herself  provided  to  the
      Respondent.

7.    It is the case that many of the documents do not add significantly  to
      those which were before the Judge as enclosed  with  the  application,
      particularly on the issues which the Judge had  to  determine,  namely
      whether the Appellant was dependent on  her  mother  and  whether  her
      mother was exercising Treaty rights.

8.    Ultimately, though, there were witness statements from  the  Appellant
      and her mother to which the Judge clearly did not have regard  because
      of the overlooking of the bundle.  I accept Mr Melvin's point that the
      Judge would be entitled to give little weight to those  statements  in
      the absence of an oral hearing.  However, in  response  to  the  point
      made in the rule  24  statement,  that  nothing  would  be  gained  by
      remittal because it would be likely that  the  Appellant  would  again
      elect for a hearing on the papers,  Mr  Ononeme  indicated  that  this
      would not be the position and that the Appellant would ask for an oral
      hearing this time round.

9.    Although, based on the documents in the bundle,  it  is  quite  likely
      that a Judge would not have formed any different view on  the  crucial
      issues, I cannot say that the outcome would necessarily have been  the
      same.  The hearing was procedurally unfair for failure to take account
      of  the  Appellant's  further  evidence,  particularly   the   witness
      statements.

10.   For those reasons, I am satisfied  that  the  grounds  do  disclose  a
      material error of law in the Decision.   I  therefore  set  aside  the
      Decision.  I am also satisfied in light of the  nature  of  the  error
      found, that it is appropriate to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, particularly in order that the Appellant can have  her  oral
      evidence considered.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  LSL  Mensah
promulgated on 21 September 2018 is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.


Signed      [pic]                 Dated: 25 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
