
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04911/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 June 2019                                |On 2 July 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                             Mr Muhammad Arshad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Fitzsimmons, Counsel, instructed by Sindhu
                    Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  3  December  1981.   He
    appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  C  H  Bennett
    promulgated on 18 March  2019.   Judge  Bennett  dismissed  his  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent dated 30 June 2018 to  refuse  his
    application for a permanent residence card.  The application  contended
    the appellant was a  family  member  who  had  retained  the  right  of
    residence, under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").

Factual background

 2. The appellant's application for a permanent residence card was made  on
    the basis of his previous marriage to [LP], a citizen of Lithuania born
    5 August 1993 ("the sponsor").   They  married  on  23  July  2012  and
    divorced on 25 November 2015. The application was refused on the  basis
    that his marriage to the sponsor was one of convenience.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, which found that the
    Secretary of State had discharged the burden  he  bore  to  demonstrate
    that the predominant purpose of the marriage was for the  appellant  to
    secure an immigration advantage, and dismissed the appeal.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal also found that the appellant did not meet the  remaining
    criteria necessary for the issue of a permanent  residence  card  as  a
    family member who had retained the right of  residence,  regardless  of
    the position concerning whether the marriage was one of convenience.

Permission to appeal

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge proceeded on  a  basis  which
    had not  been  advanced  before  him,  and  made  observations  in  his
    decision, for example concerning the  attractiveness  of  the  sponsor,
    which had no place in a decision of the tribunal.

 5. In order to understand the grant of permission, it is necessary to turn
    to the grounds.  The grounds highlight the factual basis upon which the
    judge resolved the case against the appellant and contrast his findings
    with the case advanced by the respondent.  The  judge  found  that  the
    sponsor thought she was in a genuine relationship with  the  appellant,
    and that it was the appellant who had misled her. This,  contended  the
    grounds, contrasted with the case advanced by the respondent which  was
    that both parties to the marriage intended  it  to  be  a  marriage  of
    convenience. This finding also contrasted with an earlier  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan promulgated on 13  January  2017,  which
    found that both parties to the  marriage  intended  it  to  be  one  of
    convenience. In departing from both  the  respondent's  case,  and  the
    facts  previously  established  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to find that the  appellant  had  intended  to
    deceive his wife, yet the evidence did not permit such a  finding.  The
    judge had rejected two key strands of the  respondent's  case,  thereby
    minimising  the  remaining  case  against  the  appellant,  leaving  an
    insufficient evidential basis to justify such adverse findings.

Submissions

 6. Ms Fitzsimons submitted that within the  course  of  the  decision  the
    judge found the parties to have been in a genuine relationship, thereby
    precluding and rendering irrational his subsequent conclusion that  the
    appellant entered the relationship  with  the  predominant  purpose  of
    obtaining an immigration advantage.  At [26], the judge  accepted  that
    the appellant and sponsor "lived together  as  husband  and  wife".  He
    noted at [36] that the witnesses supported  the  contention  that  they
    were seen together as husband-and-wife. At  [42],  the  judge  accepted
    those  parts  of  the   appellant's   evidence   which   describe   the
    circumstances in which he met the sponsor and in  which  the  appellant
    described his physical attraction towards the  sponsor.  At  [45],  the
    judge rejected the suggestion that the sponsor's predominant purpose in
    entering the marriage was to secure an immigration  advantage  for  the
    appellant; the judge found: "she married [the appellant] out of genuine
    love and affection".

 7. Against that background, Ms Fitzsimons submits that it was  never  part
    of the respondent's case that the  appellant  deceived  his  wife  into
    thinking that the marriage was genuine, in circumstances where it  was,
    in fact, one of convenience. She points to  Judge  Khan's  decision  in
    which it was found that both parties intended the  relationship  to  be
    one of convenience. That was an appeal against removal decisions  taken
    by the respondent in respect of both the appellant and the sponsor,  in
    which both appeals were dismissed. Although  the  judge  below  in  the
    present matter quoted extensively from that decision,  surprisingly  we
    have not been provided with a copy of it.

 8. The above "factual matrix", contends Ms  Fitzsimons,  was  entirely  at
    odds with the case advanced by the respondent. Pursuant to  Sadovksa  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 54 at  [29],  it
    is necessary for both parties to a  marriage  of  convenience  to  have
    entered the marriage intending for the sole or predominant  purpose  to
    be to secure an immigration advantage. The only exception to this is in
    the case of deceit, whereby the non-EEA national succeeds in convincing
    his or her spouse that the relationship is  genuine,  in  circumstances
    when it is not.  Cogent evidence is required to justify such a finding,
    submits Ms Fitzsimmons.

 9. Ms Fitzsimons submits that a finding of deceit  was  not  open  to  the
    judge on the basis of the reasoning he  adopted.  At  [43],  the  judge
    expressly rejected part of the respondent's case that photographs found
    on the appellant's telephone displaying him in  the  sponsor  had  been
    "staged". Also in that paragraph, the judge rejected  the  respondent's
    case that the appellant had sent "flirty" messages to other  women,  as
    revealed by a search of his telephone during an immigration enforcement
    visit.  Ms Fitzsimons submits that in dismissing these central elements
    of  the  respondent's  case,  the  residual  evidence  adduced  by  the
    respondent was insufficient to merit of finding that the  marriage  was
    one  of  convenience  involving  the  deceit  of  the  sponsor  by  the
    appellant.

10. The judge's reasoning is further undermined when [47(b)  and  (c)]  are
    considered, submitted Ms Fitzsimons.  This submission is  that  judge's
    reasoning was irrational, given he made the  following  findings  which
    are completely at odds with his overall conclusion:

         "(b) The photographs show that [the sponsor] is an attractive young
         woman. There is nothing inherently improbable in  the  propositions
         that [the appellant] should have found her physically attractive.

         (c)  The photographs are consistent with  the  relationship  having
         been at the  time  of  the  marriage  based  on  genuine  love  and
         affection. But they do not establish that that was the  predominant
         purpose of the marriage.

         (d)  The  fact  that  the  marriage  broke  down...  in  2014  [is]
         consistent with the marriage having been entered on  the  basis  of
         genuine love and affection, but that... [the appellant and sponsor]
         simply fell out of love, having little, if anything in common..."

11. Ms Fitzsimons highlights the terminology used by the judge at  [50]  to
    demonstrate that he was approaching  his  analysis  improperly,  taking
    into  account  irrelevant  considerations,  and  viewing  the  marriage
    through the lens of domestic cultural expectations. The judge expressed
    matters in these terms:

         "...it cannot but have been obvious to [the appellant], as a man of
         c.30, that [the sponsor] was, in emotional terms, an immature young
         woman."

     The judge footnoted the term "immature young woman" with the  following
    observation:

         "In case there be any who cannot see this,  if  the  position  were
         that [the sponsor] had told [the appellant], in  March  2012,  when
         they had, at best, known one another for circa two or  three  weeks
         that she  wished  to  marry  him,  she  could  not  but  have  been
         emotionally immature."

    The judge made another reference to her "emotional immaturity"  at  [50
    (e)], in which he  stated  that  this  quality  made  her  a  "suitable
    candidate" for the appellant, as she was less likely to  consider  that
    she was being exploited in order to confer an immigration advantage  on
    the appellant.

12. At [50(d)], the judge highlighted the differences  in  the  backgrounds
    and ages of the sponsor and the appellant; they married  when  she  had
    just turned 18 and he was 30. The judge highlighted the fact  that  the
    only motivational factor described by the appellant  for  marrying  the
    sponsor was her physical  attractiveness  and  expressed  doubt  as  to
    whether a genuine relationship.

13. Finally, Ms Fitzsimons submits that the  approach  the  judge  took  to
    examining the case advanced  by  the  appellant  demonstrated  that  he
    applied  the  wrong  burden  of  proof.  She  submits  that  the  judge
    approached the matter on the basis that it was  for  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate that the marriage was not one of convenience,  rather  than
    the burden being on the respondent throughout to  demonstrate  that  it
    was.

14. For the respondent, Mr Tarlow contended that the judge  approached  the
    issue of the evidential burden shifting to the appellant, in accordance
    with the authorities: see [50 (b)]. The  judge  arrived  at  legitimate
    findings of fact which were open to him to reach on the evidence before
    him.





Legal framework

15. Where the respondent alleges that a marriage is one of convenience, the
    burden rests on him to demonstrate that the marriage  falls  into  that
    category (see Papajorgi (EEA spouse  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC),  Agho  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 at [13] and  Sadovska  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 54  at,  for  example,  [28].
    The  burden  upon  the  respondent  is   not   discharged   merely   by
    demonstrating there to be a reasonable suspicion that the  marriage  is
    not  genuine  (that  is,  was  contracted  for  the  sole  purpose   of
    circumventing the domestic immigration control regime) but, if he  does
    establish the presence of such a reasonable  suspicion,  the  appellant
    will be expected to respond to the allegation.  In those circumstances,
    the evidential pendulum will swing  to  the  appellant.   However,  the
    basic rule is this: "he who asserts must prove": see Sadovska  at  [28]
    per Lady Hale PSC.

Discussion

16.  Ms  Fitzsimons  does  not  challenge  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    requirements contained in regulations 10(5)(c) and 10(6)  of  the  2016
    Regulations were not met. The relationship had  not  lasted  for  three
    years prior to the initiation of divorce proceedings and there  was  an
    absence of evidence that the appellant, if he were an EEA national, had
    been exercising Treaty rights since the date of divorce. On that basis,
    she accepts that it is not possible for the  appellant  to  succeed  in
    this appeal. Understandably  and  quite  properly,  the  appellant  has
    challenged the decision below as he seeks to challenge the  substantive
    finding that he was a party to a marriage of convenience.  The focus of
    this decision, therefore, will be that issue.

17. We do not consider the judge below to have erred in law on the marriage
    of convenience point, for the following reasons.

18. First, Ms Fitzsimons' submission that the judge resolved a  case  on  a
    factual basis not advanced by the respondent is based on the  erroneous
    premise that the fact-finding function of a  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is constrained by the submissions  of  the  parties.  On  this
    approach, the parties would be able to tie the hands of a judge, merely
    by virtue of the scope of the submissions they  make.  That  cannot  be
    right. There is no doctrine which states that the fact-finding function
    of the Tribunal is limited by the submissions advanced by the parties.

19. Of course, where a judge proposes to resolve the case  on  an  entirely
    different basis to that advanced by the parties, fairness  may  require
    that the judge gives the parties the opportunity to make submissions on
    the proposed course of action: see AM (Fair hearing) Sudan [2015]  UKUT
    656 (IAC), headnote (v).   The  reason  for  that  is  essentially  for
    reasons of procedural fairness.  A judge is  not  required  to  give  a
    running commentary on the approach he or she is  minded  to  take,  but
    where the resolution of  the  case  is  likely  to  take  place  on  an
    altogether different basis to that canvassed by the  parties,  fairness
    dictates that the parties should be provided the  opportunity  to  make
    submissions on the point.

20. That is not the territory of the submissions advanced by Ms Fitzsimons.
    No part of Ms Fitzsimons' submissions contended that  the  hearing  was
    procedurally unfair in this way. She did not  identify  how  the  judge
    could have conducted the  hearing  differently,  so  as  to  cure  this
    claimed procedural defect.   The respondent advanced reasons as to  why
    he considered the marriage between the appellant and the sponsor to  be
    one of convenience. Quite properly, the judge analysed the respondent's
    case, rejecting some of it, and accepting other parts.  The judge found
    that the sponsor had  not  intended  the  relationship  to  be  one  of
    convenience, whereas the appellant had.  The Judge did not go as far as
    the  respondent  invited  him  to  go,  but  nor  were   his   findings
    incompatible  with  the  respondent's  primary  case   concerning   the
    appellant.  In adopting this approach,  the  Judge  departed  from  the
    findings of Judge Khan, correctly viewing  that  decision  through  the
    lens of Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)
    Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702.  Again, Ms Fitzsimons  did  not  submit
    how or why Judge  Khan's  decision  should  have  led  to  a  different
    conclusion on the part of the Judge in this matter.

21. Ms Fitzsimons' submissions rely on a misreading of  the  decision.  She
    highlighted the apparent inconsistencies between the "findings" of  the
    judge at [47],  referred  to  paragraph  11  above,  and  his  eventual
    conclusions at [50].

22. Properly understood, at [47], the judge was  highlighting  the  counter
    arguments that could be advanced on behalf of  the  appellant.  It  was
    part of the thorough and detailed examination of all sides of the  case
    which this judge conducted over the course of his 39-page decision.  So
    much is  clear  from  the  introductory  words  which  feature  at  the
    beginning of [47]: "as against the points in paragraph  46,  there  are
    the following points..." Plainly, the judge was rehearsing the  factors
    in favour of the appellant's case. Nothing in that  paragraph  contains
    the judge's final findings of fact. There is no merit to this aspect of
    the appellant's case.

23. It will be helpful at this point  to  consider  the  criticisms  levied
    under Ground 3, namely that the  judge  made  findings  of  fact  using
    inappropriate terminology based on the appearance of the  sponsor,  and
    his own domestic cultural expectations.  The references to the  sponsor
    being "an attractive young woman" were in  the  context  of  the  judge
    having accepted the appellant's evidence that he, the appellant,  found
    the sponsor to be an attractive  young  woman.  The  reason  the  judge
    described the sponsor in these terms was because he was considering the
    appellant's case that he found the sponsor to be an  attractive  woman.
    While there is superficial force in Ms Fitzsimons' submissions that the
    judge should have avoided terminology which appeared to convey his  own
    subjective analysis of the sponsor's appearance, it is  clear  that  he
    was doing so in order  to  consider  this  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  and does not demonstrate that the judge erred in law in this
    aspect of his analysis.

24. The judge's finding that the appellant used the age difference and  the
    relative gap in maturity and experience between him and the sponsor  to
    his own ends was within the range of  findings  properly  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence before him.  But for his marriage to the sponsor,
    the appellant would have had no right to reside in the United  Kingdom.
    His immigration status was such that he had every incentive to  benefit
    from a marriage to an  EU  citizen.  The  judge  was  highlighting  the
    sponsor's vulnerability and contrasting it with the  scheming  approach
    of the appellant.  These are factors which the judge  was  entitled  to
    take into account, and his terminology does not undermine his findings.

25. This brings us to the  final  submission  advanced  by  Ms  Fitzsimons,
    namely that the judge erred  in  his  application  of  the  burden  and
    standard of proof concerning marriages of  convenience.  Ms  Fitzsimons
    submits that the judge approached the marriage of convenience issue  on
    the basis that the appellant bore the burden of demonstrating that  the
    marriage was  not  one  of  convenience,  rather  than  the  burden  to
    demonstrate that it was resting  on  the  respondent.  We  reject  this
    submission.

26. First, at [12] to [16], over  the  course  of  five  pages,  the  judge
    correctly directed himself as  to  the  relevant  legal  framework.  Ms
    Fitzsimons has not attacked any aspects of this  part  of  the  judge's
    decision.

27. Secondly, the judge applied that legal framework to the  facts  of  the
    case. At [13], the judge correctly identified  that  the  Secretary  of
    State bears the burden of demonstrating that the marriage  was  entered
    into  for  the  sole  (as  in  predominant)  purpose  of  securing   an
    immigration advantage for the appellant.  He also correctly  identified
    that the evidential burden shifts to an appellant upon the provision of
    material which demonstrates the presence of reasonable suspicion by the
    Secretary of State. At [50], the judge applied those principles to  the
    facts of this case. Specifically, at [50(b)], the judge noted that  his
    analysis was sufficient to cause the evidential burden to shift to  the
    appellant. He did not consider the evidence of the  appellant  to  have
    caused the evidential pendulum to have swung back to the  Secretary  of
    State, as required by the authorities, if the appellant is  to  provide
    an answer to the allegation.

28. These findings all were made against the background of the decision  of
    Judge Khan which found that the appellant and the sponsor  had  entered
    into a marriage of convenience.  Judge Bennett correctly noted that the
    previous decision was his starting point, but not his finishing  point.
    Throughout the course of his very detailed and  careful  analysis,  the
    judge applied the  relevant  legal  principles  to  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's intentions at the point he entered into the  marriage.  The
    judge gave clear reasons as to why he accepted  the  respondent's  case
    that the sole or  predominant  purpose  for  which  the  appellant  had
    entered into the marriage was to secure an immigration  advantage.  The
    fact that in doing  so  he  made  findings  of  fact  which  were  more
    favourable to the sponsor  than  those  of  Judge  Khan  and  the  case
    advanced by the Secretary of State does not in  any  way  render  those
    findings unsafe.

29. We consider that the decision  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    contain any material errors of law.

Conclusion

30. This appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 28 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith







