
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04925/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 May 2019                        |On 04 June 2019                      |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Syed Ferdous Ahmed                                |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ahmed, of Lincoln's Chambers Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following a hearing on  19  February  2019,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Davidson  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Syed  Ferdous   Ahmed
    (hereafter the "claimant"), a national of Bangladesh born on 7  October
    1986, against a decision of the Secretary of State of 29 June  2018  to
    refuse his application of 20 March 2018 for a derivative residence card
    to confirm that he was the primary carer of Mrs. Tayamun Nessa  Khatun,
    a British citizen born on 2 January 1936 (hereafter the "sponsor"). The
    sponsor is the appellant's maternal grandmother.

 2. The Secretary of State's decision was made under  regulation  16(5)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  (hereafter
    the "2016 EEA Regulations"). In the decision letter, the  Secretary  of
    State noted that the claimant was registered as a carer with Hillingdon
    Carers.  However, he was  not  satisfied  that  the  claimant  was  the
    sponsor's primary carer or that she would be  unable  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom or another EEA state if he was  required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom  for  an  indefinite  period.  The  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the sponsor could procure assistance from other sources
    with the help of Social Services. He noted  that  the  assessment  from
    Hillingdon Council that had been submitted by the claimant stated  that
    the sponsor would be re-referred to Adult Social Care if  the  claimant
    did not provide care for the sponsor.

 3. The Secretary of State therefore concluded that the  claimant  had  not
    shown that alternative  care,  whether  from  the  local  authority  or
    private care providers, was unavailable or unsuitable.

 4. At the hearing on 9 May 2019, I heard submissions from the  parties  as
    to whether Judge Davidson had materially erred in law.  I  reserved  my
    decision on this issue and then heard submissions on whether (if I were
    to conclude that Judge Davidson had materially erred in  law)  I  could
    proceed to re-make the decision  on  the  appeal  without  any  further
    adjournment.

 5. Mr Ahmed initially submitted that I should  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"). However, upon being pressed to explain why
    a remittal would be appropriate, given the very limited  issue  in  the
    appeal and the fact that the claimant had not made  an  application  to
    admit further evidence, he agreed that the Upper Tribunal could proceed
    to re-make the decision and hear submissions on that issue.

 6. I record that no application was made, whether prior to the hearing  on
    9 May 2019 or at the hearing, to admit evidence  that  was  not  before
    Judge Davidson. I also record that Mr Ahmed did not  suggest  that  the
    claimant or anyone else would give oral evidence. He  did  not  request
    that the hearing be adjourned part-heard for submissions to be made  on
    another date concerning the re-making of the decision.

 7. I therefore proceeded to hear submissions on 9 May 2019 concerning  the
    re-making of the decision on the claimant's  appeal,  which  I  said  I
    would consider if I decided that Judge Davidson had materially erred in
    law.

Previous appeals

 8. The claimant had had two previous  appeals  which  concerned  the  same
    issue, as follows:

    (i)     An appeal against a decision of 23 December 2014 which  refused
          his  application  for  a  residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
          derivative right of residence as the primary carer of the sponsor.
          This decision was made under regulation  15A  of  the  Immigration
          (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. This appeal  was  heard
          on 28 July 2015 before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Robinson
          who dismissed the appeal.

    (ii)    An appeal against a decision of 21 April 2016 which refused his
          application for a residence card as confirmation of  a  derivative
          right of residence as the  primary  carer  of  the  sponsor.  This
          decision  was  made  under  regulation  15A  of  the   Immigration
          (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. This appeal  was  heard
          on 15 June 2017 before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson
          who dismissed the appeal.

 9. Judge Robinson heard oral evidence from the claimant and  the  sponsor.
    He did not find the claimant credible. He rejected his evidence that he
    had lived with the sponsor in her sheltered accommodation (para 24). He
    noted that there was no medical statement of the  sponsor's  conditions
    and no evidence of the medication or treatment  that  the  sponsor  was
    receiving  (para  26).  Although  she  was  receiving  local  authority
    accommodation, there was no information as to  whether  any  assistance
    had been offered or was available from the  local  authority.  However,
    the evidence showed that she had access to a duty  manager  around  the
    clock and he found that it was  unlikely  that  she  could  not  access
    assistance from a manager because of language difficulties  (para  27).
    On the basis of  the  oral  and  written  evidence  before  him,  Judge
    Robinson said that he was satisfied that the claimant was the sponsor's
    main carer but he was not satisfied that she would be unable to  remain
    in the United Kingdom if he were required to leave. He  took  the  view
    that she would continue to have access to  medical  treatment  and  her
    needs would be assessed by the local authority if she  were  unable  to
    manage without the help of the claimant. He considered  that  this  was
    especially so as she was living  in  sheltered  accommodation  and  was
    known to the local authority (para 29). He therefore concluded that the
    claimant had not  demonstrated  that  he  had  a  derivative  right  of
    residence (para 30) and dismissed the appeal.

10. An issue before Judge Hodgkinson was whether the claimant  was  related
    as claimed to the sponsor. Judge Hodgkinson resolved this issue in  the
    claimant's  favour.  He  accepted  that  the  sponsor  had  significant
    disabilities and  illnesses  (para  20),  that  the  claimant  was  the
    sponsor's primary carer and that the sponsor was heavily dependent upon
    the claimant (para 26). He noted discrepancies between  the  claimant's
    evidence and the sponsor's evidence and concluded that  the  extent  of
    the sponsor's dependency on the claimant had  been  exaggerated  to  an
    indeterminate extent (par 26). He  noted  that  the  sponsor  lives  in
    sheltered accommodation but there was no evidence that established that
    any real attempts had been made to obtain  any  kind  of  care  package
    outside the care that the claimant was providing to her and that  there
    was no evidence which indicates that any enquiries at all had been made
    in relation to possible residential accommodation for  the  sponsor  so
    that she could be looked after by alternative carers in  a  residential
    setting. He found that the evidence did not unequivocally indicate that
    the sponsor would elect to return to live in  Bangladesh  or  that  she
    would be unable to continue to  live  in  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
    claimant were not in the United Kingdom (para 27).

11. As can be seen, both Judge  Robinson  and  Judge  Hodgkinson  were  not
    satisfied that the sponsor would  be  compelled  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom because there was no evidence  before  them  that  the  sponsor
    could not obtain alternative care if  the  claimant  were  not  in  the
    United Kingdom to care for her.

Judge Davidson's decision

12. Judge Davidson heard evidence from the claimant and the  sponsor  which
    she summarised at paras 5-8 of her decision. They  gave  evidence  that
    the sponsor's  condition  has  deteriorated,  in  that,  she  has  been
    diagnosed with dementia, presenting  currently  as  forgetfulness,  and
    that she also suffers from stress and heart problems. She  has  been  a
    victim of burglary and is nervous around people she does not know.  She
    speaks no English and is illiterate. She is entirely dependent  on  the
    claimant since the deaths of two of her daughters. Her other  daughters
    live in Bangladesh.

13. The claimant said that he had been told by the local council that  they
    are unable to provide the level of care that he can  provide,  although
    this was in a verbal conversation and there was no documentary evidence
    to support this. As well  as  providing  her  with  physical  care  and
    dealing with her medication and other medical needs, the claimant gives
    her emotional support  and  practical  support  by  looking  after  her
    financial affairs, assisting her with her daily prayers and taking  her
    out.

14. Judge Davidson said that she  adopted  the  findings  of  the  previous
    judges in relation to the claimant's relationship to  the  sponsor  and
    that the claimant was the primary carer of the sponsor (para  14).  She
    also took into account the fact that it had previously been found  that
    the sponsor suffered from significant disabilities and illness and that
    the part played by the  claimant  in  her  care,  including  acting  as
    interpreter, had been  accepted  (para  15).  She  said  that,  on  the
    evidence before her, the sponsor was heavily reliant on  the  claimant,
    not only for her  physical  care  but  for  all  the  other  support  a
    vulnerable person needs (para 16).

15. Judge Davidson then said, at paras 17-20, as follows:


       "17. The evidence shows that she is eligible for  adult  social  care
          from Hillingdon Council but there is no detail of what that would
          entail and whether it would replace all the  care  given  by  the
          Appellant.


       18.  I take into account the sponsor's forgetfulness, as a symptom of
          mild dementia and  the  impact  on  her  of  being  a  victim  of
          burglary. I find that, in the light  of  these  issues,  and  the
          significant language and cultural  barriers  encountered  by  the
          sponsor, that the care given by the local authority would not  be
          an adequate replacement for the care given by the sponsor.


       19.  I accept that the sponsor prefers her care to be  given  by  her
          grandson rather than a stranger but this is not the test. I  must
          be satisfied that the sponsor would be unable to  reside  in  the
          United Kingdom if her grandson were to be removed. I find that it
          would cause her enormous hardship if  her  grandson  were  to  be
          removed, such that the family may have to  consider  whether  she
          could remain in the United Kingdom. I  find  that  the  sponsor's
          need for [the claimant] goes beyond preference and convenience.


       20.  I accept that there are no other family members  in  the  United
          Kingdom who could provide care, since the  sponsor's  brother  is
          himself elderly and in need of care.


       21.  I therefore conclude that [the claimant] has shown that he has a
          derived right of residence under the Regulations."

      (my emphasis)

16. Although Judge Davidson referred  to  an  independent  social  worker's
    report at para 10 of her decision, she did not mention it, in terms, in
    her assessment of the case, at paras 14-21 of her decision.

17. The report  in  question  was  a  report  from  Mr  Maswood  Ahmed,  an
    independent social worker, dated 25 January 2019 (pages  44-65  of  the
    claimant's bundle). At page 52, the social worker said that the sponsor
    would be eligible for support following an assessment  under  the  Care
    Act 2014, the criteria for which he set out at page 53. At page 54,  he
    said that it was unlikely that the sponsor would be considered suitable
    to remain in the community if she were to live on her  own  or  without
    the support of the claimant and that it was likely that  a  high  costs
    package  of  support  with  extremely  complicated  routines  would  be
    required to manage her needs around the clock in a residential home for
    the elderly. At page 55, he said that the complicating factors  in  her
    case were that she does not speak English at all, that she has  limited
    knowledge of the wider society and how it functions  and  that  she  is
    likely to find it difficult to settled into a residential  home.  There
    was a severe shortage of residential homes that  have  facilities  that
    can meet all of the sponsor's cultural and religious needs as  well  as
    provide  "around  the   consistent   staffing   with   her   linguistic
    background".

Whether Judge Davidson had materially erred in law

The grounds

18. Mr Clarke relied upon the grounds but  distilled  the  lengthy  grounds
    into three bullet points, i.e. adequacy of reasoning, failure to follow
    precedent and failure to follow Devaseelan * [2002] UKIAT 00702.  Since
    I will need to deal with the written  grounds  in  any  event,  I  have
    summarised them as follows:

    (i)     (Para 1 of the grounds) (Ground 1)  Judge  Davidson  had  found
          that the claimant was the primary carer of the sponsor  but  there
          was no medical evidence or social worker's report to  confirm  the
          sponsor's specific medical and care requirements.

    (ii)    (Paras 2-4, paras 7 and 10 of the  grounds)  (Ground  2)  Judge
          Davidson gave inadequate reasons  for  finding  that  the  sponsor
          could not access adequate alternative care.

    (iii)   (Paras 5-6 of the grounds) (Ground 3) Judge  Davidson  had  not
          adequately  reasoned  her  finding  that  the  sponsor  would   be
          compelled to leave the United Kingdom and there was no evidence to
          support the claimant's assertion that this would be the case.

    (iv)    (Paras 6, 8-10 of the grounds) (Ground 4)  Judge  Davidson  had
          failed to apply relevant authorities, i.e.  Ruiz  Zambrano  [2011]
          EUECJ C34/09, Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; Reg 15A (3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs)
          Pakistan (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 89 (IAC), Devaseelan *  [2002]  UKIAT
          00702 and Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano)  [2015]
          UKUT 00560 (IAC).

    (v)     (Para 11 of the grounds) (Ground 5) Judge  Davidson  failed  to
          consider the public  interest  considerations  in  s.117B  of  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").

Submissions

19. Mr Clarke referred me to paras 65 and  66  of  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan in Ayinde and Thinjom and the  head-note  in  the
    case which reads:


       "(i) The deprivation of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of
          the rights attaching to the  status  of  European  Union  citizens
          identified in the decision in Zambrano  [2011]  EUECJ  C-34/09  is
          limited to safeguarding a British citizen's EU rights  as  defined
          in Article 20.


       (ii) The  provisions  of  reg.  15A  of  the  Immigration  (European
          Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended apply when  the  effect
          of removal of the carer of a British citizen renders  the  British
          citizen no longer able to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in
          another EEA state. This requires the carer to establish as a  fact
          that the British citizen will be forced to leave the territory  of
          the Union.


       (iii)     The requirement is not  met  by  an  assumption  that  the
          citizen will leave and does not involve a consideration of whether
          it would be reasonable for the carer to leave the United  Kingdom.
          A comparison of the British citizen's standard of living  or  care
          if the appellant remains  or  departs  is  material  only  in  the
          context of whether the  British  citizen  will  leave  the  United
          Kingdom.


       (iv) The Tribunal is required to examine critically a claim  that  a
          British citizen will leave the Union if the benefits he  currently
          receives by remaining in the United Kingdom  are  unlikely  to  be
          matched in the country in which he claims he  will  be  forced  to
          settle."

20. Mr Clarke reminded me that Judge  Hodgkinson  and  Judge  Robinson  had
    found that there was a paucity of evidence to show that the  care  that
    the sponsor needed could not be obtained from the local  authority  and
    therefore a paucity of evidence to  show  that  the  sponsor  would  be
    compelled to leave the United Kingdom. The only evidence  before  Judge
    Davidson was the evidence summarised by her at para 5,  i.e.  the  oral
    evidence of the claimant that he had been told by the  local  authority
    that it is unable to provide the sponsor with the level of care that he
    can provide. However, there was no documentary evidence to support  his
    evidence.

21. Mr Clarke referred me to the independent  social  worker's  report.  He
    submitted that it was clear from the report that, if the claimant  were
    to leave the UK, the sponsor would be assessed for her  needs.  It  was
    likely that she would not be  considered  suitable  to  remain  in  the
    community. She would require a package of around-the-clock care,  which
    would need to include assistance with language and other  cultural  and
    religious  needs,  within  a  residential  home.  However,  the  social
    worker's report was not evidence that such care would not be available.
    It simply stated that such care would be very expensive.

22. At para 17 of her decision, Judge Davidson had said  that  the  sponsor
    was eligible for adult social care from  Hillingdon  Council  but  that
    there was no detail of what that would  entail  and  whether  it  would
    replace all of the care given by the claimant. At  para  18,  she  said
    that she found that the care given by the local authority would not  be
    an adequate replacement for the care given by the claimant.  Mr  Clarke
    submitted that this finding was wholly unreasoned because there was  no
    evidence at all before the judge as to what care  the  local  authority
    would provide. He submitted that the judge therefore erred  in  failing
    to provide reasons for her finding at para 18, that the care  given  by
    the local authority if the claimant were to leave  the  United  Kingdom
    would be inadequate.

23. In Mr Clarke's submission, the main error was at  para  19,  where  the
    judge found that "... it would  cause  her  enormous  hardship  if  her
    grandson were to be removed, such that the family may have to  consider
    whether she could remain in the United Kingdom." This was wrong because
    it shows that the judge had applied the wrong test. He  submitted  that
    Judge Davidson did not  make  a  finding  that  the  sponsor  would  be
    compelled to leave the United  Kingdom  and  so  she  had  inadequately
    reasoned her finding  that  the  claimant  had  shown  that  he  had  a
    derivative right of residence.

24. Mr Clarke submitted that, in summary, the judge had  failed  to  engage
    with the evidence before her, failed to recognise the lack of  evidence
    to show what care the sponsor would receive from adult social  services
    or the local authority and applied the wrong test at para 19.

25. In response, Mr Ahmed submitted that, although the  decision  of  Judge
    Davidson was short, it was nevertheless a sound decision. The  findings
    that she made were open to her. She gave her reasons at paras 15-19  of
    her decision.  On the evidence that was before her, there  had  been  a
    material change in the sponsor's circumstances since the  decisions  of
    Judge Robinson and Judge Hodgkinson, as Judge  Davidson  summarised  at
    paras 5-8 of her decision. In addition, Judge Davidson had the  benefit
    of the independent social worker's report. In these  circumstances,  he
    submitted that Judge Davidson  was  justified  in  departing  from  the
    findings of Judge Robinson and Judge Hodgkinson. She  was  entitled  to
    find that the care that  the  sponsor  would  receive  from  the  local
    authority would not be an adequate replacement for the  care  that  the
    claimant gives. If the claimant were to leave, the circumstances  would
    compel her to leave the United Kingdom. She would not be  able  to  ask
    for support without the claimant's help. She would not even be able  to
    telephone for help.

26. Mr Ahmed reminded me that Judge Davidson had more evidence  before  her
    than Judge Robinson or Judge Hodgkinson had had, in  the  form  of  the
    independent social worker's report. He submitted that it was clear that
    Judge Davidson adopted the conclusions of the social worker.

Assessment

27. At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke submitted (para 23 above) that  the
    main error was at para 19 of Judge Davidson's decision,  in  that,  she
    had not made a finding that the sponsor would be compelled to leave the
    United Kingdom.

28. I can see substance in this submission. Although the final sentence  of
    para 15 and the second sentence of para 19 of Judge Davidson's decision
    show that she was aware that the question she had to decide was whether
    the sponsor would be unable to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
    claimant left, she fell short of making such a finding,  as  the  third
    sentence of para 19 shows. However, as  this  ground  was  not  in  the
    Secretary of State's written grounds and no application  was  made  for
    the Secretary of State's grounds to be amended, it would be  unfair  to
    take this point against the claimant.  I have therefore left it out  of
    account.

29. I can deal with ground 5 briefly. Section 117B of the 2002 Act sets out
    the public interest considerations that a court or tribunal  must  take
    into account when deciding the "public interest  question"  (s.117A(1),
    (2) and (3)), i.e. whether a decision is proportionate. In other words,
    it applies in cases in  which  Article  8  is  considered.  It  has  no
    application in deciding whether an individual has established  that  he
    or she  has  a  derivative  right  of  residence  under  the  2016  EEA
    Regulations. Ground 5 is therefore misconceived.

30.  In  relation  to  ground  4  and,  in  particular,  the  reference  to
    Devaseelan, it is clear that the Secretary of  State  relies  upon  the
    findings of Judge Robinson and Judge Hodgkinson, that the claimant  had
    not established that the sponsor could not obtain  the  care  that  she
    needed from the local authority because there was a paucity of evidence
    before them. To the extent that the  Secretary  of  State  relies  upon
    these findings as a starting point, the submission is misconceived. The
    principle in Devaseelan, that the findings of a  judge  in  a  previous
    appeal are a starting point, concerns findings of fact as to whether or
    not certain events said to have taken place in the past did take place;
    for example, an asylum seeker's account of events in the past which  he
    relies upon in order to establish his asylum  claim.  The  findings  of
    Judge Robinson and Judge  Hodgkinson,  that  there  was  a  paucity  of
    evidence before them to show that the sponsor could not obtain the care
    that she needed from the local authority, concerned the  state  of  the
    evidence before them concerning a future event,  as  opposed  to  being
    findings as to whether any particular events had occurred in the past.

31. The relevance of the findings of Judge Robinson and Judge Hodgkinson is
    that they put the claimant on notice of the evidential gap in his  case
    as presented  to  Judge  Robinson  and  Judge  Hodgkinson.  Instead  of
    producing documentary evidence of the care  that  the  local  authority
    would provide to the sponsor, he gave oral evidence to the effect  that
    the local authority had confirmed to him that it is unable  to  provide
    the level of care that he  can  provide  and  said  that  they  was  no
    documentary evidence to support this. Even if it can be said  that  the
    judge was entitled to accept  the  claimant's  oral  evidence  to  that
    effect as sufficient to discharge the burden of proof upon him  to  the
    standard of the balance of probabilities (an issue  I  have  not  taken
    against the claimant in deciding whether Judge Davidson had  materially
    erred in law because it was not raised  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds), the fact  is  that  the  claimant's  oral  evidence  did  not
    constitute evidence of the care that the local authority would provide.
    It was simply evidence that the local authority was unable  to  provide
    the level of care that he can provide, which is not the same.

32. The authorities relied  upon  in  ground  4  also  establish  that  any
    assessment of whether a British citizen would be compelled to leave the
    territory of the EU is highly fact-sensitive. The test  for  compulsion
    is an objective one. The Zambrano  principle  does  not  guarantee  any
    particular quality of life in the EU, although there would come a point
    where the consequences would become so serious for the EU citizen  that
    they would effectively be compelled to  leave.  The  test  was  one  of
    practical compulsion, i.e. that the EU citizen would be  left  with  no
    practical choice but to leave the EU if the  carer  left.  Whether  the
    boundary was crossed was a matter of fact and degree.

33. I noted that:

    (i)     On the evidence of the claimant and the sponsor  as  summarised
          at para 5 of the decision of Judge Davidson,  the  case  presented
          was that the local authority had  stated  that  it  is  unable  to
          provide all of the care that the claimant provided but he did  not
          give evidence of the care that the local authority would provide.

    (ii)    At para 17, Judge Davidson said that the sponsor  was  eligible
          for adult social care from Hillingdon Council but that  there  was
          no detail of what that would entail and whether it  would  replace
          all the care given by the claimant.

    (iii)   The report of the social worker was  to  the  effect  that  the
          sponsor would be re-assessed, that she  would  require  a  24-hour
          package of  care  to  include  language  and  other  cultural  and
          religious needs in a residential  home.  The  report  was  to  the
          effect that such a package of care would  be  very  expensive  and
          that there are huge financial constraints on local authorities but
          it did not state  that  such  a  24-hour  package  of  care  in  a
          residential home would not provided. The  social  worker  did  not
          state that the sponsor would not receive care that  addressed  her
          cultural, language and religious needs.

    (iv)    It was not suggested in evidence before Judge Davidson that the
          sponsor's emotional dependency on the claimant was such  that  she
          would still be compelled to leave the United Kingdom even  if  the
          local authority provided 24-hour care that addressed the  totality
          of her other needs (including her religious and  cultural  needs).
          It is clear that, in referring to "the  sponsor's  need  for  [the
          claimant]" in the final sentence of para 19,  Judge  Davidson  was
          referring to the care that the  sponsor  was  receiving  from  the
          claimant as opposed to her emotional  dependency  on  him:  it  is
          difficult to see why else she referred to such need going  "beyond
          preference and convenience".

34. Given the lack of evidence as explained at (i) above, it is  impossible
    to see why Judge Davidson found, at para 19, that  the  sponsor's  need
    for the claimant went beyond  preference  and  convenience,  a  finding
    which was wholly unreasoned.

35. Furthermore, given the gaps in the evidence before  Judge  Davidson  as
    described at (i), (ii) and (iii) above and  given  (iv)  above,  it  is
    impossible to see why she reached  her  finding,  at  para  18  of  her
    decision, that the care given by the local authority would  not  be  an
    adequate replacement  for  the  care  given  by  the  claimant.  It  is
    therefore impossible to see why she allowed the appeal.

36. I am therefore satisfied that grounds 2, 3 and 4, taken  together,  are
    established. It is plain that grounds 2, 3 and 4 were material  to  the
    judge's decision to allow the appeal. I therefore do not need  to  deal
    with ground 1.

37. For all of the reasons given above, I set aside the judge's decision to
    allow the appeal, and her finding, implicitly made,  that  the  sponsor
    would be compelled to leave the United Kingdom.

Re-making the decision on the claimant's appeal

Submissions

38. Mr Clarke reminded me that the burden was upon  the  claimant  to  show
    that the sponsor would be compelled  to  leave  the  territory  of  the
    United Kingdom if he were to be required to leave the  United  Kingdom.
    He submitted that the most that the evidence shows is that the claimant
    had said in evidence before Judge Davidson that the local  council  had
    informed him that they would be unable to provide the necessary care.

39. In Mr Clarke's  submission,  there  was  no  evidence  from  the  local
    authority as to what care the sponsor would need if the  claimant  were
    to leave the United Kingdom and whether such care would be provided, if
    necessary by the provision of care in a residential  home.  The  social
    worker's  report  highlights  the  problems  of   funding   for   local
    authorities and states that  the  sponsor  would  need  to  go  into  a
    residential home for the elderly whereas she is at present in sheltered
    accommodation.

40. Mr Clarke therefore submitted that it is necessary for the claimant  to
    demonstrate that residential home care would not be  available  to  the
    sponsor. The social worker states that there is a problem because there
    are budget constraints on local authorities.  The  social  worker  also
    states, at page 55, that the sponsor is likely to find it difficult  to
    settle into a residential home. In the second paragraph on page 55,  he
    refers to the sponsor having cultural  and  religious  needs.  However,
    there was no evidence that such assistance would not  be  available  to
    her.

41. Accordingly, Mr Clarke submitted that it was simply not open to  me  to
    find that the sponsor would be compelled to leave the  United  Kingdom.
    He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

42. Mr Ahmed relied upon his skeleton  argument  and  the  social  worker's
    report.  He  submitted  that  the  social   worker's   report   was   a
    comprehensive report. The social worker had said that the care that the
    claimant was providing to the sponsor was "not likely to  be  available
    to her in a way that will be acceptable and reassuring for  her  or  at
    the same level as can be provided by [the claimant] as he  is  able  to
    meet all of her religious, cultural and practical care needs" (para  1,
    page 45). It was the social worker's opinion  that  the  sponsor  would
    "seriously struggle to be able to live in the UK" without the help  and
    support of the claimant (para 3, page  45).  It  was  his  professional
    opinion that "it would be of considerable benefit to [the  sponsor]  if
    [the claimant] was to continue with his established private and  family
    life in the UK on the basis that he is a key family member and  primary
    carer for [the sponsor]" and that granting the  claimant's  application
    would "greatly assist [the sponsor] who is indeed a very vulnerable and
    elderly lady now 82 years old, who is in need of around  the  clock  24
    hours support, 365 days a year, that cannot reasonably  be  substituted
    by any state provisions that would be able to meet  all  of  her  needs
    particularly her cultural needs providing the  personalised  care  that
    [the claimant] as a family member is able to  provide"  (para  3,  page
    45).

43. Mr Ahmed submitted that given the circumstances of  the  sponsor,  i.e.
    that she is disabled, that she is unable to speak English, that she  is
    illiterate, she has been burgled and her medical condition,  she  would
    be compelled to leave the United Kingdom. He submitted  that  the  care
    that the local authority would be able to provide would  not  meet  her
    needs.

Assessment

44. I have summarised the key principles that emerge from  the  authorities
    at para 32 above and quoted the head-note in Ayinde and Thinjom at para
    19 above.

45. The burden of proof is upon the claimant to establish, to the  standard
    of the balance of probabilities, that, if he were to leave  the  United
    Kingdom, the sponsor would be compelled to leave the United Kingdom and
    therefore the territory of the EU. It has not  been  suggested  by  the
    Secretary of State that she could live in some other part of the EU.

46. The claimant is plainly aware from the decisions of Judge Robinson  and
    Judge Hodgkinson that his appeals before them failed because there  was
    a lack of documentary evidence from the  local  authority  establishing
    precisely what care it would provide for the sponsor. No such  evidence
    was produced before Judge Davidson. As I  said  at  para  6  above,  no
    application was made to  admit  evidence  that  was  not  before  Judge
    Davidson. I therefore re-make the decision on the claimant's appeal  on
    such evidence as is before me.

47. The claimant's oral evidence, summarised at para 5 of Judge  Davidson's
    decision, that the local authority informed him that it  is  unable  to
    provide the care that he provides to the sponsor, is unsatisfactory for
    two reasons.  Firstly, it is not evidence of the care  that  the  local
    authority would provide. Secondly, in any event, his oral  evidence  is
    insufficient to discharge the burden of proof  upon  him  to  establish
    relevant facts  to  the  standard  of  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    particularly in view of the fact that he has had two  previous  appeals
    by which he was put on notice of the evidential gap in his case.

48. Furthermore, the claimant's failure  to  produce  documentary  evidence
    from the local authority to support his oral evidence goes against  the
    credibility of his evidence. If it is true  that  he  had  had  such  a
    conversation, it is wholly lacking  in  credibility  that  he  did  not
    obtain documentary evidence in support. He has been legally represented
    throughout. He had legal representation at  the  appeals  before  Judge
    Robinson,  Judge  Hodgkinson  and  Judge  Davidson.  In  all   of   the
    circumstances, I am in no doubt that  the  reason  why  no  documentary
    evidence has been submitted is not because he has  not  considered  the
    need for such evidence but because the written evidence he has received
    or that he knows he will from the local  authority  does  not/will  not
    support his case.

49. I have considered the independent social worker's report with care.  Mr
    Ahmed relied, in particular, on the following:

    (i)     The fact that the social worker had said that the care that the
          claimant was providing to  the  sponsor  was  "not  likely  to  be
          available to her in a way that will be acceptable  and  reassuring
          for her or at the same level as can be provided by [the  claimant]
          as he is able to meet all of her religious, cultural and practical
          care needs" (para 1, page 45).

    (ii)    It was the social worker's professional opinion that "it  would
          be of considerable benefit to [the sponsor] if [the claimant]  was
          to continue with his established private and family life in the UK
          ..." and that granting the claimant's application  would  "greatly
          assist [the sponsor]  ...  cannot  reasonably  be  substituted  by
          [state provision] ...".

50. However, it is not a  case  of  considering  what  level  of  care  can
    reasonably be provided by the state, nor is it a  case  of  considering
    what level of care is acceptable to the sponsor or of  benefit  to  the
    sponsor.

51. Mr Ahmed submitted that the sponsor would not even be able to  use  the
    telephone to call for help. This was an attempt to give evidence, which
    is unacceptable and which I reject in any event. I do not accept  that,
    if she required assistance, the sponsor would  be  unable  to  use  the
    emergency systems that will no doubt have been in place  for  residents
    at the sheltered accommodation where she lives to  call  for  immediate
    assistance. I do not accept  that  any  assistance  she  requires  with
    language would not be provided. There is no evidence to that effect, in
    any event.

52. The sponsor has mild dementia (social worker's report, page  55)  which
    currently presents as forgetfulness. She also suffers from  stress  and
    heart problems. She has dizzy spells and suffers from falls.  She  also
    suffers from pain. The medication she takes includes  anti-depressants.
    She has been a victim of burglary and is nervous around people she does
    not know. She does not speak English. She is illiterate.

53. Local authorities arrange to provide care  for  people  suffering  from
    various medical conditions and who are vulnerable for various  reasons.
    They arrange care for people who need interpreters and for  people  who
    have different types of cultural and religious needs.  In  the  instant
    case, the independent social worker does  not  suggest  that  the  care
    provided by the local authority to the sponsor would  not  address  her
    cultural, language and religious needs.

54. If the claimant were to leave the United Kingdom, the sponsor would  be
    assessed under the Care Act 2014,  as  the  independent  social  worker
    states in his  report.  She  is  in  sheltered  accommodation.  She  is
    therefore already known to the local authority. At its highest, and  as
    Mr Clarke submitted, the independent social worker's report is  to  the
    effect that a 24-package of care and support  in  a  residential  home,
    which I acknowledge includes language and other cultural and  religious
    needs, would be very expensive. However,  as  I  said  at  para  33(iv)
    above, the report does not state that such care would not be provided.

55. There is simply no evidence that the sponsor would not receive adequate
    care in the United Kingdom, if the claimant were to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. In the absence of such evidence, I do not accept  the  opinion
    of the independent social worker  that  the  sponsor  would  "seriously
    struggle to be able to live in the UK" without the help and support  of
    the claimant. It is obvious that he  reached  this  conclusion  on  the
    basis that, in view of the financial constraints on local  authorities,
    it would be unreasonable to expect the local authority responsible  for
    the sponsor's care to address all of her needs in a residential home. I
    have already explained why the claimant's oral evidence is lacking.

56. Whilst I accept that the social worker's report shows that the  sponsor
    is emotionally dependent on the  claimant,  it  was  not  suggested  in
    evidence before Judge Davidson or in the social worker's report, and as
    I said at para 33(iv) above, that the sponsor's emotional dependency on
    the claimant was such that she would be compelled to leave  the  United
    Kingdom  even  if  the  local  authority  provided  24-hour  care  that
    addressed the totality of her other needs (including her religious  and
    cultural needs). I would be sceptical about the credibility of any such
    belated evidence, given that this is the claimant's third appeal on the
    same issue.

57. Given that there is no such evidence before me and given the evidential
    gaps in the evidence before me, as explained above,  I  am  simply  not
    satisfied that, if the claimant were to leave the United  Kingdom,  the
    sponsor would be left with no practical choice but to leave the  United
    Kingdom.

58. The claimant therefore does not satisfy regulation 16(5)  of  the  2016
    EEA Regulations. I therefore re-make the  decision  on  the  appeal  by
    dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

59. It will be seen that I have decided this appeal on  the  basis  of  the
    findings of fact of Judge Davidson, including  her  findings  that  the
    claimant is the sponsor's primary carer and that he provides  her  with
    24-hour care. I have not taken into  account,  against  the  claimant's
    credibility, the  fact  that  the  evidence  given  that  the  claimant
    provides the sponsor with 24-hour care is difficult to  reconcile  with
    the fact that she lives in sheltered  accommodation  and  the  claimant
    does not live with her.

      Decision

    The decision of Judge of  First-tier  Tribunal  Davidson  involved  the
    making of material errors of law sufficient to require  it  to  be  set
    aside. The decision was set aside.

      I re-make the decision by dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision.






[pic]Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date: 2 June 2019
