
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04835/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4th January 2018                  |On 17th January 2018                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S M REEDS
                 DEPUTY JUDGE FARRELLY OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                       MISS MOTUNDE REMILEKUN OLUJOBI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr James Khalid, Counsel, instructed by Chancery CS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Antony Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. This appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Bowler at Hatton Cross on 25
      September 2017 and was dismissed. The  appeal  was  in  respect  of  a
      decision taken by the respondent  on  15  March  2016.  That  decision
      refused the appellant's application for confirmation she was  entitled
      to a right  of  permanent  residence  by  virtue  of  European  Treaty
      provisions. The decision also sought to revoke her existing  residence
      card. This was on the basis that her marriage to an  EU  national  was
      one of convenience.

   2. Neither the appellant nor her representatives, Chancery CS Solicitors,
      attended the appeal. The judge noted her representatives had  provided
      an appeal bundle and they had been sent a notice of  hearing.  In  the
      absence of any further explanation  the  judge  decided  to  hear  the
      appeal in the appellant's absence.

   3. The judge concluded that the evidence, principally  a  home  visit  by
      immigration officials, provided a reasonable basis for contending  the
      appellant's marriage was one of convenience. At paragraph 33 the judge
      said:
         "I have taken account of the Appellant's  Witness  Statement  where
         she denies saying what  the  immigration  officers'  note  records.
         However, the Appellant did not attend and  therefore  her  evidence
         could not be tested in cross-examination. Consequently I reduce the
         weight I give to her evidence."

   4. The judge went on to find that  the  evidence,  principally  the  home
      visit  by  integration  officials,  discharged  the  legal  burden  of
      demonstrating this was a marriage of convenience.  The  appellant  had
      not discharge the  evidential  burden  that  it  was  not.  The  judge
      referred to the absence of supporting evidence, such as from  friends,
      to show that the marriage was genuine.

The Permission to appeal.

   5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  based  on  the  assertion  by  the
      appellant's representatives that they were not advised of the date  of
      hearing. The application contends that whilst the original hearing was
      scheduled for 25 September 2017 the Tribunal issued them with a  fresh
      Notice of Hearing, on the 14th August 2017, for a  hearing  listed  on
      the 16th October 2017.

The Upper Tribunal

   6. Mr Khalid, Counsel for the appellant, said his instructing  solicitors
      had prepared an appeal bundle in anticipation of the scheduled hearing
      for 25 September 2017. There is a Notice on file, dated 15  May  2017,
      from the tribunal advising the parties of this hearing. The appeal was
      assigned the reference number  EA/04835/16.This  is  the  appeal  that
      First tier Judge Bowler dealt  with.  They  then  received  a  further
      notice of hearing; dated 14 August 2017, advising of a hearing  on  16
      October 2017.They did not attend the earlier hearing.

   7. Mr Khalid advised that  the  appellant  attended  the  hearing  on  16
      October 2017, by which stage she had received the  decision  of  First
      tier Judge Bowler. She produced this decision to the second judge  who
      adjourned the listed hearing so that enquiries could be made.

   8. Mr. Melvin,  Senior  Presenting  Officer,  relied  upon  the  rule  24
      response. That response refers  to  a  note  made  by  the  Presenting
      Officer in attendance at the hearing of 16 October  2017.  It  records
      that that appeal had been assigned file number EA/03631/2016. The note
      records that it was apparent at the hearing that the appellant had  in
      fact two appeals, one of which had already been  dealt  with  and  was
      dismissed.

Consideration

   9. The file reference EA/03631/2016 has still not been linked to the file
      in the present appeal. Consequently, we have limited information about
      that appeal. So far as we  can  tell  from  the  representatives  that
      second appeal has not progressed further.

  10. The application for permission to appeal refers  to  a  letter  of  14
      August 2017 and suggests a new date of hearing  was  being  fixed.  No
      such letter has been produced.  What  is  available  is  a  Notice  of
      Hearing for the 14th August 2017. This was  addressed  solely  to  the
      appellant's solicitors. Notably, it has a different  reference  number
      from the one issued on the 15th May 2017 and refers to a  "Mr"  rather
      than "Miss" Olujobi.

  11. We accept that a possible explanation  of  events  is  that  when  the
      appellant's representatives received the later Notice of Hearing  they
      assumed that the date of the earlier hearing had changed. In  fairness
      to them the Tribunal should also have noted the different appeal files
      and linked the appeals. Furthermore, the  appellant's  representatives
      did write to the Tribunal by letter dated 12  May  2016  pointing  out
      that the appellant was a `Miss' and not a `Mr'. However, the  Tribunal
      continued to make this mistake.

Conclusion

  12. We are satisfied that  the  interests  of  justice  require  that  the
      decision of First-tier Judge Bowler be set aside. This is on the basis
      a procedural error arose  of  such  consequence  as  to  amount  to  a
      material error of law.  We  extract  the  public  law  principal  from
      Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT   00418   (IAC)   that
      ultimately the test to be applied is that of fairness: was  there  any
      deprivation of the affected  party's  right  to  a  fair  hearing?  It
      appears that the appellant intended to be present at  her  appeal.  It
      cannot be said her absence  would  have  made  no  difference  to  the
      outcome. The issue in the appeal was genuineness of her  marriage.  It
      is apparent from paragraph 33 of the decision that the judge  drew  an
      adverse  inference  from  her  absence  and  that  of  any  supporting
      witnesses.

Decision

A material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Bowler
dismissing the appellant's  appeal  has  been  established.  The  matter  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 15 January 2018



Directions.

   1. The appeal is remitted for a de novo hearing before any First-tier
      Tribunal judge except First tier Judge Bowler.


   2. The parties should check what decisions are being appealed and any
      outstanding appeals should be linked for hearing together.

   3. The appellant's representatives should advise if an interpreter is
      required.

   4. We have the original bundle amounting to 53 pages from the appellant's
      representative. It is for them to consider any need for updating;
      bearing in mind the circumstances at the date of hearing will be
      relevant.

   5. The respondent's original bundle contains a summary of the home visit
      by Home Office officials. If the respondent is relying upon any
      further evidence in relation to the marriage this should be provided
      to the appellant's representatives immediately.

   6. It is anticipated the hearing should last no more than one and a full
      half hours.


