
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04348/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft Teams     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 June 2021                              |On 14 July 2021               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                           Yousaf Muhammad Sohall
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tariq of West London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He appealed to a Judge of
the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 2
August 2019 refusing his application for a residence card as an extended
family member of an EEA national as defined in Regulation 8 of the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   The claim was based on the appellant's relationship with his brother,
the sponsor, and the relevant period is that, as noted by the judge at
paragraph 26 of his decision, between 2006 to 2011 when the appellant was
living in Pakistan, during which time the sponsor, his brother Javid Iqbal
was living in France.

3.   There had been an earlier appeal on the same basis in 2015.  The judge
in that case as in this case also was not satisfied with the evidence of
dependency.

4.   It was accepted that the appellant and the sponsor are related as
claimed and also that the sponsor was exercising Community rights at the
relevant times.

5.   In her decision letter the Secretary of State did not accept that the
appellant was dependent on or residing with the sponsor immediately prior
to entering the United Kingdom.  The appellant with regard to the period of
2006 to 2011 had previously provided four MoneyGram receipts and had now
provided money transfer receipts from ZeeQue Financial Services and a
letter from Garrison Public High School.  In his witness statement he said
that at the time of the previous hearing he was only able to produce four
money transfer receipts from Asma Currency Exchange.  Those are in his
bundle and cover the period from February 2009 to September 2010.  Asma
Currency Exchange had provided a response to an email request, stating that
the money was received from Javid Iqbal.  The judge noted the MoneyGram
receipts and the name of the receiver, which was the appellant.  These were
after the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom and were from the
sponsor in France.

6.   The appellant in his evidence said that the sponsor had paid for his
education in Pakistan.  He said that whilst he lived in a joint household
with his brothers and his parents they were not able to support him.  He
also said that the sponsor provided money for him to study in the United
Kingdom.  The judge noted the terms of the school letter, which confirmed
that the appellant studied at the school between 2002 to 2008.  It stated:
"Mr Javid Iqbal, his elder brother who lived in France, used to visit us
twice a year to obtain his progress report and also paid his fees in
advance for upcoming months".  The sponsor said that the fees were paid
once a year in cash.  He had not brought the receipts to the hearing.  The
evidence of the appellant was regarded by the judge as differing in that he
had stated that there was a card which showed that each term's fees were
paid.  He also said that money was sent for his maintenance.  The judge
noted that there were no receipts from 2006 to 2008 and the only record of
support was the letter from the school.  There were receipts from currency
exchange and also ZeeQue for the period after the appellant left the school
and before he came to the United Kingdom.  These showed eighteen payments
between January 2009 and January 2011.  The judge noted that no documents
were produced to the respondent with the application and the ZeeQue
receipts were only produced with the appellant's bundle in December 2019.
They were produced nine to ten years after the transactions to which they
referred.  The judge considered this to raise questions about their
validity and the documents were to be considered in line with the overall
credibility of the evidence.

7.   The judge said that he needed to be satisfied that the money was not
for maintaining a particular standard of living or for luxuries but was
provided for the appellant's essential needs.  It was not necessary that
the support was the only money provided but that it was necessary for the
appellant's essential needs.  The judge considered that with many family
members in Pakistan the evidence was hard to believe.  It was a joint
household with many members working.  The sponsor had given evidence at the
previous Tribunal hearing of his family in France.  No questions were asked
about their whereabouts or how he maintained both them and the appellant.
Whilst a rough calculation was given of needs, the actual outgoings of the
appellant had not been shown.  The judge commented that the letter from the
school lacked detail and amounts of money paid.  No bank statements had
been provided to show payments as the payments were said to be in cash and
no receipts produced.  The judge said there was a discrepancy in that the
school said that the brother came twice a year and the sponsor that he went
and paid once a year with a receipt given and the appellant said that there
was a payment card used each term.  The judge considered that the father
retired in 1995 when the sponsor would have been about 19 and apart from
one brother the others were younger and the father must have been able to
provide for his family on his pension at that stage.

8.   The judge noted the findings of the judge at the earlier hearing as
being the starting point for his considerations.  The judge there had found
that the appellant had provided no evidence which the judge accepted that
the sponsor had been meeting his essential living needs prior to the
sponsor moving to live in the United Kingdom.  The judge said that he had
noted the additional evidence of receipts and the oral evidence given.
There had been no evidence to state that the money was for the appellant's
essential needs.  The evidence conflicted over certain aspects of the case
and lacked credibility in certain areas which he had highlighted.  The new
documents were obtained a long time after the transactions and the judge
did not accept their validity in the light of the overall credibility of
the evidence.

9.   He went on to say that even if it were accepted that these payments
were made he was not satisfied that the money was needed for the
appellant's essential needs.  There had not been anything to verify that
the appellant was in need of this money.  This was especially true in view
of the findings of the earlier judge and the explanation of the joint
household given at that time.  There it had been said that the family lived
as a joint household and all the brothers provided financial assistance to
their father.  On his own evidence the appellant had said that they lived
as a joint household, which meant that all of his brothers assisted his
father financially so the appellant could be maintained by his father and
his "essential living needs" were met.

10.  The judge concluded that on the information provided the appellant was
not dependent upon the sponsor from 2006 to 2011.  He said that he had
noted and taken account of the case law about regular payments and had
looked at the specific evidence provided and reminded himself about the
burden of proof and the standard of proof.  The appeal was as a consequence
dismissed.

11.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the basis
in particular that the judge had failed to consider the reliability of the
ZeeQue Financial Services receipts within the context of the evidence as a
whole and in particular the sponsor's witness statement which indicated
that the receipts had been obtained on a recent visit to Pakistan.

12.  In his submissions, Mr Tariq adopted and developed the points made in
the grounds of appeal and also in his skeleton argument.  He went through
the evidence that had been before the judge.  The sponsor had paid for the
appellant's school fees as his other brothers could not do so.  ZeeQue
money transfers for living and college fees had been provided as the
appellant's father was not able to pay.  The receipts were in the
appellant's name.  The school had been paid in cash.  The sponsor had
managed to obtain the ZeeQue receipts.  He had provided extra money as and
when needed.  The appellant would have to show his ID card in order to get
the money.  The evidence was very strong and the credibility of the
appellant and the sponsor had not been disputed.  It was noted that no
questions had been asked about the brother's family in France.

13.  In his witness statement, the sponsor had said as recorded at
paragraph 10 about the money being for essential needs in contrast to what
the judge had found.  His findings were contrary to the facts about the
appellant's needs.  It should be questioned why they would be sent to the
appellant to collect as cash when there were other siblings.  The matter
was to be considered in light of the guidance in Reyes [2013] UKUT 00314
(IAC).  It was a factual test and one of a broad approach being needed to
be taken with regard to the circumstances.  The appellant was the youngest
of a big family and the money was sent as he needed it for clothing and
schooling.  The evidence had been consistent.  The issue of dependency had
been addressed and the reasoning was inadequate.  It was not just a
question of weight.  Detailed reasoning was needed if the witness statement
about the family's circumstances was not accepted and it should be
questioned why the payments would be made to the youngest brother and over
such a lengthy period.  In his witness statement at paragraphs 4 and 7 the
sponsor referred to the difficulties in obtaining documents.  It was
plausible to obtain the letter from the school and he had said how he had
got the ZeeQue receipts.

14.  In her submissions, Ms Isherwood argued that the reasoning was
required to be adequate and sufficient and that had been done by the judge.
 He had noted contradictions, at paragraph 29 of his decision.  He had gone
through the evidence.  There were contradictions about the bank accounts
and the judge had followed the guidance in Reyes.  He had clearly
acknowledged and considered the evidence at paragraphs 26 and 27 and
considered at paragraph 28 the discrepancies with regard to the payment of
the school fees.  The inconsistencies had been highlighted.  There was a
lack of bank statements etc. to support what was asserted.  The reasoning
was adequate and the judge had not erred in law.

15.  By way of reply, Mr Tariq argued that with regard to the claimed
discrepancies about how the school was paid, when one looked at paragraph 9
of the judge's decision there was no mention that the appellant claimed
there was a payment for each term.  The brother had visited and paid and
said that he paid cash and this was shown through the money receipts.  The
school letter was credible.  Though there was a lack of bank statements, it
was a question of the balance of probabilities only and it was relevant
that it was the youngest brother to whom this money was paid.  The judge
had not followed the guidance in Reyes which required a holistic
examination of the facts and circumstances.  There was evidence and witness
statements which had been found to be credible and had not been questioned.
 The ZeeQue payments covered the crucial period.  It was clear from the
witness statements that the money was needed, in contrast to what the judge
had said at paragraph 31 of the decision.

16.  I reserved my decision.

17.  The judge properly noted the findings of the judge at the earlier
hearing and the conclusion is summarised in his decision at paragraph 30.
He went on to say that he had noted the additional evidence of receipts and
the oral evidence given.  He referred to conflicts in the evidence over
certain aspects of the case.  This, I think, is in particular a reference
to the fact that the school letter referred to the sponsor visiting twice a
year to obtain a progress report and paid the appellant's fees in advance
for upcoming months, and the sponsor said that the fees were paid once a
year in cash and had not brought the receipts to the hearing.  The
appellant's evidence was that there was a card which showed that each
term's fees were paid.  In the summary of his oral evidence at paragraph 9
he had said that the fees were paid in cash and there was a card from the
school which used to state it was paid but he no longer had the card.

18.  I consider that it was open to the judge to have concerns about
credibility of the evidence, bearing in mind what I agree are discrepancies
in the evidence as to the way in which the payment of the school fees was
made.  I also consider that it was open to him to have the doubts that he
had about the very late production of the ZeeQue receipts which were not
produced at the earlier hearing and which properly raised questions about
their validity.  All the appellant's brother, the sponsor, said about the
ZeeQue receipts was that at the earlier hearing he was only able to produce
four money transfer receipts from Asma Currency Exchange and since then he
had been able to trace money receipts from ZeeQue Financial Services
Limited in Pakistan.  I consider that it was open to the judge also to find
lacking in credibility the fact that there were so many family members in
Pakistan, a joint household with many members working, that the money was
necessary for the essential needs of the appellant.  The letter from the
school was regarded, again a finding open to the judge, as lacking in
detail and/or lacking evidence as to the amounts of money paid and there
was as accepted a lack of bank statements to show the payments.  It was a
relevant point to note at the end of paragraph 29 that the father retired
in 1995 when the sponsor would have been about 19 and not providing for the
family or the appellant and yet that the father must have been able to
provide for his family on his pension at that stage.  Though the judge did
not refer specifically to the brief explanation given by the sponsor of the
fact that he had now been able to obtain the ZeeQue receipts, it is clear
that that evidence was before the judge and was properly considered.  It
was not necessary for him to refer specifically to the fact that payments
were made to the appellant rather than any other member of the family.  In
my view, it was open to the judge not to accept the credibility of the new
documents in light of his particular and general concerns about
credibility.  The alternative findings were also open to him.  He properly
bore in mind the findings of the earlier judge and the explanation of the
joint household given at that time which led him not to be satisfied that
the money was required for the appellant's essential needs.  This
alternative finding was also open to the judge.

19.  In conclusion therefore, I find that the judge did not err in law and
his decision dismissing this appeal is maintained.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 7 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
