
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04204/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22nd February 2018                 |On 6th March 2018                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                            serge olivier guipier
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Robison promulgated on 26 June 2017, in which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his application  for  an  EEA  permanent
    Residence Card dated 6 April 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of the Ivory Coast,  born  on  23  December
    1973 who was issued with an EEA Residence Card on 4 October 2011 as the
    spouse of Ms Halimata Cisse, an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom.  He made an application on 11 October 2016 for a
    permanent Residence Card  as  a  person  who  had  retained  rights  of
    residence following divorce from his wife.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 26 June  2017  on  the  basis
    that she was not satisfied that the Appellant had  provided  sufficient
    evidence of (i) his former spouse exercising free  movement  rights  in
    the United Kingdom at the time of  their  divorce;  (ii)  the  marriage
    having lasted for at least three years and that the Appellant  and  his
    former spouse had resided in the United Kingdom for at least  one  year
    during their marriage; and  (iii)  the  Appellant  currently  being  in
    employment, self-employment or being economically self-sufficient as if
    he were an EEA national.

 4. Judge Robison dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 26 June
    2017 on the basis that the couple  had  not  cohabited  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least three years, nor that the marriage had lasted  for
    three years such that the requirements  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the "EEA Regulations")  had  not  been
    satisfied for a permanent Residence Card to be issued or the appeal  to
    be allowed.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals  on  the  ground  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law by confusing the requirements for  cohabitation
    in the United Kingdom with the requirement that the marriage had lasted
    for at least three years, as set out in regulation  10(5)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and that on the facts sufficient evidence had been accepted
    which showed those requirements had been met.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Martin on all grounds  on  19
    December 2017.

 7.  The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the  appeal  hearing,  nor  did  any
    representative.  Despite Aldgate Immigration having put  themselves  on
    record for the Appellant shortly prior to the  hearing,  they  did  not
    attend  and  when  contacted  denied  they  were  instructed  by   this
    Appellant.  In any event, the Home Officer Presenting Officer  conceded
    on behalf of the Respondent that there was a material error of  law  in
    the application of the EEA Regulations in the decision of Judge Robison
    and I therefore considered it to be in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the error of law  hearing  even  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant as no further oral submissions were needed from him or on his
    behalf to justly deal with the appeal.

Findings and reasons

 1. Judge Robison,  in  paragraphs  4  to  6  of  her  decision,  correctly
    identifies the relevant  provisions  of  the  EEA  Regulations  to  the
    present appeal, setting out the relevant provisions  of  regulation  10
    and 15 of the same.  In paragraph 7, she correctly identified that  the
    focus of this appeal is on the question of whether  the  Appellant  has
    proved that the marriage lasted at least  three  years,  and  that  the
    couple resided in the United Kingdom for at least one year of  marriage
    (other reasons for refusal having been conceded or sufficient  evidence
    having been provided to satisfy them).

 2. However, the Judge did not apply the provisions that  he  had  set  out
    correctly to the findings of fact he made.  For example,  in  paragraph
    10 there is reference to the issue of the couple having  cohabited  for
    at least three years (not the identified issues that the  marriage  had
    lasted for at least three years and  the  couple  had  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom for at least one year) and  in  paragraph  14  that  the
    documents did not prove that the couple  had  cohabited  for  at  least
    three years, or indeed that the marriage had lasted for at least  three
    years.  The latter finding being completely contrary  to  the  accepted
    evidence that the couple married on 28 May 2009 and divorced on 31 July
    2014, meaning that the marriage had  in  fact  lasted  more  than  five
    years.  It is clear that the Judge confused the requirements of  length
    of marriage and period of cohabitation in this appeal  and  because  of
    that confusion, dismissed the appeal,  despite  factual  findings  that
    showed that the relevant  requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations  were
    satisfied.  That is a clear and material error of law meaning  that  it
    is necessary to set aside the decision of Judge Robison.

 3. At the hearing, I indicated to the Home Officer Presenting Officer that
    there was sufficient  information  in  the  factual  findings  made  in
    documents before the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  me  to  remake  the
    decision on the papers in the Appellant's  favour.   In  response,  she
    submitted that the Respondent would normally look for greater  evidence
    of the Appellant's circumstances than just  a  tenancy  agreement,  for
    example, she would expect to see utility bills or other  correspondence
    linking a couple to a particular address; but accepted  that  that  was
    not a specific requirements set out in the EEA Regulations but a matter
    of evidence to be determined by the Tribunal.

 4. I am satisfied that  although  there  may  have  been  better  or  more
    comprehensive evidence from the Appellant as to cohabitation  with  his
    spouse, there was sufficient evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and therefore also before me, in the form of a joint tenancy agreement,
    that he was cohabiting with his wife at a property in Halley Road  from
    2 December 2010 to 5 January 2012.  That is a period of more  than  one
    year of cohabitation in the United Kingdom during  the  period  of  the
    Appellants marriage.  Together with the evidence which  had  also  been
    accepted by the Respondent at  the  time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing that the marriage had lasted between 28 May 2019  and  31  July
    2014 when the couple  were  divorced,  satisfies  the  requirements  of
    regulation 10(5)(d)(i) of the EEA Regulations.  In the absence  of  any
    other outstanding issues raised by the Respondent as to satisfaction of
    the relevant requirements of the  EEA  Regulations,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant  has  established  that  he  meets  the  requirements  for  a
    permanent Residence Card set out in regulation 15(1)(b) in  conjunction
    with regulation 10(5) and I therefore allow his appeal.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision and remake it.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         28th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

