
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04484/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision made at Field House         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 March 2020                      |On 10 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                              USMAN AHMED MALIK
                       [ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Moffatt  promulgated  23.8.19,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse   his
    application made on 23.9.16 for an EEA Residence card, pursuant to  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 2. As explained in my decision promulgated 13.2.20, following the decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755,  out of time,  the
    appellant sought to appeal the respondent's decision of 23.3.17  which,
    in reliance on Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC),
    purported to refuse a right of appeal.

 3. The appellant applied to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal out of time, which was granted by  Judge  Shanahan  on  17.7.18.
    However, it appears that Judge  Shanahan  may  have  misunderstood  the
    decision which the appellant sought to challenge and  assumed  that  it
    was the later decision of  the  respondent,  dated  8.2.18.  Permission
    having been granted and time extended,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also
    misunderstood  the  decision  under  challenge,  with   Judge   Moffatt
    believing it to be the later decision of 8.2.18.

 4. Subsequently, the appellant sought to appeal the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that the judge  was  considering  the  wrong
    decision. Had the error been spotted sooner,  it  is  likely  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal would have set its decision aside and  reconsidered
    the application for an extension of time  to  appeal  the  decision  of
    23.3.17, and, if extension/permission granted, the substantive decision
    in the appeal.

 5. In my decision and  directions  promulgated  13.2.20,  on  the  renewed
    application to the UT for permission to appeal,  I  indicated  that  my
    preliminary view was that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should be set aside for error of law and the  matter  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for  reconsideration  of  the  application  for  an
    extension of  time  to  appeal  the  decision  of  23.3.17  and  for  a
    substantive  decision  on  the  correct  decision  under  challenge.  I
    directed that absent any written objection within 14  days,  the  Upper
    Tribunal would proceed to determine the appeal without an oral  hearing
    and remit the matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  indicated.  No
    response has been received.

 6. In the circumstances and for the reasons explained above, I  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    made a decision in respect of a decision of the respondent that was not
    under challenge and failed to address the decision  against  which  the
    appellant had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. This is a case which
    falls squarely within the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing and  that  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2 to deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  including  with  the
    avoidance of delay, it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal.



     Signed

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated    2 March 2020



Consequential Directions

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House;

The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

The appeal may be listed before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  with  the
exception of Judges Moffatt and Appleyard;



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.



     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated: 2 March 2020


