
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04411/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2018                          |On 28 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                fatima vafaie
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy instructed by Kent Immigration and
Visa Advice
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mrs Vafaie against the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which dismissed her appeal against the  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing her a residence card as a family member of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom,  that  refusal
    being dated 25 April 2017.

2.   It was common ground that the  judge's  decision  requires  to  be  set
    aside and remade.   He  accepted  that  the  appellant's  sponsor,  her
    husband, moved to the Republic of Ireland in January 2015  to  exercise
    his treaty rights as a worker or self-employed, that he registered  for
    work and that he found employment as  a  painter  and  decorator.   The
    judge accepted his evidence that there was insufficient work to support
    him and that that employment came to an end in  March  2016.   After  a
    search for work he and the appellant moved back to the  United  Kingdom
    in May 2016 where he resumed employment with a taxi company  for  which
    he had previously worked.  The judge found therefore that he had  lived
    in the Republic of Ireland and exercised treaty rights for just over  a
    year, well in  excess  of  the  minimum  requirement  of  three  months
    contained in the Citizen's Directive.  The judge  found  that  to  have
    been genuine residence during which time the sponsor was joined by  the
    appellant, to whom he was  married,  and  they  developed  family  life
    together.  The judge also found that the appellant met  the  definition
    of a family member of a qualified person  and  accepted  that  she  was
    issued with a residence card by the Irish authorities.

3.   The judge however dismissed the appeal on the basis of his  finding  in
    respect of Regulation 9(4) of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016, on the basis as he found of admissions  made  by  the
    sponsor and the appellant that the move to Ireland was  in  substantial
    part intended by  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  to  circumvent  UK
    Immigration Rules.  Accordingly the provisions of  Regulation  9(1)  to
    (3) did not apply to the Appellant.

4.   The basis upon which it was common ground between  the  representatives
    that the judge had erred was  with  regard  to  his  interpretation  of
    Regulation 9(4).

5.   Mr Whitwell produced a copy of the respondent's guidance in respect  of
    applications for residence cards made  by  family  members  of  British
    citizens.  At page 17 one sees the following:

         "However, if one of the reasons for moving to another member  state
         was to avoid the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  the
         residence in that member state was in any case genuine  (see  stage
         3) then the intention to avoid the requirements of the  Immigration
         Rules is not in itself sufficient to refuse to  issue  a  residence
         card."

6.   I agree with the joint submission and therefore find an  error  of  law
    in the judge's decision as a consequence of which the decision requires
    to be remade.

7.   On behalf of the appellant it  is  argued  that  what  is  required  in
    interpreting Regulation 9(4) and in line with  what  was  said  by  the
    Supreme Court in Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54 is that in a case where  abuse
    of rights is in issue, that needs to be a sole or  predominant  purpose
    of the move and even so there is a requirement that removal as  it  was
    in that case must be a proportionate response.

8.   In line with the judge's findings, and bearing  in  mind  the  guidance
    from the European authorities including O and B [2014] EUECJ  C-456-12,
    to which I was  taken  by  Ms  McCarthy,  it  is  I  think  clear  that
    circumvention of the Immigration Rules would require to be the sole  or
    predominant purpose behind the move back to  the  United  Kingdom  from
    Ireland in this case.  This must be seen in the context of the  judge's
    findings about the exercise of treaty rights by the sponsor in  Ireland
    and the duration of that exercise, that there was genuine residence  in
    Ireland and that the appellant met the definition of a family member of
    a qualified person and was issued with a residence card  by  the  Irish
    government.  It is clear that one of the reasons for moving to  Ireland
    was to avoid the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  but  I  am
    satisfied, in line with the respondent's guidance, that  the  residence
    in Ireland was in any case  genuine,  in  line  with  the  unchallenged
    findings of the judge in that regard.

9.   It may be unnecessary to say much if anything about proportionality  in
    light of my findings of the judge's findings in that  regard,  but  for
    what it is worth I would not consider it to be proportionate to  refuse
    a residence card in the particular circumstances of this case.

10.   Bringing  these  matters  together,  I  am  satisfied  that   in   the
    circumstances of this case and in light  of  the  authorities  and  the
    guidance, the appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a  residence  card  is
    allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 10 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
