
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05479/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2018                          |On 7th February 2018          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                nyimasata [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant,  a  national  of  Gambia,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 30th  May
    2017 to refuse her application  for  a  derivative  residence  card  in
    accordance with Regulation 16(5) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2016.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence considered the appeal on  the
    papers in accordance with the Appellant's  request  and  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 1st September 2017.  The  Appellant
    now appeals to this Tribunal  with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 13th November 2017.

 2. According to the papers before me the Appellant made an application for
    a residence card on the basis of a derivative right of residence as the
    primary carer of a British citizen child, her son, who was born in  the
    UK on [ ] 2016.  I note that in  the  application  form  the  Appellant
    ticked a box at 2.2 indicating  that  she  was  applying  as  "a  joint
    primary carer who shares care and responsibility for a British  citizen
    equally with another person". At 2.21 of the form she named the child's
    father as a British citizen.  The Appellant sent the  child's  passport
    and birth certificate which gave  details  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    child's father.

 3. The application was refused by the Secretary of State on the basis that
    the Appellant had not provided adequate evidence to show  that  she  is
    the primary carer of a  British  citizen  because  she  had  failed  to
    provide sufficient evidence of primary care.

 4. The Appellant appealed against that decision and provided  evidence  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  This evidence is contained in a bundle with a
    covering letter dated 21st July 2017.  The  bundle  contains  a  letter
    dated 12th June 2017 from the Appellant stating that she is the primary
    carer of her son and that she  has  permanent  primary  care  including
    physical custody, development, medical care,  upbringing  and  parental
    care as a mother.   She  enclosed  some  documentary  evidence.   These
    included a letter from her GP which states, "Ms [C] is the  main  carer
    for her son [  ].  She is the one with him at all times.   She  attends
    the clinic with him when he is unwell and for his immunisation.  I have
    not seen him with his father".  She submitted a letter  from  a  health
    visitor which states that the Appellant is the primary  carer  for  her
    son.  She also enclosed a letter from a  children's  centre  confirming
    that the Appellant and her son attend the centre.  She also enclosed  a
    household bill in her name.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the decision on the  basis  of  this
    evidence and the evidence  in  the  Respondent's  bundle.  The  judge's
    findings are contained at paragraphs 4 and 5.  At paragraph 4 the judge
    noted that on the face of it the  child  is  a  British  national.   At
    paragraph 5 the judge said:
         "The relevant provisions are to be found in reg 15A(2) of the  2006
         Regs.  The appellant must demonstrate, inter alia, on balance, that
         [the child] would not be able to remain in the UK if she were to be
         required to leave the UK.  The appellant has provided evidence that
         she takes [the child] to GP surgery and the like.   However,  there
         is no evidence that [the child] would be able to remain in  the  UK
         if the appellant returns to  the  Gambia.  The  appellant  has  not
         provided any evidence of the whereabouts  of  the  child's  father.
         The letters from the GP assert that the GPs have not seen the child
         with its father.  This does not mean the father is  not  living  in
         the same house or his whereabouts are not known.  Or that  he  does
         not play his part in the care of the child.  The mere fact that she
         is the mother of a  British  child  is  insufficient  to  meet  the
         requirements of reg 15A(2) of the 2006 Regs."

 6. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  against  that  decision  in
    which she asserts that she is the primary  carer  of  the  child.   She
    asserts that the child's father is mainly responsible for her financial
    support paying an amount every week for the child's  maintenance.   She
    says that she has not been in touch with the child's father and has not
    known his whereabouts for about four months.  She  submitted  that  the
    evidence produced was sufficient.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimmett
    who highlighted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  said  that  the
    Appellant had not shown that the child would not be able to  remain  in
    the UK if she were required to leave but went on to say that there  was
    no evidence that the child would be able to remain in  the  UK  if  the
    Appellant returned to the Gambia.  The judge considered that there  was
    an arguable error of law in light of that conclusion.

 8. In the Rule 24 response the Secretary of State submitted that there  is
    a palpable typing error in the judge's findings which are clearly meant
    to read that there was no evidence that the child would not be able  to
    remain in the UK if the Appellant left.  It is contended that  this  is
    the only sensible  reading  of  the  determination  which  reads  as  a
    conclusion properly open to the judge on the evidence.

 9. At the hearing before me Ms Fijiwala submitted that the  burden  is  on
    the Appellant to prove that the child would be unable to remain in  the
    UK if she were required to leave.   The  judge  found  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence in relation to the father's  involvement  and  in
    her submission the judge could not have decided  this  case  any  other
    way.

10. The Appellant appeared in person at the  hearing  before  me.  She  was
    clearly upset by the decision and indicated that she did not have funds
    to make any other application to court  or  to  seek  an  oral  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  She said that she did  not  have
    funds to seek legal advice in relation to this matter.   She  explained
    that the father did not live with her  and  was  not  involved  in  the
    child's life.

11. I explained to the Appellant at the hearing that in my  view  that  the
    judge made a decision that  was  open  to  him  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence.

Error of Law

12. I accept the Secretary of State's submission that it is clear that  the
    sentence in paragraph 5 which reads, "however,  there  is  no  evidence
    that [the child] will be able to remain in  the  UK  if  the  Appellant
    returns to the Gambia" must be a typing error in  the  context  of  the
    rest of that paragraph.  It is clear that  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had not provided  sufficient  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    whereabouts of the father of the child.

13. In my view this finding was clearly open to the judge on  the  evidence
    before him. I  note  that  the  application  form  indicates  that  the
    Appellant was applying on the basis that she was a joint primary carer,
    sharing responsibility for a child.  The documentary evidence submitted
    contains little more than an assertion by the Appellant that she is the
    primary carer and an indication by the GP that they had  not  seen  the
    child with his father.  The judge was entitled to  conclude  that  this
    does not mean that the father is not living in the same  house  as  the
    Appellant or that his whereabouts are not known or  that  he  does  not
    play his part in  the  care  of  the  child.   These  were  conclusions
    properly open to the judge on the basis of the evidence before him.

14. Although it was not raised by the Appellant  who  was  unrepresented  I
    also note that the  judge  referred  to  Regulation  15A  of  the  2006
    Regulations whereas in fact, because the application was made in  March
    2017, this decision was considered in accordance with the provisions of
    Regulation 16(5) of the 2016 Regulations.  Regulation 16(5) provides as
    follows:
         "The criteria in this paragraph are that -
          a) The person is the primary carer of a British citizen ("BC");
          b) BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and
          c) BC would be unable to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in
             another EEA State if the person left the United Kingdom for an
             indefinite period."

15. I am satisfied that there  is  no  material  difference  between  these
    provisions in terms of the test and the issues the  judge  was  looking
    at.  Thus this is not a material error either.

16. I suggested to the Appellant that it would be appropriate  for  her  if
    she wished to pursue this application to seek advice  and  to  consider
    making a fresh application with further  evidence  as  to  her  claimed
    current circumstances.

17. Based on my findings above I am satisfied  that  the  judge  reached  a
    decision open to him on the basis of the evidence before him.  In these
    circumstances the judge made no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make a material error of law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

