

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/05957/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                   |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                    |promulgated                           |
|on 11 April 2018                    |              on 16 April 2018        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                        AMMINI ST. AUGUSTINE ANDERSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Q Ghafoor of Ghafoor Immigration Services.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with permission against a  decision  of  First-
       tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manchester,  promulgated  on  5  October  2017
       following a hearing at North Shields, in which  the  Judge  dismissed
       the appellant's appeal against the refusal of the respondent to issue
       a Residence Card in recognition of a right to reside  in  the  United
       Kingdom as a family member.

Background


    2. The appellant is a Jamaican national born on  24  January  1988.  The
       reasons for refusal are dated 13 June 2017 in  which  it  was  found,
       when considering regulation 9 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
       2016, that the  appellant  had  not  provided  adequate  evidence  to
       support his application to show he is the direct family member  of  a
       British citizen who was exercising treaty rights in another EU member
       state.  The  decision-maker  was  not  satisfied  the  appellant  had
       provided adequate evidence to show that his residence in Ireland with
       the British citizen sponsor was genuine as he  had  not  demonstrated
       that the centre of the British citizen's life transferred to Ireland.
        He had resided with the British citizen sponsor  in  Ireland  for  a
       total period of only five months and the accommodation in Ireland was
       only on a temporary basis. It  was  suspected  that  the  appellant's
       first lawful residence with the sponsor was in  Ireland  rather  than
       the UK in order to circumvent  immigration  law.  The  decision-maker
       then sets out reasoning in support of these conclusions.

    3. The Judge having considered the evidence sets out  findings  of  fact
       from [37] of the decision under challenge which may be summarised  in
       the following terms:

             a. The success or otherwise of the appeal primarily depends  on
                the question of whether the appellant can establish  on  the
                balance of probabilities that  the  conditions  set  out  in
                regulation 9(2) of the 2016 Regulations are satisfied [38].


             b. The conditions require the appellant to establish  (a)  that
                his spouse is (i) residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-
                employed person, self-sufficient person or a student  or  so
                resided immediately before returning to the United  Kingdom;
                or (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence in  an
                EEA State; (b) he and his spouse resided together in the EEA
                state; and (c) their residence in the EEA State was genuine.
                The Judge noted the  issue  in  the  case  was  whether  the
                appellant has established that regulation 9(2)(c) was met in
                relation to the residence in the Republic of Ireland [39].


             c. Regulation 9(3) sets out the  factors  relevant  to  whether
                residence in an EEA state is or was genuine [40]. Regulation
                9(4) states the regulations do not apply where  the  purpose
                of residence was as a means to circumvent in any immigration
                laws applying to the non-EEA national to which the appellant
                would otherwise be subject [41].


             d.  The  Judge  considered  the  background  history   of   the
                application [42]. The Judge noted the appellant  applied  to
                enter the Republic of Ireland, where his wife  and  children
                had moved, on  22  July  2014.  The  appellant  entered  the
                Republic of Ireland on 23 July 2014  with  a  Visa  granting
                leave until 23 November 2014 but later extended to  7  April
                2015 [43].


             e.  The  Judge  found  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  prior
                connection the appellant or his spouse had to  the  Republic
                of Ireland and the appellant did not explain why his  spouse
                could not have worked in the UK on a self-employed basis  as
                she did in the Republic  of  Ireland,  together  with  other
                concerns [44].


             f. The Judge expresses concern about the  claim  there  was  an
                alleged prearranged interview for the appellant's wife  with
                an organisation in Ireland [45] leading to a finding it  was
                more likely that the move to the  Republic  of  Ireland  was
                motivated not by employment or economic  prospects  but  the
                fact it was a way by which  the  family  could  be  reunited
                which would not be  possible  if  the  spouse  and  children
                remained in the UK. The Judge noted the  fact  residence  in
                the Republic of Ireland only lasted for some five months was
                a relevant factor [46].


             g. The Judge noted evidence regarding schooling of  the  eldest
                and middle child  in  the  Republic  of  Ireland  and  other
                documents; but concluded if that material  was  provided  as
                cogent evidence of integration in the  Republic  of  Ireland
                and the transfer of the centre of life it was surprising  it
                was of such short duration [47].


             h.  There  was  no  attempt  to  provide  specific  details  of
                corroborative evidence of the claim the family were  victims
                of racial  discrimination  and  micro-aggression  which  was
                found to be inconsistent with the evidence produced to  show
                the integration of the family.  The Judge noted that if  the
                spouse had  transferred  the  centre  of  her  life  to  the
                Republic of Ireland no attempt was made to move elsewhere if
                conditions that they experienced were unacceptable  in  that
                part of Donegal [48].


             i. The Judge  found  contradictory  evidence  having  been  put
                forward in relation to the manner in which residence in  the
                Republic of Ireland came to an end.  The  appellant  claimed
                his spouse came to the UK on 26 December 2014  and  that  he
                followed shortly thereafter for a visit to see his  spouse's
                mother which was said to be not consistent with  the  family
                having to re-transfer the centre of  life  back  to  the  UK
                because of racial discrimination [49].


             j.  The  Judge  found  the  stated  intention  to  be   totally
                inconsistent with the further evidence of the appellant that
                they had sold some of their  furniture  and  belongings  and
                given the rest away before coming over,  together  with  the
                fact that other items have been moved to the UK [50].


             k. The Judge concludes it is not  just  the  shortness  of  the
                appellant and his spouses stay in the  Republic  of  Ireland
                that was concerning but also the  circumstances  surrounding
                it and ending of it that raise serious  concerns  about  the
                genuineness of their residence including whether the  centre
                of the spouse's life was transferred there [51].


             l. The Judge also noted, when considering the  regulation  9(3)
                factors that the accommodation in the  Republic  of  Ireland
                was of a  six-month  residential  tenancy  which  they  were
                allegedly asked to quit a few weeks later before the tenancy
                period had ended to be replaced by  tenancy  of  a  property
                which the appellant alleged was unsuitable and mouldy [52].


             m. Considering the evidence in the round, the  Judge  concludes
                that the appellant failed  to  establish  that  he  and  his
                spouse's residence in the Republic of  Ireland  was  genuine
                and that he had not established that the conditions set  out
                in regulation 9(2) had been met or that he was  entitled  to
                the issue of the Residence Card.


    4. The appellant sought permission to appeal  asserting  primarily  that
       the motivation for making use of free movement rights was  irrelevant
       where a person had done so specifically to make use  of  such  rights
       and that the circumvention test applied by the Judge was clearly  and
       directly contrary to EU law.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, the operative part of the  grant  being  in  the  following
       terms:

           "The grounds allege that the Judge failed to have proper  regard
           to EU Directives  and  established  principles  of  EU  law,  in
           particular, Article 21(1) TFEU; Directive 2004/38; O and B v The
           Netherlands (12  March  2014);  Metock  (C-127/08);  Akrich  (C-
           109/01)  and  Emsland-Starke  (C-110/99).   I   have   carefully
           considered  the  Judges  decision  which  contains   a   careful
           consideration of the evidence and findings by  reference  to  UK
           caselaw  (Surinder  Singh)  and  Regulations.   The  appellant's
           representative maintains that this approach led to  a  different
           outcome to that which may have been reached  had  EU  provisions
           and caselaw been applied.   I find that  there  is  an  arguable
           error in the decision.  Permission to appeal is granted."


Error of law


    6. The right of entry to an EEA nationals home country of third  country
       family members from another EU state is now included at regulation  9
       of the 2016 EEA Regulations, as identified by the Judge.

    7. In the earlier decision of Minitsre Voor  Vreemdelingenzaken  v  Eind
       ECJ (Case C 291/05),  the Court found that a third  country  national
       family member of an EU citizen was not entitled to a residence permit
       in the home country of that citizen just because she had had  one  in
       another Member State where she had lived with the  citizen:  but  was
       entitled to live with the citizen in his home country where  she  was
       travelling from another Member State where she  had  lived  with  the
       citizen and where the citizen had been gainfully employed.  The  ECHR
       (Grand Chamber) ruled that (i)  In the event of  a  Community  worker
       returning to the Member State of which he is  a  national,  Community
       law does not require the authorities of that State to grant  a  right
       of entry and residence to a third-country national who is a member of
       that worker's family because of the  mere  fact  that,  in  the  host
       Member State where that worker was gainfully  employed,  that  third-
       country national held a valid residence permit issued on the basis of
       Article 10 of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68; but  (ii)  When  a  worker
       returns to the Member State of which he is a  national,  after  being
       gainfully employed in another Member State, a third-country  national
       who is a member of his family has a right under Article  10(1)(a)  of
       Regulation No 1612/68 as amended  by  Regulation  No  2434/92,  which
       applies by analogy, to reside in the Member State of which the worker
       is a national, even where that worker does not carry on any effective
       and genuine  economic  activities.  The  fact  that  a  third-country
       national who is a member of a  Community  worker's  family  did  not,
       before residing in the Member State where the  worker  was  employed,
       have a right under national law to reside  in  the  Member  State  of
       which the worker is a national has no bearing on the determination of
       that national's right to reside in the latter State.

    8. Regulation 9 of the 2016 Regulations provides:

       Family members of British citizens


       This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum


       9.-    (1)  If the conditions in paragraph (2) are  satisfied,  these
           Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F")  of
           a British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national.


           (2)    The conditions are that-


                (a)    BC-


                    (i)    is residing in an EEA State as  a  worker,  self-
                    employed person, self-sufficient person or a student, or
                    so resided immediately before returning  to  the  United
                    Kingdom; or


                    (ii)   has acquired the right of permanent residence  in
                    an EEA State;


                (b)    F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and


                (c)    F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.


           (3)    Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is
           or was genuine include-


                (a)    whether the centre of BC's life  transferred  to  the
                EEA State;


                (b)    the length of F and BC's joint residence in  the  EEA
                State;


                (c)     the  nature  and  quality  of   the   F   and   BC's
                accommodation in the EEA State, and whether  it  is  or  was
                BC's principal residence;


                (d)    the degree of F  and  BC's  integration  in  the  EEA
                State;


                (e)    whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with  BC
                was in the EEA State.


           (4)    This regulation does not apply-


                (a)    where the purpose of the residence in the  EEA  State
                was as  a  means  for  circumventing  any  immigration  laws
                applying to non-EEA nationals to which F would otherwise  be
                subject (such as any applicable requirement under  the  1971
                Act to have leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom);
                or


                (b)    to a person who is only eligible to be treated  as  a
                family member as  a  result  of  regulation 7(3)  (extended
                family members treated as family members).


           (5)    Where these Regulations apply to F, BC is to  be  treated
           as holding a valid passport issued  by  an  EEA  State  for  the
           purposes of the application of these Regulations to F.


           (6)    In paragraph (2)(a)(ii), BC is  only  to  be  treated  as
           having acquired the right of  permanent  residence  in  the  EEA
           State if such residence would have led  to  the  acquisition  of
           that right under regulation 15, had it taken place in the United
           Kingdom.


           (7)    For the purposes of determining  whether,  when  treating
           the BC as an EEA national under these Regulations in  accordance
           with paragraph (1), BC would be a qualified person-


                (a)     any  requirement  to  have  comprehensive   sickness
                insurance cover in the United Kingdom  still  applies,  save
                that it does not require the cover to extend to BC;


                (b)    in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated as
                a worker under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC is not required
                to satisfy condition A;


                (c)    in assessing whether BC can be treated as a jobseeker
                as defined in regulation 6(1), BC is not required to satisfy
                conditions A and, where  it  would  otherwise  be  relevant,
                condition C.


    9. The Judge refers to the decision in Surinder Singh which was  decided
       by the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) on 7 July  1992.
       The CJEU, in answering the question referred to it by the High  Court
       for a preliminary ruling, found:

           "Article 52 of the Treaty and Council Directive 73/148/EEC of 21
           May 1973 on  the  abolition  of  restrictions  on  movement  and
           residence within the Community for nationals  of  Member  States
           with regard to establishment  and  the  provision  of  services,
           properly construed, require a Member State  to  grant  leave  to
           enter and reside in its territory to  the  spouse,  of  whatever
           nationality, of a national of that State who has gone, with that
           spouse, to another Member State in order to  work  there  as  an
           employed person as envisaged by Article 48  of  the  Treaty  and
           returns to establish himself or herself as envisaged by  Article
           52 of the Treaty in the State of which he or she is a  national.
           A spouse must enjoy at least the same rights as would be granted
           to him or her under Community law if his or her  spouse  entered
           and resided in another Member State."


   10. The judgment enabled EU citizens to rely upon principles of EU law to
       enable family members to live with them in their home  state,  rather
       than in another Member State. The Court recognised that the  movement
       of family members was particularly important for ensuring that Member
       State nationals  are  not  deterred  from  exercising  free  movement
       rights.

   11. In O and B v The Netherlands (12 March  2014),  referred  to  in  the
       Upper Tribunal's grant of permission to appeal,  the  Court  extended
       the derivative rights for family members upon return  to  follow  the
       exercise of all Treaty rights in another Member  State,  rather  than
       just to the  family  members  of  migrant  workers  or  self-employed
       persons.  The CJEU in O and B found that "where a Union  citizen  has
       created or strengthened a family life with a third  country  national
       during genuine residence, pursuant to  and  in  conformity  with  the
       conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) and Article 16(1) and  (2)
       of Directive 2004/38 ... in a Member State other than that  of  which
       he is a national, the provisions of that directive apply  by  analogy
       where that Union citizen returns, with the family member in question,
       to his Member State of origin."

   12. Article 7 of Directive 2004/38 confers a right of residence for  more
       than three months on Union citizens exercising Treaty rights to work,
       be self-employed, self-sufficient,  or  study.  This  means  that  UK
       citizens who have exercised Treaty rights in another Member State for
       a minimum of three months may be able to rely upon EU law to increase
       their options to be joined by a third-country national family  member
       in the UK, where their family life has been 'created or strengthened'
       within the EEA state.

   13. Following O and B,  the  UK  national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in
       another Member state before returning home need  not  necessarily  be
       economically active as they just need to be  able  to  demonstrate  a
       genuine exercise of Treaty rights.

   14. Whilst the Judge focuses upon the question of  motivation,  the  CJEU
       has shown on  many  occasions  that  the  motivation  for  a  genuine
       exercise of Treaty rights is irrelevant: where  there  is  a  genuine
       exercise of Treaty rights by a UK  national  in  another  EEA  state,
       their family members may be entitled to rely upon the Surinder  Singh
       principle following the return of a UK national to the UK.

   15. The evidence before the Judge of the EEA national,  the  UK  citizen,
       exercising treaty rights in the Republic of Ireland included a letter
       from the Irish Revenue Authorities dated 9 September 2014  confirming
       registration by the appellant's spouse for tax purposes  with  effect
       from 28 August 2014, registration for Value  Added  Tax  with  effect
       from 25 August 2014, a letter from a business in County Donegal dated
       25  November  2014  confirming  the  appellants  spouse,  the  UK/EEA
       national, has been a customer of that business for several months,  a
       letter from a named individual confirming that she is a  customer  of
       the appellants  spouse  who  is  a  Kleeneze  Distributor,  documents
       relating to cost of goods to be provided and deposits received,  copy
       bank statements showing payments made in relation to the business and
       the payment of utility bills in relation to occupied property, a copy
       confirmation of processing payment relating to the business, together
       with invoices issued by Kleeneze Limited detailing  items  purchased,
       together with a letter from the organisation  dated  3  October  2014
       upon the appellant's spouse joining as a distributor. There is also a
       copy of the UK/EEA national's letter from  the  company  providing  a
       photo identity card  in  connection  with  her  work.  Statements  of
       accounts due to the  company  by  the  appellant's  spouse  are  also
       included in addition to orders and  documents  relating  to  ribbons;
       said to relate to another aspect of the  UK/EEA  national's  business
       activities.

   16. The appellant's representative asserted  the  Judge's  findings  with
       regard to residence and employment were not sustainable.

   17. The case law makes it clear that the key issue  in  appeals  of  this
       nature is whether the appellant has demonstrated  there  has  been  a
       genuine exercise of treaty rights by the EEA national.

   18. It was accepted at the hearing that the documents  before  the  Judge
       supported the assertion the UK/EEA national was genuinely  exercising
       treaty rights in the Republic of Ireland as a self-employed person.

   19. The period of residence, although the accommodation was temporary  by
       virtue of it being taken as an  assured  shorthold  tenancy,  was  in
       excess of the three-month period provided for  an  initial  right  to
       remain in a Member State by an EEA national.

   20. It is not disputed that a person demonstrating an ability to  satisfy
       the requirements detailed in Surinder Singh and O and B  is  able  to
       make use of an  alternative  route  to  entry  clearance  for  family
       members to join the EEA national within  the  UK  which  escapes  the
       requirement to demonstrate the minimum level of earnings  or  savings
       required  to  bring  the  applicant  within  the  provisions  of  the
       Immigration Rules. Even though this  may  be  so,  if  a  person  has
       demonstrated a right to enter under EU law that right cannot be taken
       away by domestic legislation  or  other  provisions  which  create  a
       situation incompatible with an individual's EU rights.

   21. The starting point in the decision  should  have  been  to  ascertain
       whether the appellant had demonstrated a genuine exercise  of  Treaty
       rights. It was accepted by the advocates that the evidence before the
       Judge supported a finding in the appellant's favour on this point.

   22. Whilst the Judge analyses specific provisions of regulation 9  it  is
       clear that the key question was not properly analysed and the finding
       at [46] that it was found more likely that the move to  the  Republic
       of Ireland was motivated not by employment or economic prospects  but
       by the fact that it was a way which  the  family  could  be  reunited
       which would have been unlikely to be possible if  the  appellant  and
       spouse and children have remained in the  United  Kingdom,  fails  to
       properly analyse the evidence before the Judge and  related  EU  case
       law.

   23. It is accepted the Judge refers to Surinder Singh and  O  and  B  but
       does not arguably consider the impact  of  those  decisions  and  the
       impact of European law upon the merits of this appeal.

   24. I find the Judge has erred in law in  the  manner  made  out  in  the
       application for permission to  appeal  and  grant  of  permission  to
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal. I set the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge aside.

Discussion


   25. The Upper Tribunal is in a position to  remake  the  decision  as  no
       further evidence is required. In light of the  evidence  establishing
       the UK/EEA national, the appellant's spouse,  was  exercising  treaty
       rights as a self-employed person in the Republic of  Ireland  and  in
       light of the fact the evidence  relating  to  accommodation  and  the
       family's ties to Donegal where they  lived  follow  from  the  UK/EEA
       national's move to Ireland to exercise such treaty rights, I find the
       appellant has discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required
       standard to show he is entitled to the grant of a Residence  Card  in
       recognition of a right to reside in the United Kingdom  as  a  family
       member of his spouse.

   26. I therefore substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

Decision

   27. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is allowed.

  Anonymity.

       The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 April 2018

