

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/05894/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |   Decision & Reasons            |
|                                          |promulgated                      |
|On 13 February 2018                       |   On 16 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 TAREK AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Salam of Salam & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Shimmin promulgated on 26 June 2017, following consideration of the
        appeal on the papers without an oral hearing, in  which  the  Judge
        following the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala  (EFMs:  Right
        of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  00411  found  that   Tribunal   had   no
        jurisdiction to  hear  the  appellant's  appeal.  The  respondent's
        refusal of 3 May 2016 refers to an application for a residence card
        as family members whereas this has always  been  an  application  a
        Extended Family Members of an EEA national.
     2. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  on  28
        November 2017 by reference to the later decision of  the  Court  of
        Appeal in Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 which  found  the  decision  in
        Sala was wrong and set the same aside.


     3. Whilst Mr Bates indicated the respondent would prefer cases of this
        nature to be stayed pending an appeal to the Supreme Court  against
        the decision in Khan, there is no evidence that permission has been
        sought or granted by the Supreme Court or that an  order  has  been
        made staying the decision in Khan pending the hearing of any appeal
        to the higher court. In the absence of such order the  decision  of
        the Court of Appeal is binding upon this tribunal. The request  for
        a stay is refused.  If  such  order  is  subsequently  granted  the
        respondent will be able to renew any application to the  First-tier
        Tribunal.



     4. I find the First-tier Tribunal, through no fault of Judge  Shimmin,
        has erred in law in finding that tribunal had  no  jurisdiction  to
        hear the appeal. I set the decision aside.


     5. In light of the fact there has been no hearing  of  the  merits  of
        this appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, this appeal is  allowed
        to the limited extent it is remitted to that Tribunal to  be  heard
        afresh.


Decision

     6. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remit the  appeal  to
        the First-tier Tribunal.




   Anonymity.


     7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 13 February 2018





