
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05159/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2017                  |On 5 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                               Mr Farhan Aslam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by Vision
Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Appellant against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, Judge M A  Khan,  promulgated  on  12  July  2017,
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  of
    24 May 2017 refusing to grant the Appellant a residence card under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (hereinafter "EEA
    Regulations 2016"). The Judge refers to the  former,  2006  Regulations
    throughout, but it is not argued by either party that this amounted  to
    an error of law.

2.   The Appellant had initially entered the UK in 2009 with leave to  enter
    as a student and had been granted a further period of leave  to  remain
    as a student valid until 31 May 2014.  That leave was curtailed  on  28
    March 2012 to expire on 27 May 2012.   The  Appellant  entered  into  a
    relationship with a French national of Ghanaian  origin,  named  Andrea
    Soares Gomes.  They entered into a marriage by proxy under Ghanaian law
    on 21 April 2012.  There is a decree absolute at C1 of the Respondent's
    bundle indicating that they were divorced on 15 November 2016.

3.   Prior to the most recent application, the Appellant had made  a  number
    of applications for residence cards in relation to his marriage  to  Ms
    Soares Gomes:

     (i) An application dated 19 June 2012, refused in a decision  dated  17
    December 2012. The Respondent disputed that the document relied upon to
    evidence the Appellant's  marriage  was  a  valid  document  confirming
    customary marriage in Ghana; it was not accepted that the Appellant was
    in a genuine or subsisting  relationship  with  the  Sponsor;  and  the
    evidence (from 2012) that the Sponsor had been economically  active  in
    the UK was rejected. The Application was refused under EEA  Regulations
    2006, regulation 6 (qualified person),  7  (family  members)  and  8(5)
    (persons in a durable relationship with a qualified person).

     (ii)     An application dated 1 October  2013  refused  in  a  decision
    dated 13 February 2014, against which the Appellant  appealed.  At  the
    hearing before me, Ms Jegarajah   confirmed,  upon  direct  questioning
    from the Tribunal, that the appeal (ref IA/10223/2014) had come  before
    Judge Monson, who had dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  dated  27
    October 2014, not accepting that  the  Appellant's  marriage  documents
    demonstrated that  his  marriage  was  valid,  and  not  accepting  the
    Appellant's oral evidence. Judge Monson's decision was not provided  to
    Judge Khan by either Ms Jegarajah or her instructing solicitors at  the
    hearing before the Judge on 23 June 2017, notwithstanding that  it  was
    in their possession (in electronic form, at least).  I  return  to  the
    issue of the decision of Judge Monson  below.

     (iii)    Ms Jegarajah's grounds of appeal dated 24 July 2017  refer  at
    paragraph 9 to a further application on 2 December 2014 refused  on  22
    December 2014.

     (iv)     An application dated 11 January 2015, refused on 12  May  2015
    on grounds that certain evidence, from 31 July 2013 to 31 October  2013
    relating to the Sponsor's employment, was rejected, and the Sponsor was
    deemed not to be a worker under Reg 6  of  the  2006  Regulations.  The
    validity of the Appellant's marriage was not raised.

4.   The Appellant's most recent  application  is  dated  11  January  2017.
    Although  associated  representations  from  the   Appellant's   former
    representatives Prestige  Solicitors,  dated  15th  December  2016  are
    entitled "EEA(FM) permanent  residence  permit",  the  application  was
    actually made on form EEA(FM), not EEA(PR). Although the letter  refers
    to certain evidence being provided, the period covered by that most  of
    that evidence was not stated. The form itself refers to evidence of the
    Sponsor's earnings from 2014 'ongoing' (question 8.37). The application
    could not on that basis have supported an application for a certificate
    confirming a right of permanent residence.

5.   The decision of the Respondent is contained in two separate  documents,
    both stating on its face that it was  served  on  24  May  2017.  There
    appears to have been some dispute about whether this decision was dated
    19th, 24th or 30th May 2017, but I do  not  find  the  actual  date  of
    service material.

6.   One of the documents is entitled "refusal to issue  a  residence  card"
    and is subtitled "Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016
    Regulation 10(5) with reference to 2 & 7", and provides in the body  of
    the notice of decision as follows:

         "You have applied for a retained right of residence  on  the  basis
         that you are the former family member of an EEA  national  who  was
         exercising treaty rights at the time of divorce and  subsequent  to
         divorce you have been residing in the United Kingdom as a qualified
         person.  However, you have not provided  sufficient  evidence  that
         you have retained a right of residence following  divorce  from  an
         EEA national in accordance with Regulations 10(5) and 10(6) of  the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016." (Emphasis added)


7.   It is to be noted that the part of Regulation  10(5)  relevant  to  the
    present case is as follows:

         "(5) The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-
              (a) ceased to be a family member of a qualified person  or  an
             EEA national with  a  right  of  permanent  residence  on  the
             termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A;
              (b) was residing in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
             these Regulations at the date of the termination;
              (c) satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
              (d) either-
                  (i) prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for  the
                  termination of the marriage or the civil partnership,  the
                  marriage or civil partnership  had  lasted  for  at  least
                  three years and the  parties  to  the  marriage  or  civil
                  partnership had resided in the United Kingdom for at least
                  one year during its duration; .."


    And further, Regulation 10(6) provides:


         "(6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person- (a) is not
             an EEA national but would, if the person were an EEA national,
             be a worker, a  self  employed  person  or  a  self-sufficient
             person under regulation 6;..."

     The notice of decision is not specific as to which element or  elements
    of Regulations 10(5) and 10(6) were deemed not to be satisfied, due  to
    the alleged insufficiency of the Appellant's evidence.

8.   Accompanying that notice of decision is a Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    of the same date.  The letter contains the following:

         "Reasons why you application has been refused

         The following information is stated as follows:

         (Details of the Appellant's earlier immigration history)

  . You made an application for a Residence card on  19th  June  2012.  The
    application was refused on 17th December 2012 as  your  Ghanaian  proxy
    marriage was not accepted as a valid marriage by this department and as
    such proof of your relationship to the EEA national.
  . You made another application for a Residence card on 1st October  2013.
    The application was  refused  on  13th  February  2014  again  as  your
    Ghanaian proxy marriage was not accepted as proof of your relationship.


  . You made a further application for a Residence  card  on  11th  January
    2015. The application was refused on 12th May 2015  as  you  failed  to
    demonstrate you were the unmarried partner of an EEA national

         You have  made  your  current  application  under  retained  rights
         claiming that you are the ex-spouse of an EEA  national.   However,
         it is stated that this department has never accepted your  Ghanaian
         marriage as being valid  and  as  such  you  cannot  qualify  under
         retained rights.


         Furthermore, you attended a credibility interview on 19 May 2017 to
         establish the validity of your relationship  to  the  EEA  Sponsor,
         Andrea Soares Gomes.  Due to various discrepancies  throughout  the
         interview the Immigration Officers deemed your relationship to  the
         EEA national to be one of convenience.  Consequently, even if it is
         accepted that your marriage was valid under Ghanaian law, which  it
         is not, you would not meet the criteria for a residence card  under
         retained rights  as  it  is  submitted  you  have  entered  into  a
         relationship with Andrea Soares Gomes in an attempt to gain a basis
         of leave in the UK.


         As a result it is stated you are unable to qualify for a  residence
         card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016."


9..  Notice of appeal was filed on 30th May 2017 by Prestige  Solicitors.  A
    Respondent's bundle was prepared, bearing the date 14 June 2017, and is
    addressed to Prestige Solicitors. The Appellant was detained on 19  May
    2017, and he also changed representation, on either 20th or  21st  June
    2017, to Vision Solicitors (who still act for the  Appellant)  who  had
    gathered together 'as many documents as they could'  (decision, para 6)
    prior to the hearing on 23 June 2017.

10.  On 21 June 2017 Visions Solicitors applied to adjourn  the  hearing  of
    23 June on the basis inter alia that the  no  Respondent's  bundle  had
    been received by the Appellant or his previous  representatives.  In  a
    decision made  the  same  day,  the  application  was  refused  on  the
    following grounds (the reference to judicial review proceedings was,  I
    understand, to some associated challenged against his detention):

         "i.  The judicial review proceedings are not relevant to the  claim
             for adjournment of the appeal.


         ii.  If the Respondent does not  supply  a  bundle  the  Respondent
             cannot rely on the  documents  which  might  be  in  it.   The
             disadvantage is to the Respondent not the Appellant.


         iii. It is not for the Appellant  to  make  good  the  Respondent's
             case.


         iv.  The Appellant must file and  serve  all  documents  which  are
             relevant and in the possession of the Appellant, not wait  for
             the Respondent to do so.


         v.   Adjournment refused."


11.  The appeal proceeded before Judge Khan on 23 June 2017.  No renewal  of
    the adjournment application was made. Ms  Jegarajah  appeared  for  the
    Appellant. She was then in possession of a  copy  of  the  most  recent
    refusal letter but, according to the Judge "would  not  let  the  court
    view it, because  she  submits  (the)  Immigration  Judge   refusing  a
    written adjournment request on 21/6/2017 stated that if the  respondent
    did not serve a bundle on the appellant's representatives,  they  could
    not later seek to rely on any documents with that bundle". There was no
    Appellant's bundle, or witness statement (decision, paragraph  9);  the
    Appellant was not called to  give  oral  evidence  (para  17).  It  was
    submitted that the Appellant had provided all the  necessary  documents
    to establish that he is (or was) in a genuine  relationship   with  his
    EEA partner (para 14). The Respondent provided a copy  of  the  refusal
    letter to the Judge (para 7). It is also apparent that the Judge had  a
    copy of a Respondent's bundle before him (para 18).

12   It is clear from the Judge's decision that he found in  favour  of  the
    Appellant on the issue of whether he had entered  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  The Presenting Officer before  the  Judge,  Mr  Williams,
    accepted that there were not in fact any discrepancies in the interview
    which took place with the Appellant on 17 May 2017, and the Judge  held
    at paragraph 27 that the Respondent had failed to shift the  burden  of
    establishing that his marriage was not  one  of  convenience  onto  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent had failed to show that  the  Appellant  had
    entered into a marriage of convenience under Regulation 2  of  the  EEA
    Regulations. There is  no  challenge  by  the  Respondent  before  this
    Tribunal to that finding.

13.  However, the Respondent also  submitted  before  Judge  Khan  that  the
    issues raised in the previous decision letters, relating to the Sponsor
    not having provided adequate evidence of her economic activity  in  the
    United Kingdom, were also issues which were to  be  determined  in  the
    present appeal.

14.  The Judge discussed the validity of the marriage, but made  no  finding
    on it (para 25).

15.  The Judge further found as follows at paragraphs 26 and 28:

         "26. The Appellant made an application for a residence card  on  11
             January 2015.  This was refused on 12 May  2015.   The  reason
             for the refusal was that the Appellant had failed  to  provide
             evidence that his EEA Sponsor  was  exercising  treaty  rights
             under Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations  2006.   On  12  May
             2015, the EEA national Sponsor's employer confirmed  that  she
             had only worked for a three months' trial period between  July
             2013 and October 2013 and had not worked  thereafter.   On  11
             January 2017, the Appellant applied under Regulation 10(5) the
             EEA Regulations based on his EEA national's employment  record
             during the time that they were said to be in marriage  and  up
             to the time of the  divorce  proceedings.   I  have  not  been
             provided with any evidence that the Appellant relied  upon  in
             his application.  However, all the evidence in relation to his
             EEA  national  Sponsor's  employment   has   been   previously
             rejected.


         28.  It is for the Appellant to show that his EEA national  Sponsor
             was exercising her treaty rights up to the time  when  divorce
             proceedings  started.   The   history   of   the   Appellant's
             applications  and  time  and  again  his  failure  to  provide
             evidence of the EEA national's employment shows that  she  was
             not  exercising  her  treaty  rights  in  the  UK.   The   EEA
             national's  registration  was  revoked  in   2012.    In   the
             circumstances,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
             establish  his  case  under  Regulation  10(5)  of   the   EEA
             Regulations 2006 (sic).  The fact that the  EEA  national  can
             continue to reside in the UK does not assist the Appellant  to
             establish his case.


         29.  On the evidence before me, on the  balance  of  probabilities,
             for the above-mentioned reasons, I find that the Appellant has
             established that the Appellant has  failed  to  establish  his
             case under Regulation 10(5) of the EEA  Regulations  2006  (as
             amended)."


16.  The Appellant has appealed to this Tribunal in grounds  dated  24  July
    2017.  The grounds recite the history  of  the  appeal  and  assert  at
    paragraph 15 that:

         "The decision under appeal raised one issue only.  That is that the
         marriage was  a  marriage  of  convenience.   Although  documentary
         evidence was submitted to show that the A's former partner had  not
         been exercising treaty rights during the relevant period, the R did
         not take any issue with the evidence concerning this matter in  the
         decision letter."


17.  The Appellant's first ground at paragraphs 16 to  18  is,  in  summary,
    that given that the Appellant had satisfied the Judge that his marriage
    was not one of convenience, and this,  in  the  Appellant's  assertion,
    being the sole point in dispute between the  parties,  the  Appellant's
    appeal should have been allowed.  The second  ground  argues  that  the
    Judge in raising at paragraphs 27 and 28 the question  of  whether  the
    EEA national spouse was exercising her EEA rights, proceeded  unfairly,
    this not being a matter which was raised in the Respondent's decision.

18.  It was also asserted that the Appellant's  application  of  11  January
    2017 included different documents to the previous applications.  It was
    argued that  if  the  Respondent  had  properly  raised  the  Sponsor's
    exercise of her  treaty  rights  as  an  issue  in  the  decision,  the
    Appellant would have asked for a direction from the Tribunal  that  the
    Respondent contact HMRC to provide the  Appellant  with  his  ex-wife's
    HMRC tax records for the relevant period.

19.  In a Rule 24 reply the Respondent argues, in summary,  that  the  Judge
    did not misdirect herself in law in dismissing the appeal.

20.  At the outset of the hearing before me, I  indicated  to  Ms  Jegarajah
    that the position set out in the grounds of appeal, that the only issue
    before the Judge was  whether  the  Appellant's  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience, was highly questionable, given that the refusal letter  of
    24 May 2017 clearly also raised the question of  the  validity  of  the
    Appellant's Ghanaian marriage.

21.  In relation to the issue of the validity of  the  Appellant's  marriage
    Ms Jegarajah  asserted that the fact that  the  Family  Courts  in  the
    United Kingdom had  on  15  November  2016  issued  a  decree  absolute
    confirming that the marriage between the Appellant and Ms Soares  Gomes
    had been dissolved was  categorical  evidence  of  the  fact  that  the
    marriage must have  been  deemed  to  have  been  valid  in  the  first
    instance, otherwise the Family Court  would  not  have  issued  such  a
    decree absolute.  I asked Ms Jegarajah if she relied upon any authority
    in support of the proposition that a decree absolute must be  taken  as
    categorical proof of the validity of the marriage which it purported to
    dissolve.  She was unable to provide me with any such authority. It was
    at this point that Ms Jegarajah conformed that she was in possession of
    Judge Monson's decision of 27 October 2014, and had been at the time of
    the hearing on 23 June 2017.

22.  I remark at this point that I find it extraordinary that any party  who
    has in their possession a decision  of  a  Judge  addressing  an  issue
    directly in point with an issue that is raised in a later appeal should
    not provide a copy of that  decision  to  the  Judge  seized  with  the
    present appeal.  Mr Clarke, for  the  Respondent,  did  not  have  that
    document in his possession and could not find  it  on  his  file.  That
    decision should, according to long  established  principles  ( Starred
    SSHD v D (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  ('Devaseelan')  have  been  the
    starting point of the Judge's decision on  the  issue  of  validity  of
    marriage, and any other matter set out in Judge Monson's decision which
    was also raised in the present appeal.

23.  The essence of Ms Jegarajah's submission is that whatever findings  had
    been made by Judge Monson in 2014  relating  to  the  validity  of  the
    Appellant's marriage, these had been overtaken by the  decree  absolute
    from November 2016, and she reiterated her argument  that  such  decree
    absolute must be taken as confirmation that  the  Appellant's  marriage
    was a valid one.

24.  I have no hesitation rejecting that proposition.  As the Judge  pointed
    out in his decision at paragraph 25, "I have not been provided with any
    documentation in relation to the  divorce  proceedings  in  the  County
    Court.  It is not known on what basis  the  Family  Court  reached  its
    decision."  There is no evidence to suggest that either  party  to  the
    marriage raised as an issue before the Family Courts the potential that
    the marriage was not a valid one in the first instance.   Ms  Jegarajah
    pointed out that the Family Courts must have had a copy of the Ghanaian
    marriage certificate in order  to  be  satisfied  that  there  was  any
    marriage at all, and the issuing of the decree absolute meant that  the
    marriage certificate must have been taken to have been invalid.

25.   I  find  that,  absent  any  authority  to  support   Ms   Jegarajah's
    proposition, that where there is no evidence that  the  validity  of  a
    marriage was raised as a point before the Family Courts, the issuing of
    a decree absolute, without more, cannot be taken  as  determinative  of
    the  validity  of  that  marriage  in  the  first  instance.   This  is
    especially the case in the present appeal where the Appellant has  been
    aware that the Respondent has rejected the validity of his marriage  to
    Ms Soares Gomes on a number of  occasions,  including  in  the  present
    decision, and the Appellant and his representatives were in  possession
    prior to the hearing of 23 June 2013 of a decision of a previous  Judge
    finding that the documents on which the Appellant  relied  to  evidence
    his marriage were not reliable.

26.  I must regrettably observe that those acting  for  the  Appellant  have
    failed to approach the hearing before the Judge on 23  June  2017  with
    any kind of  appropriate  candour.   The  principles  in  the  case  of
    Devaseelan would clearly have applied in a case such as this,  where  a
    key issue in dispute between the parties, raised  in  the  Respondent's
    decision letter of 24 May 2017, has been adjudicated  upon  within  the
    last three years.  It was not appropriate for the Appellant to withhold
    from Judge Khan the decision of Judge Monson  merely  on  the  supposed
    basis that the decree absolute dated November 2016  made  any  previous
    finding of an earlier Judge irrelevant. Nor was it appropriate  for  Ms
    Jegarajah  to  have  purposely  withheld  another   document   in   her
    possession, being the refusal letter of 24 May 2017.

27.  As is noted by Judge Scott-Baker, granting permission  in  this  matter
    on 26 July 2017, the Judge failed to make any findings in his  decision
    as to the validity of the marriage.  There is nothing within  paragraph
    25 of the decision or any other part of the decision which amounts to a
    clear finding one way or  the  other  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
    marriage was valid.  I find that this matter remains to be determined.

28.   Turning  to  the  Appellant's  principal   complaint   that   it   was
    procedurally unfair for  the  Judge  to  have  considered  whether  the
    Sponsor had been economically active, Ms Jegarajah  refers  me  to  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014, Rule 24 in particular, which reads as follows:

         "24.-    (1)  Except in appeals to which Rule 23  applies,  when  a
                  Respondent is provided with a copy of a notice of  appeal,
                  the Respondent must provide the Tribunal with -


                  (a)  the notice of the decision to  which  the  notice  of
                      appeal relates and any other document the  Respondent
                      provided to the Appellant  giving  reasons  for  that
                      decision;


                  (b)   any  statement  of  evidence  or  application   form
                      completed by the Appellant;


                  (c)  any record of an  interview  with  the  Appellant  in
                      relation to the decision being appealed;


                  (d)  any other unpublished document which is  referred  to
                      in a document mentioned in subparagraph (a) or relied
                      upon by the Respondent; and


                  (e)  the notice of any other appealable decision  made  in
                      relation to the Appellant.


             (2)  The Respondent must, if the Respondent intends to  change
                  or add to the grounds or reasons relied upon in the notice
                  or the other documents referred to  in  paragraph  (1)(a),
                  provide  the  Tribunal  and  the  other  parties  with   a
                  statement  of   whether   the   Respondent   opposes   the
                  Appellant's case and the grounds for such opposition."

29.  Ms Jegarajah explains to me the difficulties which she  and  those  who
    instruct her had in the run up to the First-tier hearing in obtaining a
    copy of the Respondent's decision and  bundle.  However,  Ms  Jegarajah
    confirmed that by the time of the hearing, they were in  possession  of
    that bundle.

30.  There is within that bundle at  pages  D1  to  D2  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's  former  representatives  Prestige  Solicitors   dated   15
    December  2016  which  was  a  letter  accompanying   the   Appellant's
    application for the residence card which he made  at  that  time.   The
    letter  specifies  seven  items  of  evidence  said  to  accompany  the
    application form including the completed  form,  the  decree   absolute
    document, Lloyds bank account statements for  the  past  three  months,
    payslips for the applicant, ex-partner's wage slips (and it  is  to  be
    noted that this letter of 15 December 2016 does not specify the  period
    of those wage slips), previous tenancy  agreement  and  utility  bills.
    The application form  itself  specifies  at  paragraph  8.37  that  the
    Sponsor's employment had been at a  salary  of  �725  (presumably,  per
    month) from 2014, ongoing.

31.  Ms Jegarajah points out that even  though  the  notice  of  immigration
    decision makes reference to the non-satisfaction of  Regulations  10(5)
    and 10(6) (the latter being the requirement that the Appellant evidence
    his own earnings) those  points  were  not  raised  explicitly  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter accompanying the decision.   It was on  this
    basis that she had framed her case to suggest that  upon  demonstrating
    that his marriage was not one of convenience, all of the issues in  the
    appeal had been determined in the Appellant's favour.  I  have  already
    found above that the Judge had failed to make any relevant  finding  as
    to the validity of the Appellant's marriage.

32.  I accept that whereas the Judge refers  at  his  paragraph  26  to  the
    reasons stated in the Respondent's earlier decision of 12 May 2015 that
    the Respondent had not accepted the evidence from July to October  2013
    about the Sponsor's alleged employment  at  that  time,  this  was  not
    determinative of whether the Sponsor was gainfully  employed  or  self-
    employed from 2014 onwards, as asserted in the application form in  the
    present application.

33.  However, Mr Clarke argues that  in  the  history  of  the  Respondent's
    decision-making regarding his various applications for a residence card
    under  the  EEA  Regulations,  the  reliability  of  the  evidence  the
    Appellant has relied upon in relation to the Sponsor's  employment  has
    been challenged on every occasion, even if not specifically  challenged
    in  the  present  decision.   Mr  Clarke  asserted  that  Mr  Williams,
    Presenting Officer before the Judge, was entitled to raise the issue of
    whether the Appellant's ex-partner had been economically active  up  to
    the point of divorce, and Mr Clarke further argued that the  Judge  had
    been entitled to find at paragraphs 26 and 28 that that requirement was
    not satisfied in the present appeal.

34.   Mr  Clarke  also  pointed  out  that  if   the   Appellant   and   his
    representatives felt that they had been prejudiced on the  day  of  the
    hearing, 23 June 2017, in the Respondent seeking to raise the issue  of
    the Sponsor's employment, then it was open to them to have applied  for
    an adjournment again, before the Judge on the day of the  hearing,  but
    they had not done so.

35.  I find there was a degree of ambiguity about what issues were  actually
    raised in the notice of decision, and the  letter  giving  reasons  for
    refusal, both dated  24  May  2017.  The  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    undeniably refers to the Appellant's past history of applications,  and
    the reasons for the  refusal  of  those  applications,  which  includes
    reference to decisions in both 2012 and 2015  rejecting  the  Sponsor's
    financial evidence. However, as the reasons  decision  letter  did  not
    thereafter raise the reliability of the Sponsor's financial information
    from 2014 onwards,  I  accept  that  there  may  have  been  procedural
    unfairness to the Appellant in the Respondent seeking to open the issue
    of whether his ex-spouse had been economically  active  in  the  United
    Kingdom from 2014 onwards.

36.  Further, the reasons given  by  the  Judge  at  his  paragraph  26  for
    finding that the Appellant had not satisfied him that the  Sponsor  had
    been economically active, were principally reasons which related to the
    evidence dating from 2013, whereas the application form states that the
    Appellant relied upon evidence from 2014  onwards  in  support  of  his
    present application.  It is clear that that evidence was not  contained
    within the Respondent's bundle before the Judge, which was in breach of
    Rule 24 of the Procedure Rules.

37.  However, I arrive at the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  caused
    procedural unfairness by  a  narrow  margin  only.  The  Appellant  was
    directed on 21 June 2017 to provide all documents  which  are  relevant
    and in the possession of the Appellant. I was not informed exactly what
    documents were in the possession of the Appellant at that time, but  it
    seems the Appellant's  attitude,  in  filing  no  bundle  at  all,  was
    somewhat cavalier.  Further, no  renewed  adjournment  application  was
    made on the day of the hearing when it became clear that the Respondent
    was raising the issue of the sponsor's economic activity.

38.  However, on balance, I am of the view that the  decision  must  be  set
    aside, save for the  finding  at  paragraph  27  that  the  Appellant's
    marriage, whatever its validity, was not one of convenience.

39.  I am of the view that the appropriate course of action to take in  this
    appeal is to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

40.  Clear findings will need to be made on the validity of the  Appellant's
    marriage.  For the avoidance of doubt, I  am  of  the  view  that  mere
    reference to the existence of a degree absolute  in  relation  to  that
    marriage, unless contrary authority can be provided by  the  Appellant,
    is not determinative of the  question  of  whether  that  marriage  was
    valid.

41.  I direct the Appellant to file and serve a  copy  of  the  decision  of
    Judge Monson dated  27  October  2014,  reference  IA/10223/2014.   The
    findings made in that decision  will  be  the  starting  point  of  the
    findings to be made by the First-tier rehearing  this  present  appeal,
    applying the ordinary principles set out in Devaseelan.

42.  I also find, even though it may have been procedurally unfair  for  the
    Respondent to seek to open the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant's
    Sponsor was economically active in the UK at the  hearing  of  23  June
    2017, it is now clear that the Respondent does raise such a challenge.

43.  On remittal to the First-tier, therefore,  both  parties  are  under  a
    duty to file with the Tribunal any and all evidence on which they rely.
      Insofar as he wishes to assert that any part of the  EEA  Regulations
    on which he relies is satisfied, he must produce his positive evidence.
     For the avoidance of doubt, this should include the evidence which  he
    relies upon to demonstrate his own economic activity, as per Regulation
    10(6).

    Notice of Decision

     I therefore find that the making of the Judge's decision  involved  the
    making on one or more material errors of law.

     I allow the Appellant's appeal  to  the  extent  that     I  set  aside
    Judge's decision, save for the findings at paragraph 27,  and  I  remit
    this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined in  accordance
    with this decision. If the Appellant wishes to obtain a direction  that
    the Respondent disclose records from HMRC, an application  for  such  a
    direction is to be made to the First tier Tribunal.


    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                     Date 4.10.17
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

