
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ea/05138/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 29th May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                ARTI HAXHIAJ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Puar, instructed by Solacexis Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. We have given the details of representation in this appeal in the usual
    way, and indeed that is the way it  appeared  to  us  at  the  hearing.
    Following the hearing, however, we received a  letter  dated  17  April
    2019 indicating that Solacexis Solicitors were no longer instructed  to
    represent the appellant.  Mr Puar  was  evidently  not  aware  of  that
    letter either.  We record here that  he  did  everything  that  anybody
    acting for the appellant might have been expected to do in this case.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania who appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent refusing him  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom.  The appellant's case was based on his
    marriage to a Greek national.  He asserted that  they  had  married  in
    2005 in Greece, and moved to the United Kingdom in February  2006.   He
    was granted five years residence as a family member of an EEA National.
     He and his wife  were  divorced  in  2012.   The  appellant,  however,
    claimed that he continued to reside in the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016  and  had,  by  the  time  of  his
    application, completed 10 years residence.

 3. Judge Boyes dismissed the appellant's appeal.   He had before him  HMRC
    records which tended to show that the appellant's wife was not employed
    for the relevant period of time in the United Kingdom.  As Judge  Boyes
    said, "I prefer the documentary evidence provided by HMRC as opposed to
    the  appellant's  purported  recollection.   It  is  by  far  the  more
    reliable.".

 4. Judge Boyes' decision concluded as follows:

         "20. The appeal thus fails.  There was  no  Article  8  ECHR  claim
         other than the matter raised as per above  [the  challenge  to  the
         refusal of the residence permit].  In any event, there was  nothing
         compelling outside the rules.

         Notice of Decision

         21.  It follows from the above that:

             A.   the appeal against the refusal of  a  Residence  card  is
             dismissed and the appeal fails."

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on grounds asserting  that  the  judge
    had not been entitled to reach the view he did on the facts relating to
    the appellant's wife's employment, and that he had  confused  the  need
    for the marriage to last three years with the need to demonstrate  that
    she worked for the relevant period of five years.  It was  also  argued
    that the judge had erred in dismissing a Human  Rights  appeal,  rather
    than confining himself to the EEA appeal before him.

 6. As we have said, Mr Puar did all that could be done on the  appellant's
    behalf.  The grounds relating to the substantive  decision  are  wholly
    without merit.  The appellant needed to show his wife's employment  for
    the relevant five years, up to the  date  of  the  termination  of  the
    marriage.  The HMRC evidence was, for a good deal of that period, quite
    specific: it showed that the appellant's wife had  been  registered  as
    working in the United Kingdom in 2009/10,  2010/11,  and  2011/12,  but
    that there was no trace of any taxable employment after 12  June  2011.
    Mr Puar pointed out that as there were "no records held" for the  years
    before 2009/10, it followed that HMRC records could  not  be  complete.
    We do not think that that exactly follows, but, in any event, the judge
    was amply entitled to find that the appellant had not  shown  that  his
    wife was working after 12 June 2011, and therefore not for the relevant
    five-year period.  In addition, inspection at the hearing before us  of
    documents that were also before the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeared  to
    show that the appellant's wife had already left the United Kingdom when
    she began proceedings for divorce in Greece in July 2012 (the  document
    was executed by her in person, but by  the  appellant  only  through  a
    notary-proxy) and was by the date of the divorce proceedings in October
    and November 2012 described as "resident in Pyrgos".

 7. It might be possible to show, from one  phrase  in  the  determination,
    that the judge was looking for three years work rather than  five:  but
    that would be a mistake wholly in  the  appellant's  favour.    If  the
    position is that the judge was not satisfied on the evidence  that  the
    appellant's wife had been  working  for  three  years,  it  necessarily
    follows that she had not been  working  for  five  years.   So  far  as
    concerns the refusal of a residence card, we dismiss this appeal.

 8. There remains the question of the allegation that the judge  determined
    a human rights appeal.  It is clear that  there  was  no  human  rights
    appeal before him, and he had no jurisdiction  to  determine  one.   We
    cannot see that the words of reference to a human rights claim, and the
    notice of decision, which we have  set  out,  could  give  anybody  any
    reason to suppose that the judge's decision encompasses a human  rights
    appeal.  For the  avoidance  of  doubt,  however,  we  are  content  to
    indicate that the determination under appeal does not reach, and  could
    not reach any view on the merits of a claim other than  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 9. For the reasons we have given, Judge Boyes' decision,  dismissing  this
    appeal, stands.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 21 May 2019


