
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05877/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th October 2018                      |On 20th November 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             kevin enssa camara
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Juss promulgated on 23 July  2018,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to remove the Appellant under regulation 23 of the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 dated 8 June 2017
    was allowed, albeit on a different basis.  For ease I continue to refer
    to the parties as they were before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  Mr
    Camara as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Portugal  born  on  14  June  1967,  who
    claims to have entered the United  Kingdom  with  his  mother,  also  a
    Portuguese national, in 2011.

 3. The Respondent's decision to remove the Appellant was on the basis that
    he was not a person exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 4. Judge Juss allowed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  23  July
    2018.

The appeal

 5. The Respondent appeals on the ground that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    wrongly considered that the decision under appeal was a deportation one
    with findings made in  that  context  and  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Regulation  21(5)(c)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 and Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  However, no deportation decision had been made,  the  decision
    under challenge was for removal for failure to exercise  treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Mailer on all  grounds  on  6
    August 2018.

Findings and reasons

 1. At the oral hearing, both parties confirmed that the decision  made  in
    respect of the Appellant which was the subject  of  his  appeal  was  a
    decision  to  remove  dated  8  June  2017.   Similarly,  both  parties
    confirmed that there was no decision to deport the Appellant  dated  11
    August 2017 or otherwise.

 2. Judge Juss' decision begins in the first paragraph by  identifying  the
    decision under appeal as a  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant  under
    section 5(1) of the Immigration Act  1971  dated  11  August  2017,  by
    reference to  regulations  23  and  27  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations and subsequently reference was  made  to  an
    earlier decision of 6 June 2017 to remove the Appellant.  The  decision
    then records the evidence and submissions of the parties which were all
    clearly directed to the decision appealed, the decision to remove dated
    8 June 2017.

 3. In paragraphs 13 to 24 of the decision, the Judge  Juss  sets  out  the
    legal framework solely in relation to deportation of  an  EEA  national
    under regulations 21 and 27 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations  2016  and  caselaw  relevant  to  those  provisions.    In
    paragraph 25 of the decision he expressly states that this is the basis
    on which he is approaching the appeal and  proceeds  to  determine  the
    appeal on that basis in paragraphs 26 and following.

 4. The decision contains an egregious error of law in that Judge Juss  has
    proceeded to determine an appeal against a deportation  decision  which
    has never been taken by the Respondent.  There is not even  a  hint  or
    suggestion in any of the papers on the appeal file of  any  deportation
    decision or any decision dated 11 August  2017  and  similarly  nothing
    that suggested that there was at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal either.  The Judge is entirely mistaken as to  the  nature  of
    the decision under appeal and therefore  considers  the  appeal  on  an
    entirely false premise without making  any  findings  relevant  to  the
    actual decision under appeal, the decision to remove dated 8 June 2017.
     The decision must therefore be set aside.

 5. At the oral hearing before me, there was no dispute as to the facts  or
    the error of law made by the First-tier Tribunal.  The  parties  agreed
    that the matter is appropriately remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as
    the Appellant has not had a fair hearing of his  appeal  nor  have  any
    relevant factual findings been made in relation to the actual  decision
    under appeal.  A fresh hearing on the  basis  of  the  actual  decision
    under appeal is required.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the  appeal
for a de novo hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Birmingham)  to  be
heard by any Judge except Judge Juss.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date     15th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

