


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: EA/05737/17

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At: Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 21 January 2019                        |On: 1 February 2019                 |
|                                           |                                    |

                                   Before:

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOHN FREEMAN

                                  Between:

                                 ke RENTONG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:  Chuen Lam (counsel instructed by David Tang & Co)
For the respondent: Miss Alexandra Everett

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Pathma Lingam), sitting at Taylor House on  11  October
    2018, to  an EEA appeal by a citizen of China, born 1962. The appellant
    made an illegal entry to this country in 2002,  but  in  2013  his  son
    married an Italian citizen, and he was given a five-year residence card
    as a dependant, expiring on 23 June  2018.  On  13  June  2017  he  was
    refused a further one, for lack of evidence of dependency.

 2. On 4 October last year, just a week before the date of the hearing, the
    appellant's son's divorce was made absolute. The  judge  was  satisfied
    that the appellant remained dependent on his son, and  so  allowed  the
    appeal: she did not allow it on the basis  of  any  retained  right  of
    residence. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that what  the
    appellant needed to show was dependency on his  son's  ex-wife,  rather
    than on his son himself.



 3. Law       The appellant's son, still in work, may well be entitled to a
    retained right of residence  on  the  end  of  his  marriage;  but  the
    question is whether the appellant himself remains entitled  to  benefit
    from that. This is a pure question of law, which has to be  decided  in
    the first place on the basis  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations  2016.  The  relevant  parts  follow:  there  was  no
    suggestion that this case involved any extended family member.

"Family member"
7.- (1) In these Regulations, "family member" means, in relation to a
person ("A")-
           (a) A's spouse or civil partner;
           (b) A's direct descendants, or the direct descendants of A's
             spouse or civil partner who are either-
             (i) aged under 21; or
             (ii) dependants of A, or of A's spouse or civil partner;
           (c) dependent direct relatives in A's ascending line, or in that
             of A's spouse or civil partner.

    "Family member who has retained the right of residence"
    10.- (1)  In these Regulations, "family member who has retained the
           right of residence" means, ...  a person who satisfies a
           condition in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
         (2) ...
   (5) The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-
           (a) ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or an EEA
             national with a right of permanent residence on the
             termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A;
           (b) was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
             Regulations at the date of the termination;
           (c) satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
           (d) either-
             (i) prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the
             termination of the marriage or the civil partnership, the
             marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at least three
             years and the parties to the marriage or civil partnership had
             resided in the United Kingdom for at least one year during its
             duration;
           (ii) ...
         (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-
           (a) is not an EEA national but would, if the person were an EEA
             national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
             sufficient person under regulation 6; or
           (b) is the family member of a person who falls within paragraph
             (a).


           (f) a person who-
           (i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
             Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and
           (ii) was, at the end of the period, a family member who has
             retained the right of residence.



Right of permanent residence
      15.-(1)  The following persons acquire the right to reside in the
            United Kingdom permanently-
            ...
            (f) a person who-
             (i)    has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                  these Regulations for a continuous period of five years;
                  and
             (ii)   was, at the end of the period, a family member who has
                  retained the right of residence.

      Issue of residence card
      18.- (1) The Secretary of State must issue  a  residence  card  to  a
            person who is not an EEA national and is the family member of a
            qualified person  or  of  an  EEA  national  with  a  right  of
            permanent residence under regulation 15 ...
          (2) The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to a person
            who is not an EEA national but who is a family member  who  has
            retained the right of residence ...

 4. Discussion             Mr Lam first relied on reg. 7 (1)  (c):  however
    by the date of the hearing  the  appellant's  son  was  no  longer  the
    Italian lady's husband, and so the appellant could only claim to  be  a
    dependent direct relative in  his  son's  ascending  line.  Under  that
    paragraph, he had been a family member of the  Italian  lady  till  the
    divorce became absolute. Assuming for present purposes that his son was
    entitled to a retained right of residence, I will turn to  reg.  10  to
    see if the appellant himself could benefit from such a right.

 5. For the appellant to have a retained right  of  residence,  he  needed,
    under reg. 10 (1), to satisfy the requirements of either (2), (3),  (4)
    or (5). Of these, Mr Lam relied only on  (5).  To  qualify  under  that
    paragraph, the appellant needs to satisfy all the  conditions  in  sub-
    paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d), as shown by the  draftsman's  use  of
    'and' between (c) and (d). It can be assumed  that  (b)  and  (d)  were
    satisfied; so the appellant's case depends on satisfying (a), and  (c),
    for which in turn he needs to satisfy (6).

 6. Turning first to reg. 10 (6), the appellant is the family member of his
    son, who is a worker, so he has no difficulty with that. The difficulty
    for him comes on reg.  10  (5)  (a).  For  him  to  benefit  from  that
    paragraph, taken together with reg. 10 (1), he needs to show that he is
    a person ("A") who has "... ceased to be a family member of a qualified
    person or an EEA national with a right of permanent  residence  on  the
    termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A".

 7. The difficulty with this for the appellant is that  he  ("A")  did  not
    cease to be the family member of the Italian lady on the termination of
    his own marriage, but on that of his son. The  Regulations  provide  no
    way round this for him that I can see. Of course the Regulations do not
    create rights under EEA law, but only means for them to be  recognized.
    With this in mind I invited Mr Lam to refer  me  to  any  Directive  on
    which he could rely. However the only such provision he cited  directly
    was article 25 of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European  Parliament  and
    of the Council [the Citizens Directive], which does no more  than  make
    clear that possession of a registration certificate or similar document
    may not be  made  a  precondition  for  the  exercise  of  a  right  of
    residence.

 8. Mr Lam's final argument was on HS (EEA:revocation and retained  rights)
    Syria [2011] UKUT 165 (IAC), in particular the following passage:

       52.        Article 18 of the Directive provides that:
             "Without prejudice to Article 17, the  family  members  of  a
            Union citizen to whom Articles 12  (2)  and  13(2)  apply,  who
            satisfy the conditions laid down  therein,  shall  acquire  the
            right of permanent  residence  after  residing  legally  for  a
            period of five consecutive years in the host Member State".
       53.        This provides an alternative route for  the  appellant  to
            acquire permanent residence.  It  is  accurately  reflected  in
            regulation 15(f) [sic: 15 (1) (f)] of the 2006 Regulations  and
            requires the appellant  to  have  resided  for  five  years  in
            accordance with these regulations and was "at the end  of  that
            period  a  family  member  who  has  retained  the   right   of
            residence".  "Family  member"  here  must  mean  former  family
            member as you cease to be a family member if your  spouse  dies
            or divorces you. Residence in accordance with these Regulations
            contemplates  residence  acquired  under  any  of  the   rights
            recognised by the regulations and there  is  no  need  to  have
            resided a continuous period of five years in only one category,
            either as a spouse or a former spouse.

 9. Article 12 (2) refers to the death of a Union  citizen,  so  is  of  no
    concern here. Article 13 (2) refers back to article  2  (2);  but  this
    does no more than make it clear that a civil partner may  be  a  family
    member. Shorn of references to such a situation, article 13  (2)  runs,
    so far as relevant, as follows:

         Without prejudice to the second  subparagraph,  divorce  shall  not
         entail loss of the right of residence of a Union  citizen's  family
         members who are not nationals of a Member State where

          a) prior  to  initiation  of  the  divorce  proceedings  ...  the
             marriage has lasted at least three years, including  one  year
             in the Member State ...

10. In most cases, reg. 10 (5) (d) reproduces the effect of this.  However,
    as already discussed (see 5 -  7),  this  appellant  does  not  have  a
    retained right of residence under the Regulations, though his  son  may
    well do. Is the  appellant  nevertheless  protected  by  the  terms  of
    article 13 (2) (a)? On the basis of HS, he  had  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence after five years' qualifying  residence  here,  when
    his residence card ran out on 23  June  2018.  If  that  is  right,  he
    continued to benefit from it, regardless of whether his son  was  still
    married or not.

11. The definition of 'family member' in article 2 (2) of the Directive  is
    reproduced in reg. 7; so  article  13  (2)  appears  to  preserve  this
    appellant's right of residence, without, so far as  I  can  see,  being
    subject to the limitation  in  reg.  10  (5)  (a).  The  only  apparent
    limitation is imposed by the final  words  of  article  13  (2):  "Such
    family members shall retain their right  of  residence  exclusively  on
    personal basis". In other words, if I am right in taking the view  that
    the appellant is entitled to the benefit of article 13 (2), that  would
    not extend to any family members of his own.


12. So far as I am aware, this is a novel point. Especially as  it  appears
    to detract from my reading of the Regulations approved  by  Parliament,
    the Court of Appeal's views on it would be welcome.

Home Office appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                               23 January 2019
