

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05184/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20 February 2018                 |On 23 February 2018                   |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                MAMATAJ NAHAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Shahid, Shah Jalal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge S. Aziz, promulgated on 18 October  2017,  in  which  he
     found  that  the  Appellant  had  no  right  of  appeal   against   the
     Respondent's decision to refuse her application for  a  residence  card
     under the EEA Regulations as an extended family member.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted in view of the guidance in Khan [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1755.


The hearing


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing together with her husband who was  a
    dependant on her application.  Mr. Clarke accepted that, following  the
    case of Khan, the decision could not stand and  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Error of law


 4. The Judge in the First-tier Tribunal applied the case  of  Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).  Subsequent to that case, the
    case of Khan has held that there is a right of appeal in cases such  as
    the Appellant's.  Lord Justice Longmore, agreeing with the decision  of
    Lord Justice Irwin in the case of Khan stated as follows, [48] to [50]:

         "It is a cornerstone of the rule of law that  discretionary  powers
         conferred on Ministers of the Crown are not to be used  arbitrarily
         and that, if an exercise of power is exercised  otherwise  than  in
         accordance with the correct legal principles, it will be quashed by
         the courts. A litigant who is the subject of such a decision has an
         entitlement to an adjudication to that effect; at the very least, a
         decision by the Secretary of State not to issue a residence card is
         a decision which "concerns ... a Judgment Approved by the court for
         handing down. Khan v SSHD person's entitlement to  be  issued  with
         ... a ... residence card"  even  if  it  is  a  decision  taken  in
         pursuance of a discretion conferred on the Secretary of State.

    As Lord Halsbury LC famously said in Sharpe v Wakefield Justices [1891]
    A.C. 173, 179:-

         "... and "discretion" means when it is said that something is to be
         done within the discretion of the authorities, that that  something
         is to be done according to the rules of  reason  and  justice,  not
         according to  private  opinion  ...;  according  to  law,  and  not
         humour..."  If  "that  something"  is  a  decision  which  is   not
         "according to law" a claimant has an entitlement to relief  or,  at
         the very least, that  decision  is  a  decision  that  concerns  an
         entitlement to the object sought to be obtained - here a  residence
         card.

    As such, the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  Mr  Khan  a
    residence card, is, in my view, an EEA decision and  can  therefore  be
    appealed in the ordinary way to the First Tier Tribunal."


 5. I find that, following the case of Khan,  jurisdiction  lies  with  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  to  hear  the  Appellant's  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse  to  grant  a  residence  card  as  the
    extended family member of an EEA national.  Therefore there is a  valid
    appeal.


Decision


  6. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law, and I set the decision aside.


  7. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


  8. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 21 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

