
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05225/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21 March 2019                     |on 29 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     KE
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, of Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal J C Hamilton (the judge), promulgated  on  22  June  2018,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
         dated 20 May 2017 refusing to issue him a derivative residence card
         under regulation 16 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2016 (the 2016 Regulations) as the primary carer of  an
         EEA national child exercising Treaty rights  as  a  self-sufficient
         person.

Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born in 1983.  She  entered
         the UK in 2011 as a visitor and overstayed.  She claimed to have  a
         relationship with  a  Spanish  national,  JO,  in  2014.  She  fell
         pregnant and gave birth to their daughter, AO, on  6  August  2015.
         The appellant claimed to have then discovered that JO  was  already
         married and that he wanted nothing to do with her or their child.

      3. On 27 January 2017 the appellant applied for a derivative residence
         card confirming her right to reside as the primary carer of an  EEA
         national child. A  covering  letter  accompanying  the  application
         claimed that the appellant had sole/primary responsibility  for  AO
         and that she had been the only  one  responsible  for  raising  the
         child. The application was supported by AO's birth certificate  and
         Spanish passport. It was also accompanied by a letter from JO dated
         4 January 2017 asserting that, since AO's birth, he  had  not  been
         involved in her upbringing and that he had an 'understanding'  with
         the appellant that she should take care of the child  alone  as  he
         was married. He stated that, although he was in the UK,  he  hardly
         got involved in what concerned the child and was not interested  in
         having custody of the child as his circumstances did not permit it.
         He claimed it was "practically impossible" for the  child  to  stay
         with him. The application was also  supported  by  3  letters  from
         individuals claiming  they  had  been  financially  supporting  the
         appellant and her child.

      4. The  respondent  refused  the  application  because  there  was  no
         adequate evidence that AO was a self-sufficient person and  because
         the appellant had not demonstrated  that  AO  would  be  unable  to
         remain in the UK if she  left  for  an  indefinite  period  as  the
         child's father was a national residing in the  UK.  The  respondent
         noted that any unwillingness by JO to assume care for the child was
         not, by itself, sufficient for the appellant to assert that JO  was
         unable to care for the child.

      5. The appellant had  a  right  of  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         decision pursuant to regulation 36  of  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2016 which she exercised.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6.  The  appellant's  former  representatives  provided  a  bundle  of
         documents running to 244 pages in preparation for the hearing on  4
         May 2018. This included evidence of the appellant's private medical
         insurance and her employment, as  well  as  a  statement  from  the
         appellant dated 26 April 2018, and a letter from the appellant's GP
         stating that she was the sole primary carer for AO. The  Presenting
         Officer accepted that the appellant was now  working  and  did  not
         pursue the "self-sufficiency" ground for refusal.

      7. The judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant.  There  were  no
         other witnesses in attendance. The judge recorded  the  appellant's
         evidence which was to the effect that JO agreed  "after  a  lot  of
         pleading" to put his name on AO's birth certificate and to  arrange
         for her Spanish passport, that he had not  provided  any  financial
         support, that the appellant did  not  approach  the  Child  Support
         Agency  because  she  was  concerned  that  JO  may  "reverse   the
         passport", that he had changed his telephone number in January 2017
         and that the appellant could not contact  him.  The  appellant  was
         pregnant at the date of the appeal  hearing,  the  putative  father
         being a Nigerian national. The appellant said she had not asked the
         friends who had supported her to attend the hearing and  felt  that
         the issue of  her  sole  responsibility  for  her  child  had  been
         adequately dealt with by the GP's letter. She claimed she had  sent
         her daughter's 'Red Book' to the respondent, but the respondent had
         no record of receiving it.

      8. In the section of his decision titled 'Discussion and Findings' the
         judge summarised the representatives' submissions, which included a
         submission from  the  appellant's  representative  that  AO's  best
         interests dictated that the  appellant's  application  should  have
         been granted.

      9. At [27] the judge stated,

             "I  accept  that  broadly  speaking,  the  Appellant  gave   a
             consistent and  coherent  account  of  her  relationship  with
             [AO's] father both before and after her pregnancy. However,  I
             also accept the submission made on behalf  of  the  Respondent
             that on the  face  of  it,  her  account  of  [AO's]  father's
             behaviour was contradictory. It was said he wanted nothing  to
             do with his child  and  would  not  support  her  financially.
             Allowing his name to be placed on  the  birth  certificate  is
             clearly inconsistent with  this.  Equally  his  wish  to  have
             nothing to do with his child because he was already married is
             inconsistent with the fact that he obtained a Spanish passport
             for her, thereby enabling her mother to apply to remain in the
             UK,  where  her  and  their  child's  presence  would  pose  a
             potential threat to his marriage and increase the chances that
             he would be subjected to a claim for financial support."

     10. In subsequent paragraphs the judge rejected the  appellant's  claim
         that she had no idea of JO's whereabouts, and  rejected  her  claim
         that she had provided clear and cogent independent or  third  party
         evidence to support her account of being AO's sole carer. The  GP's
         letter was said to be brief and did not make clear  the  basis  for
         the assertions contained within it. The judge  commented  that  the
         fact that the appellant may be living alone with AO  did  not  mean
         that she was not in a relationship  with  AO's  father.  The  judge
         rejected the appellant's claim that her midwife was  aware  of  her
         circumstances as no evidence relating to the  content  of  the  Red
         Book had been provided, and the 3 people who wrote letters relating
         to their financial support of the appellant did not attend to  give
         evidence. Nor was there any evidence from a person who had acted as
         guarantor for the appellant's tenancy, or from the person with whom
         the appellant claimed  to  have  been  accommodated  when  she  was
         pregnant with AO. The judge additionally relied on the gaps in  the
         appellant's bank statements, and in particular, the absence of bank
         accounts prior to June 2017. The judge found,  in  any  event,  and
         that the bank statements raised more questions than  they  answered
         because they showed payments to other  people,  including  one  who
         shared her surname, and there was no explanation for the source  of
         a regular deposit of �200.

     11. At [35] the judge stated,

             "Looking at the evidence overall I am  not  satisfied  I  have
             been provided with  an  honest  or  accurate  account  of  the
             Appellant's circumstances,  including  her  relationship  with
             [AO's] father. It is reasonable to infer  that  the  Appellant
             has chosen not to be  candid,  because  the  truth  would  not
             assist her application. Accordingly, I find that while she may
             be [AO's] primary carer she has not shown that she  is  [AO's]
             sole carer and/or  that  [AO's]  father  would  be  unable  or
             unwilling to care for [AO] if the Appellant had to  return  to
             Nigeria."

     12. And at [36] the judge stated,

             "It follows that the Appellant has failed  to  show  that  the
             Respondent's decision compromises [AO's] best interests or was
             contrary to the Regulations."

     13. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

     14. The written grounds contend that the judge misdirected  himself  by
         requiring the appellant to prove that she had 'sole responsibility'
         rather than 'primary responsibility' for her daughter, and that the
         judge failed to apply the respondents Guidance on Derivative Rights
         to the effect that a  parent  who  resides  with  the  child  on  a
         permanent basis and does not share equal  responsibility  for  that
         child's care with another person  could  normally  be  accepted  as
         having primary responsibility. The  grounds  referred  to  evidence
         that the appellant and AO were living as a unit, which included the
         GP's letter.  The  grounds  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to
         consider the totality of the evidence before him and that he  dwelt
         on irrelevant rather than admissible evidence. I pause  to  observe
         that the grounds failed to identify what 'irrelevant' evidence  had
         been considered by the judge. The grounds  further  contended  that
         the judge drew an adverse inference  relating  to  the  appellant's
         second pregnancy, but this was clearly not the case  when  one  has
         regard to [34]. The grounds argued that AO had  always  lived  with
         the appellant and there had never been a time that JO was  involved
         in her life, and the fact that JO's  name  appeared  on  the  birth
         certificate and that he was able  to  obtain  for  his  daughter  a
         Spanish passport did not diminish the fact that he decided  not  to
         take care of AO.

     15. In granting permission to  appeal  a  Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal found it arguable that the judge erred in his  finding  at
         [35] that the appellant had not shown she was the sole carer of her
         child in the absence of evidence to support that tension.

     16. In his oral submissions at the 'error of law'  hearing  Mr  Nwaekwu
         focused  on  the  respondent's  guidance  'Free  Movement   Rights:
         derivative rights of residence', dated 27 February 2018, which  had
         been drawn to the judge's attention, and submitted  that,  contrary
         to the guidance, the judge failed to consider AO's best  interests.
         Mr Nwaekwu submitted that once the judge rejected  the  appellant's
         claim to be the sole carer of her  daughter,  it  was  nevertheless
         incumbent on the judge to then determine  AO's  best  interests.  I
         expressed my surprise to Mr Nwaekwu that not only had he failed  to
         provide me with a copy of  the  relevant  guidance,  but  that  his
         submissions were not contained in the grounds of appeal. Mr Nwaekwu
         accepted as much but submitted that every  tribunal  was  bound  to
         consider the best interests of children pursuant  to  s.55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  that  the  judge
         had, in any event, failed to make an  actual  finding  relating  to
         JO's involvement  with  AO.  It  was  submitted  that  the  judge's
         reference to AO's best interests at [36] were wholly deficient  and
         that the decision was inadequate and unsafe. Mr Avery  reminded  me
         that the burden rested on the appellant to show that  AO  would  be
         forced to leave the  UK  and  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
         comprehensively disbelieved. The judge had to make  a  decision  on
         the basis of the evidence provided by the parties and the  decision
         was sustainable. Mr Avery did not suggest he was  disadvantaged  by
         or unable to engage with the arguments advanced by  Mr  Nwaekwu.  I
         reserved my decision.

Discussion

     17. Under regulation 16(1) of the  2016  Regulations  a  person  has  a
         derived right to reside in the UK during any period in  which  that
         person is not an "exempt person" and the person satisfies  each  of
         the criteria in one or more of paragraphs (2) to (6).

     18. Regulation 16(2) reads,

             'The criteria in this paragraph are that -

               a) The person is the primary carer of an EEA national; and

               b) the EEA national -

                   i) Is under the age of 18;

                  ii) resides in the United Kingdom  as  a  self-sufficient
                      person; and

                 iii) Would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom  if
                      the person left the United Kingdom for an  indefinite
                      period.'

     19. An 'exempt person' includes someone who has a right to reside under
         another provision of the 2016 Regulations (regulation 16(7)(c)).  A
         person is the "primary carer" of a child if the person is a  direct
         relative or legal guardian of the child and either the  person  has
         primary responsibility for the child's care, or shares equally  the
         responsibility for the child's care with one other  person  who  is
         not an exempt person.

     20. In his oral submissions Mr Nwaekwu focused on the  judge's  failure
         to assess AO's best interests and not on the judge's criticisms  of
         the appellant's evidence or the judge's reference to the  appellant
         having 'sole responsibility' for her daughter.  The  issue  whether
         the judge misdirected himself by requiring the  appellant  to  show
         that she had 'sole responsibility' for AO is  something  of  a  red
         herring because the judge found, at [35], that  the  appellant  was
         AO's primary carer, and that the appellant failed to show  that  JO
         would be unable or unwilling to care for AO if the appellant had to
         return to Nigeria. That the judge was not  satisfied  that  JO  was
         unable  or  unwilling  to  care  for  his  daughter  goes  to   the
         requirement in regulation 16(2)(b)(iii), a  point  with  which  the
         grounds did not adequately engage.

     21. The judge was not bound to accept the assertions contained in  JO's
         letter, but, having noted  that  the  appellant's  account  of  her
         relationship with JO  was  "consistent  and  coherent",  the  judge
         needed to identify other evidence capable of rationally undermining
         the assertions contained in JO's letter. In his decision the  judge
         noted that JO had put his name on the birth  certificate,  arranged
         for his daughter's  Spanish  passport,  and  written  a  letter  in
         support of the residence card application.  The  judge  found  this
         behaviour was contradictory to  JO's  claim  that  he  didn't  want
         anything to do with the child as  it  enabled  the  child  and  the
         appellant to remain in the UK and, as the judge stated, potentially
         threaten JO's marriage and increase the possibility that he may  be
         subject to a claim for  financial  support.  This  was  a  rational
         assessment supported by rational reasons. Likewise, the judge  gave
         rational reasons for finding it incredible that the  appellant  was
         unable to contact JO given that his address  was  included  in  his
         letter of January 2017. The judge was rationally entitled  to  hold
         against the appellant the absence of any  oral  evidence  from  the
         individuals  who  claimed  to  have  provided  the  appellant  with
         financial support, as well as the  absence  of  evidence  from  the
         person who acted as guarantor in respect of her residence, and  the
         person with whom she lived when pregnant with  AO.  The  judge  was
         additionally entitled to draw an adverse inference from the failure
         of the appellant to provide bank statements covering  all  but  the
         period June to September 2017 and December 2017 to March 2018. This
         rendered it  impossible  to  determine  the  appellant's  financial
         circumstances over a significant period  after  the  birth  of  her
         child.

     22. The judge gave rational and sustainable  reasons  for  finding  the
         appellant's claim that JO was unable or unwilling to  care  for  AO
         unsatisfactory. It is not however the necessary corollary  of  this
         finding that AO would not be forced to  leave  the  UK.  The  issue
         before the judge was whether AO would be unable to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom if the appellant left  the  United  Kingdom  for  an
         indefinite period. It is with this  in  mind  that  I  consider  Mr
         Nwaekwu's submissions relating to the judge's approach to AO's best
         interests and the respondent's guidance relevant.

     23. In every appeal the First-tier Tribunal is bound  to  consider  the
         best interests of any child present in the UK pursuant to  s.55  of
         the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The  Charter  on
         Fundamental Rights of the European Union contains an obligation  to
         take into consideration a child's best interests  (Article  24(2)).
         I also note that, although there is no  human  rights  claim  under
         consideration in this appeal, Article 7 of the Charter protects the
         right to respect for private and family life.

     24. The Home Office Policy Guidance (Free Movement  Rights:  derivative
         rights of residence - Version 4.0. 27 February 2018) that was drawn
         to the judge's attention (see [26]) makes  reference  to  the  best
         interests of children:

             'The best interests of the child

             The duty  in  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009 to have regard to the need  to  safeguard
             and promote the welfare of children who are in  the  UK  means
             that consideration of the child's best interests is a  primary
             consideration  in  immigration  cases.  You   must   carefully
             consider  all  of  the  information  and   evidence   provided
             concerning the best interests  of  a  child  in  the  UK  when
             assessing whether a relevant child would be unable to  remain,
             or to continue to be educated, in the  UK,  if  the  applicant
             left the UK for an indefinite period.'

     25. The guidance goes on to say that,

             'Where the child is entirely dependent on the  applicant,  and
             not dependent on the other person at all, you can accept  that
             the applicant has a derivative right of residence.  Where  the
             child is entirely dependent  on  the  other  person,  and  not
             dependent on the applicant at all, you can refuse to  issue  a
             derivative residence card. In other cases, where the child  is
             more dependent on the applicant than  the  other  person,  you
             should not automatically assume that the child would be forced
             to leave the UK or EEA. Instead, you must go  on  to  consider
             the child's best interests. You must also go  on  to  consider
             the child's best interests where the child is  more  dependent
             on the other person than on the applicant.

             In a case where a child has some degree of  dependence  on  at
             least two people, the child's best interests are not on  their
             own determinative of whether requiring the applicant to  leave
             the UK for an indefinite period would force the child to leave
             the territory of the UK and/or the EEA.  They  are  a  primary
             consideration and must be considered  together  with  all  the
             other evidence  and  information  held.  You  must  take  into
             account any evidence provided in support of  the  application,
             which may include the child's own views. When considering  the
             child's  best  interests,  you  must  take  into  account  the
             consequences  on  the  child's  everyday  life  if  they   are
             separated from the applicant, for example:

             .    would they be safe, well cared-for, and  have  access  to
                  any support they need to cope with change?

             .    would they be able to keep in contact  with  the  primary
                  carer,  for  example  through  letters,  telephone  calls,
                  instant messaging, and video messaging  services  such  as
                  Skype and FaceTime, email and/or visits?

             .    would they need to move home, and if  so,  how  does  the
                  nature, quality and location of their current home compare
                  with where they would live in future?

             .    would there be disruption to their education, for example
                  could they keep attending the same school?

             .    would they be able to keep in contact with their  friends
                  and any other family members?

             You should write out for further information  if  you  do  not
             have enough information to know what is in  the  child's  best
             interests. However, you can generally assume that it is in the
             child's best interests to:

             .    remain in the UK, unless they have equal or stronger ties
                  to another country

             .    live with both parents or, if the parents live apart,  to
                  have contact with both parents, unless there are any child
                  welfare concerns Page 54 of 65 Published for  Home  Office
                  staff on 27 February 2018

             .    minimise disruption to their everyday life, unless it  is
                  in their best interests to change the status quo'

     26. The Home Office guidance is stated to have  been  amended  to  take
         account of the CJEU's judgment in Chavez Vilchez  v  Raadvanbestuur
         van der Sociale Verzekeringsbank & others [2018]  QB  103  ("Chavez
         Vilchez").  Those cases were concerned with the proposed removal of
         third country national parents  who  were  the  primary  carers  of
         European citizen children, where the other European citizen  parent
         was either absent or played a minimal role in the child's life. The
         Court considered the issue of the interaction of  the  establishing
         of derivative rights and  the  best  interests  of  the  child  and
         reasoned as follows:

             "68. In that regard, it must be recalled that, in the judgment
             of 6 December 2012, O and  Others  ...  the  Court  held  that
             factors of relevance, for the purposes of determining  whether
             a refusal to grant a right of  residence  to  a  third-country
             national parent of a child who is a Union citizen  means  that
             that child  is  deprived  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
             substance of the rights  conferred  on  him  by  that  status,
             include the question of who  has  custody  of  the  child  and
             whether that child  is  legally,  financially  or  emotionally
             dependent on the third-country national parent.

             69.  As regards the second factor, the Court has  stated  that
             it is the relationship of dependency between the Union citizen
             who is a minor and the third country national who is refused a
             right  of  residence  that  is  liable   to   jeopardise   the
             effectiveness  of  Union  citizenship,  since   it   is   that
             dependency that would lead to the Union citizen being obliged,
             in practice, to leave not only the  territory  of  the  Member
             State of which he is a national but also that of the  European
             Union as a whole, as a consequence of such a refusal (see,  to
             that effect, judgments of 8 March 2011, Ruiz Zambrano  ...  of
             15 November 2011, Dereci and Others ...;  and  of  6  December
             2012, O and Others, ...).

             70.  In this  case,  in  order  to  assess  the  risk  that  a
             particular child, who is a Union citizen, might  be  compelled
             to leave the territory of the European Union  and  thereby  be
             deprived of the genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the
             rights conferred on him by Article  20  TFEU  if  the  child's
             third-country national parent were to be refused  a  right  of
             residence in the Member State concerned, it  is  important  to
             determine, in each case at  issue  in  the  main  proceedings,
             which parent is the primary carer of  the  child  and  whether
             there is in fact a  relationship  of  dependency  between  the
             child and the third-country national parent. As part  of  that
             assessment, the competent authorities must take account of the
             right to respect for family life, as stated in  Article  7  of
             the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union,  that
             article  requiring  to  be  read  in  conjunction   with   the
             obligation to take into consideration the  best  interests  of
             the child, recognised in Article 24(2) of that charter.

             71.  For the purposes of such an assessment, the fact that the
             other parent, a Union citizen, is actually able and willing to
             assume sole responsibility for the primary day-to-day care  of
             the child is a relevant factor, but it  is  not  in  itself  a
             sufficient ground for a conclusion that there is not,  between
             the third-country  national  parent  and  the  child,  such  a
             relationship of dependency that the child would  be  compelled
             to leave the territory of the European Union  if  a  right  of
             residence were refused  to  that  third-country  national.  In
             reaching such a conclusion, account must be taken, in the best
             interests  of  the  child  concerned,  of  all  the   specific
             circumstances, including the age of  the  child,  the  child's
             physical  and  emotional  development,  the  extent   of   his
             emotional ties both to the Union citizen  parent  and  to  the
             third-country national parent, and the risks which  separation
             from the latter might entail for that child's equilibrium.

             ...

             78.  ... Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as not precluding
             a Member State from providing that the right of  residence  in
             its territory of a third-country national, who is a parent  of
             a minor child that is a national of that Member State and  who
             is responsible for the primary day-to-day care of that  child,
             is subject to the requirement that the third-country  national
             must provide evidence to prove that a refusal of  a  right  of
             residence to the third-country national parent  would  deprive
             the child of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of  the
             rights pertaining to the child's status as a Union citizen, by
             obliging the child to leave  the  territory  of  the  European
             Union, as a whole. It is however for the competent authorities
             of the Member State concerned to undertake, on  the  basis  of
             the evidence  provided  by  the  third-country  national,  the
             necessary enquiries in order to be  able  to  assess,  in  the
             light of all the specific  circumstances,  whether  a  refusal
             would have such consequences."

     27. Both the respondent's  policy  and  the  case-law  underlying  that
         policy, therefore, consider what is in the child's  best  interests
         in this context by reference to the  level  of  dependency  of  the
         child on the parent to be removed and whether that dependency would
         entail the child having to leave the EU.

     28. The judge was not ultimately satisfied  that  JO  is  unwilling  or
         unable to care for AO if the appellant had to  return  to  Nigeria.
         That conclusion was not however determinative of the  issue  before
         the First-tier Tribunal, as Chavez Vilchez makes clear.

     29. At [36] the judge does not ask himself the question  posed  by  reg
         16(2)(b)(iii) (whether the child would be unable to remain  in  the
         UK if the appellant left for an indefinite period).  This  question
         can only be determined by  having  regard  to  the  nature  of  the
         relationship between the appellant and her child and  to  the  best
         interests of the child and, in particular, by  considering  whether
         the relationship between the  child  and  the  appellant  contained
         elements of dependency  such  that,  notwithstanding  that  JO  can
         actually assume day-to-day responsibility for AO, the child will in
         reality be compelled to leave the EU. The judge's  brief  reference
         to the child's best interest at [36] is wholly inadequate  in  this
         regard. There has been no  adequate  assessment  of  the  emotional
         attachment between the appellant and AO, who was under three  years
         old at the date of the judge's decision. The judge accepts that the
         AO was living with the appellant, but there are no  clear  findings
         whether the child has had any contact with her biological father. I
         appreciate  that  these  may  be  difficult   findings   to   make,
         particularly in circumstances  where  a  judge  believed  that  the
         appellant had not been candid. The extent  to  which  a  judge  can
         undertake a detailed assessment of the best interests  of  a  child
         will, to a significant degree, be dependent on the evidence that an
         individual chooses to disclose in an appeal. If one parent  asserts
         that the other parent has disavowed any  association  with  an  EEA
         national child, and this assertion is rejected for rational reasons
         and by reference to the available evidence, a judge will usually be
         left with very limited facts. There may be cases in which  a  judge
         is entitled to infer, because of the limited nature and quality  of
         the evidence available, that there is no relationship of dependency
         between a child and the parent with whom the child lives such  that
         the child will be compelled to  leave  the  EU,  but  it  is  still
         incumbent on the judge to undertake this assessment.

     30. I have been persuaded by Mr Nwaekwu that, in  not  being  satisfied
         that JO was willing and able to care his daughter, the judge failed
         to consider whether there was nevertheless such a  relationship  of
         dependency between the child and the appellant such that the  child
         would be compelled to leave the EU. I find this is an error a point
         of law and that the judge's decision should be set aside.

     31. Given the need for further findings of fact,  and  given  that  the
         judge found the appellant's account of her  relationship  with  JO,
         broadly speaking, to have been consistent and coherent, I  consider
         it appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
         decided afresh by a  judge  other  than  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal J C Hamilton.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  hearing
before a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal J C Hamilton.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    27 March 2019
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

