

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ea/05327/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 October 2018                         |On 3 December 2018              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                                 Daoud Amini
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Linda Appiah, instructed by Vine Court Chambers

For the respondent:    Mr Andrew McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  dismissing  his  appeal  against   the
   respondent's decision to refuse him a  permanent right  of  residence  in
   the United Kingdom  on the basis of retained rights of residence pursuant
   to Regulation 10 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
   2016.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and was formerly married  to  a
   French citizen.  Her exercise of Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  is
   based on her employment by a  company  of  which  the  appellant  is  the
   proprietor.  The respondent does not dispute that the wife  was  paid  by
   the appellant's company, nor that she received payslips which  match  the
   sums paid to  her  bank  account.   The  respondent  contended  that  the
   employment may not be genuine.

3. The relevant paragraphs in the refusal letter were as follows:

         "As evidence of your sponsor's Treaty rights, you have provided  an
         accountant's letter stating that the EEA national was employed  for
         Comaksecure Limited between 1 July 2015  and  9  August  2016,  and
         printed payslips dated between April  2016  and  August  2016  from
         Comaksecure Ltd.  However, as stated in your application form,  you
         are the Director of Comaksecure  Ltd,  as  confirmed  on  Companies
         House.  As such, it is reasonable to assume that you would be  able
         to  submit  further  evidence  of  your  sponsor's  employment   at
         Comaksecure Ltd, such as copies of P60s, employment contracts  etc.
         You have  not  provided  any  evidence  of  how  your  sponsor  has
         exercised  Treaty  rights  between  the  date  you  were  issued  a
         residence card and 1 July 2015.

         You must also provide evidence that since the date of your  divorce
         you have been a worker, a self-employed person or a self sufficient
         person.  You have stated in your application that  since  2013  you
         have been self employed.  You have provided a letter from  Security
         Industry Authority as evidence.  Whilst it  is  accepted  that  you
         have applied for your security licence, the evidence provided  does
         not confirm that your application has been accepted.  As such, this
         department is unable  to  verify  whether  you  have  the  required
         qualifications to legally provide your private security services. "

4. There  were  no  invoices  correlating  with  payments  received  in  the
   appellant's bank account, and no HMRC evidence in respect either  of  the
   appellant or his sponsor spouse.

First-tier Tribunal decision

5. The First-tier Tribunal in a decision sent to the parties on 5 June  2018
   approached the decision in this appeal on the  basis  that  the  date  on
   which the appellant must show that his former wife was exercising  Treaty
   rights was the date of decree absolute,  29  June  2016.   However,  that
   decision takes no account of the guidance of Lord Justice Singh,  sitting
   alone in the Court of Appeal in Baigazieva v Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1088 on 20 April 2018, that the  relevant
   date is the date of issue of the divorce proceedings,  not  the  date  of
   decree absolute.

6. The Baigazieva judgment had been handed down well before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal decision and accordingly, there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
   Judge's approach.  That error may well be material: the  evidence  before
   me does not address itself to the Baigazieva date and by agreement,  this
   appeal was adjourned to enable that to be done.

7. By a letter dated 8 November 2018, the respondent confirmed that  he  had
   been provided with evidence of the Baigazieva date, but not  any  or  any
   adequate evidence of the exercise of Treaty  rights  by  the  appellant's
   former wife. The respondent stated that he  'continues  to  rely  on  the
   points made in the refusal letter that the appellant, as [his wife's] ex-
   employer, should be in a position to be able to provide adequate evidence
   of her employment at the relevant date'.

Discussion

8.  The  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  insufficient   to
   establish that the appellant's spouse was exercising Treaty rights for  a
   period of 5 years  before  the  application  for  a  permanent  right  of
   residence under Regulation 15(1) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
   Area) Regulations 2016 on 2 November 2016.  All of the evidence  required
   by the respondent to establish the appellant's entitlement to a permanent
   right of residence under the Regulations is set out in the refusal letter
   and is in the custody or control of the appellant but, it seems, he still
   has not provided it.

9. The appellant has  been  given  ample  opportunity  to  provide  relevant
   evidence, which, unusually in a retained rights of residence case, is all
   available to the appellant,  who  is  both  spouse  and  employer.    The
   evidence provided was inadequate and remains so.

10. The Tribunal does not consider that a further oral hearing  is  required
   to dispose of this appeal.

11. This appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

12. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law
   I set aside the previous decision. I  substitute  a  decision  dismissing
   this appeal.

Date:         28 November 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


