

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/05401/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 11 October 2018                           |On 17 October 2018          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                 LOVELIE [I]
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Krushner, of Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Filipino national born on 21 October 1984.  She
          is the mother of an Irish national child and  she  challenges  the
          determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rowlands,  promulgated
          on 20 June 2018, dismissing her appeal  against  the  respondent's
          refusal to grant her a derivative residence card.




       2. Permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal was granted by Judge Grimmett on 14 August  2018  on  the
          basis that the judge had arguably erred in  failing  to  make  any
          finding on the issue of whether  the  appellant  was  the  primary
          carer of the child. The matter then came before me on  11  October
          2018.


       3. The Hearing


       4. I  heard  submissions  from  the  parties.  A  full  note  of  the
          submissions is set out  in  my  Record  of  Proceedings.  For  the
          appellant, Mr Krushner relied on the two  grounds  that  had  been
          argued. The first was that no findings at all had been made on the
          issue of whether the appellant was the child's primary carer.  The
          second was that inadequate  or  no  reasons  had  been  given  for
          whether the claim of self-sufficiency had been made  out.  If  the
          judge dismissed the appeal because the child itself was not  self-
          sufficient  then  he  was  wrong  as  self-sufficiency  could   be
          established by the  child's  primary  carer.  Clearly,  argued  Mr
          Krushner, no child could ever provide its own funds. It was argued
          that the findings were unclear and there was  nothing  to  suggest
          that the judge considered the evidence as  none  of  it  had  been
          mentioned.  There  was  evidence  as  to  the   appellant's   free
          accommodation and the charitable funds she received; none of  this
          was referred to. The determination was unsafe and  should  be  set
          aside.


       5. In response, Mr Melvin very fairly and properly conceded  that  he
          could not defend the determination.


       6. I did not require any further  submissions  from  Mr  Krushner.  I
          indicated that I would be  setting  aside  the  determination  and
          remitting it for a fresh hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
          I now give my reasons for doing so.


       7. Discussion and Conclusions


       8. The determination is plainly inadequate. The judge refers  to  the
          "Chang" rather than the Chen case (at paragraph 1) and proceeds to
          refer to reg. 17 instead of 16 as he should  have  done.  Although
          the judge was required to make  findings  both  on  the  issue  of
          whether the appellant is the primary carer of  her  child  and  on
          self-sufficiency, he made no finding at all on the former and  his
          findings  on  the  latter  are  wholly  inadequate,  unlawful  and
          unsustainable. The judge appears to find that the child cannot  be
          self-sufficient because of his young age. He takes no  account  of
          the appellant's position or of third  party  support  despite  the
          evidence of this before him.


       9. The errors are so serious that the only possible outcome is to set
          aside the decision in its entirety.


      10. Decision


      11. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law. The  decision  is  set
          aside. It shall be remade  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal at a date to be arranged.


      12. Anonymity


      13. I have not been asked to make an anonymity order and see no reason
          to do so.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 11 October 2018




