
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05426/2018
                                                               EA/05427/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mrs Vidhyaben DilipKumar Modi
                        Mr Dilipkumar Jayantilal Modi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Waheed, counsel instructed by Hamlet Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweet, promulgated on 6 March 2019. Permission to appeal was granted by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 10 April 2019.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. On 17 July 2018, the Secretary of  State  refused  to  issue  residence
    cards to the respondents as confirmation of a right of residence  under
    European Community law as the dependent direct family members of an EEA
    national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   While
    accepting  that  the  respondents  were  the  parents-in-law  of  their
    daughter-in-law who is an  EEA  national  currently  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United  Kingdom,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    applications because  the  documents  submitted  with  the  application
    contained no evidence that they were either living with or  financially
    supported by their daughter-in-law.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary of State's
    representative  argued  that  there  was  no  evidence   of   financial
    dependency. The respondent's case was primarily put on the  basis  that
    they were living in the same household of the sponsor. The judge  found
    the witnesses to be credible and concluded that  the  respondents  were
    living with their son and daughter-in-law, the latter  being  the  only
    person bringing an income into the household.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge  failed  to  make  adequate
    findings of fact and failed to give any adequate reasons  for  findings
    on a material matter. In particular, the judge had failed to adequately
    consider the respondents' circumstances prior to leaving  India,  there
    was no consideration of whether they were working or  had  assets.  The
    respondents had entered the United Kingdom on  visit  visas  and  would
    have had  to  demonstrate  that  they  intended  to  return  to  India.
    Furthermore, it was argued that the judge failed  to  consider  whether
    the sponsor could maintain  herself,  her  husband,  her  son  and  the
    respondents from her income. There was no  reference  to  any  evidence
    that the sponsor was able to maintain the household or  to  her  income
    and expenditure.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 7. In advance of the hearing, Mr Waheed provided a skeleton argument which
    objected to the Secretary of State raising the new issue regarding  the
    respondents' circumstances in India in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. Furthermore,  the  skeleton  argument  emphasised  that
    there had been no challenge to the judge's finding that the respondents
    resided in the same household as their EEA sponsor daughter-in-law.



The hearing

 8. Ms Everett argued that there was inadequate reasoning  in  relation  to
    demonstrating dependence of the respondents on the sponsor as required.
    She contended that it was relevant to  ask  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision prevented the EEA national from exercising freedom  of
    movement and she asked me to note that in order to  be  issued  with  a
    visit visa, the respondents had to  demonstrate  they  had  a  life  to
    return to back home.

 9. Mr Waheed relied on his skeleton argument. In addition,  he  emphasised
    that the decision letter made no mention of the matters raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  regarding  the  respondents'
    circumstances  in  India  and  nor  had  the   Secretary   of   State's
    representative before the First-tier Tribunal raised such issues in his
    submissions. Mr Waheed argued that the Secretary of  State  could  have
    applied to amend the decision letter in advance of the hearing but  had
    not done so. As for dependency, the decision letter  stated  only  that
    the Secretary of State did not accept that the respondents  lived  with
    or were dependent on the sponsor. The Secretary of State's  grounds  of
    appeal did not challenge the point that the respondents have lived with
    their sponsor at all material times.

10. Ms Everett responded to Mr Waheed's submissions by accepting  that  the
    appeal was prepared to address the issues raised in the decision letter
    but that a more nuanced approach allowed for the consideration  of  the
    respondents' circumstances in India.

11. At the end of the hearing I announced that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was upheld because there was no challenge to the  judge's
    principal finding, that the respondents are members  of  the  sponsor's
    household. Furthermore, the matters now relied upon by the Secretary of
    State were never raised previously either in  the  decision  letter  or
    during the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Signed                                  Date 06 June 201908 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



