
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05121/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 11 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                prince Asiedu
                            (No anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel instructed by Mensons &
Associates
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent not to grant him a registration certificate as  confirmation
    of a right of permanent residence as the former family member of an EEA
    national pursuant to Regulations 6 and 15 of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 2. The appellant is a Ghanaian citizen and his former spouse was a  French
    citizen, thus an EEA national.  They  married  on  1  October  2010  in
    Accra, Ghana, and he was granted a residence card as the family  member
    of an EEA national on 25 November 2011, expiring on 25  November  2016.
    That residence card did not itself confer status, but for  so  long  as
    the appellant remained married to his EEA national spouse and they were
    both in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations,  it
    evidenced his rights as her family member.

 3. The  respondent's  letter  dated  25  November  2011  accompanying  the
    endorsement on the appellant's passport of his status as an EEA  family
    member said this:

         "At present your only claim to remain in the United Kingdom  is  as
         the family member of an European Economic Area (EEA)  national  who
         is exercising Treaty rights here.  If your family member decides to
         leave the United Kingdom, or ceases to exercise Treaty  rights,  or
         if you cease to be a family member, you would have  to  qualify  to
         remain in the United Kingdom in your own right.   This  Directorate
         should be notified immediately if your  family  member  decides  to
         leave the United Kingdom, or ceases  to  exercise  a  Treaty  right
         here, or if you cease to be a family member."

 4. Unhappy differences having occurred, the marriage came  to  an  end  in
    2015.  It seems that divorce proceedings began during 2015, ending with
    a decree absolute on  7  September  2015.   As  is  unfortunately  very
    common, the appellant's former spouse has not cooperated  by  providing
    evidence of her exercise of Treaty rights during the period of 4  years
    and just over 11 months that they  were  married.   Nor  is  there  any
    evidence of exactly when the parties entered  the  United  Kingdom  and
    began living here in accordance with the Regulations.



First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Tribunal refused to adjourn the hearing and  direct  the
    respondent to seek the relevant tax returns from HMRC.

 6. A friend of the appellant, a Mr Benwell, had somehow obtained 4  years'
    worth of HMRC records regarding her income, but the HMRC record for the
    tax  year  2014/2015  was  missing.   Understandably,   the   appellant
    addressed himself to the 7 September 2015 decree absolute date, not the
    earlier date of issue, but in any event, one whole year's  tax  returns
    were missing and there was no evidence about his own status  after  the
    marriage ended.

 7. The  First-tier  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  met  the
    requirement  of  Regulation  15(1)(a)  of  the  Regulations,  that   he
    demonstrate that he had resided in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance
    with the Regulations for a continuous period of 5 years and the  appeal
    was dismissed.

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.



Permission to appeal

 9. The grounds of appeal make two mutually incompatible criticisms of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, first that the  missing  2014/2015
    HMRC record was provided, and  second,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    unfairly refused an adjournment and refused to direct the respondent to
    ask HMRC to produce it.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis:

         "The grounds of appeal contend that HMRC  documents  for  2014/2015
         were lodged and  furthermore  the  Judge  had  not  given  adequate
         reasons for refusing an adjournment.  Finally, it is said the Judge
         did not make sufficient findings.

         The Judge said that the records for the year April  2014  to  April
         2015 were missed out  and  since  the  issue  is  a  material  one,
         permission to appeal is granted for reasons given in  the  grounds.
         Plainly the Judge could not be faulted  if  the  records  were  not
         before him.

         The Judge gave reasons for refusing the  adjournment  but  for  the
         sake of clarity, permission to appeal is granted on all grounds. "



Rule 24 Reply

11. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 Reply to the grant of  permission
    to appeal.

12. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

13. At the hearing, I heard submissions from Ms  M  Malhotra  and  from  Mr
    Walker for the respondent.  I have seen the  bundle  which  was  relied
    upon before the First-tier Tribunal which forms a discrete  element  of
    the bundle prepared for the Upper Tribunal proceedings.   I  have  also
    seen [2] and [11] of the decision of the First-tier Judge  which  state
    that the employment records produced for the wife ran only from 2010 to
    2014, missing out the tax year April 2014 to April 2015.   The  grounds
    of appeal assert that this is not true, but there is no evidence beyond
    that assertion and none of the spouse's employment  records  appear  in
    the bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal.

14. I asked whether the appellant had  any  evidence  with  him  about  his
    status after the Baigazieva date, the date  of  issue  of  the  divorce
    proceedings, or whether he could confirm when that was.  He could not.





Analysis

15. These grounds of appeal are a challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding of fact that  the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  5  years'
    residence in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  the  Regulations,
    because his  former  spouse's  HMRC  records  for  2014/2015  were  not
    produced.

16. On the evidence before me, the appellant has not met the  standard  for
    interference with a the First-tier Tribunal's finding of fact that  the
    2014/2015 HMRC records were not produced (see judgment of Lord  Justice
    Brooke at [90] in R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982).   The First-tier  Judge's  reasoning  is  neither
    perverse nor Wednesbury unreasonable, nor contrary to the evidence, nor
    a decision  which  I  cannot  understand,  and  accordingly  the  Upper
    Tribunal has no power to interfere with the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal and this appeal is dismissed.

17. In any event, the refusal to  adjourn  and  direct  the  respondent  to
    obtain that record, challenged in the grounds of  appeal,  is  a  clear
    indication that the document was not present and that the appellant  is
    not telling the truth when he says it was there.  I  am  not  satisfied
    that any proper reason has been shown to go behind the plain  statement
    in the decision of the First-tier Judge that the 2014/2015 HMRC  record
    was not before him.

18. Even if the 2014/2015 HMRC record had been present, the appellant would
    have been in difficulty.  In order to establish a  permanent  right  of
    residence, the appellant must show that he has resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for  a  period  of  5  years
    (Regulation 15(1)(a)).  He cannot do  so  in  reliance  on  his  wife's
    exercise of Treaty rights, because the marriage  did  not  last  for  5
    years and the last date on which he can rely on her exercise of  Treaty
    rights is the date of issue of the divorce petition (see  Baigazieva  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1088).   The
    exact date of issue of the proceedings is not  known,  but  the  decree
    absolute bears a file number beginning WT15D and it  is  reasonable  to
    assume that the divorce proceedings  were  lodged  in  the  year  2015.
    Decree absolute was pronounced after 4 years 11 months of marriage, but
    the Baigazieva date (the date of issue of the proceedings)  would  have
    been somewhat earlier than that.

19. The appellant is entitled pursuant to Regulation 10(6)  to  include  in
    the calculation of the 5-year period a period after the  issue  of  the
    divorce proceedings during which were he an EEA national, he would be a
    worker, self-employed person or self-sufficient person  as  defined  by
    Regulation 6, provided that, as here, the marriage had  lasted  for  at
    least 3 years and the parties had resided in the United Kingdom for  at
    least one of those years.    It is impossible to tell from the evidence
    which was before the First-tier Tribunal whether the appellant would be
    able to meet the Regulation 10(6) test: he  waited  for  his  residence
    card as a spouse, granted in 2011, to expire  in  2016  and  then  then
    applied for a permanent right of residence without any evidence of  his
    own economic activity after the divorce petition was issued.

20. If the appellant does have evidence of his status as  a  worker,  self-
    employed or self-sufficient person  from  the  date  of  issue  of  the
    divorce petition to the 5th anniversary of  his  being  in  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations (which may be 2010 or  2011,
    that is not clear from the evidence before me), then it is open to  him
    to make a fresh application and produce all the relevant evidence.

21. The appellant's challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in
    this appeal cannot succeed and the appeal is dismissed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed:        Judith  A  J  C  Gleeson                          Date:    28
November 2018
              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

