
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/05616/2017
                                                               EA/05617/2017
                                                               EA/05619/2017
                                                               EA/05620/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st January 2019                 |On 31st January 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                  Bibi [K]
                                    [H K]
                                    [F K]
                                    [A K]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S. Knight, Counsel instructed by Rahman and
                    Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are all nationals of Afghanistan who assert a Surinder
       Singh right of residence under the  Citizenship  Directive  (2004/38)
       and  Regulation  9  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
       Regulations 2016 ('the Regulations'). They are respectively a  mother
       and her three minor children.

    2. By its decision dated the 29th January 2018 the  First-tier  Tribunal
       (Judge Obhi) dismissed their linked appeals.  Permission to appeal to
       this Tribunal was granted by Judge Nightingale on the 22nd May 2018.

    3. The accepted facts are as follows. The Sponsor of these applications,
       Mr [K], is the husband of the first  Appellant,  and  father  to  the
       remaining three.  At some point he travelled from Afghanistan to  the
       United Kingdom and was subsequently granted British  citizenship.  In
       2015 he travelled from the United Kingdom to the Republic of Ireland,
       where he took up employment, found accommodation and registered  with
       a doctor. The Appellants were all granted a right of entry to Ireland
       under the Regulations: they were at that point family members  of  an
       EEA national exercising free movement rights.   Their date  of  entry
       to Ireland is recorded as the 9th August 2015. They were subsequently
       granted a right of residence valid until the 11th January  2020.   On
       the 22nd November 2016 the Appellants made applications for residence
       cards in the United Kingdom, citing Regulation 9 and relying on their
       period of residence in Ireland with Mr [K].

    4. The matter in issue before the First-tier Tribunal  was  whether  the
       family's residence in Ireland was "genuine".  The Tribunal found that
       it was not, and dismissed the appeal.

    5.  Mr  Knight  has  produced  a  carefully  drafted  skeleton  argument
       identifying what he submits to be a fundamental error in approach  by
       the First-tier Tribunal.  At paragraph 28 of  its  determination  the
       Tribunal said this:

           "The sole issue in this case is whether the appellant's spouse's
           residence in Ireland was genuine, or whether it was a means  for
           him to evade the Immigration Rules which  require  him  to  meet
           certain  financial,  language  and  relationship   requirements"
           (emphasis added)

       It is the submission of the Appellants that the question  of  whether
       the residence was "genuine"  had  to  be  applied  in  light  of  the
       Directive  and  caselaw  including  O  v  Minister  voor  Immigratie,
       Integratie en Asiel (C-456/12); as to  the  italicised  words,  these
       constituted a material misdirection, appearing to import as they do a
       'primary purpose' style test.

    6. Mr Diwnycz did not disagree. He accepted that no burden  lay  on  the
       Appellants to establish why they moved to Ireland. The only  question
       was whether they had in fact in substance done so. That this is so is
       reflected in Home Office policy, which  expressly  excludes  'primary
       purpose' considerations from decision-makers' minds:

           "However, if one of the reasons for  moving  to  another  Member
           State was to avoid the requirements of the Immigration Rules but
           the residence in that Member State was in any case genuine, then
           the intention to avoid the requirements of the Immigration Rules
           it not in itself sufficient to refuse to issue a residence card"

    7. The second ground was that in making its assessment the Tribunal  had
       failed to have regard to  material  evidence.  This  ground  too  was
       conceded by the Respondent, who accepted  that  the  Judge  does  not
       appear to have positively weighed in the balance  evidence  that  the
       family were all registered with the local doctor, or that  the  three
       children were all enrolled, and attended school,  in  Ireland  for  a
       year.   I would add that in making  its  finding  that  the  family's
       accommodation in Ireland was only "temporary" the Tribunal appears to
       have overlooked the fact that Mr Kadarkhail lived in largely  similar
       circumstances in the United Kingdom. The fact that a home  is  rented
       does not stop it being a home.    Similarly the type  of  low-skilled
       work that Mr Kadarkhail undertook - working in a shop, taxi driving -
       may well be 'temporary' in the sense that it could  be  insecure,  or
       the worker might move on to better things, but that does not stop  it
       being a job. Mr Diwnycz  accepted  that  where  a  family  reside  in
       another Member  State  for  a  period  of  a  year,  take  up  lawful
       employment, create a home there, send their children  to  school  and
       avail themselves of local services, there is in substance a level  of
       integration necessary to qualify as "genuine" residence.

    8. I therefore set the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  aside  and
       substitute it with a decision allowing the appeals.   The only matter
       in issue was whether the residence in Ireland was "genuine". Applying
       the guidance in O & B to  the  facts  in  this  case  the  Respondent
       accepts that test to be made out.

       Decisions

    9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors  of  law
       and it is set aside. The appeals are allowed.

   10. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           21st January 2019
