
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05066/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2018                     |On 28 December 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MUHAMMAD ASIF SAEED KUNWAR
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R H Rashid instructed by Marks & Marks Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The respondent (whom I shall refer to as "the claimant") is  a  citizen
    of Pakistan who was born on 4 April 1981.

 2. On 21 September 2015, he applied for a permanent residence  card  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003 as amended)  ("the
    2006 Regulations").  That application was refused by the  Secretary  of
    State on 4 March 2016.

 3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on 7  March  2018,  Judge  R  E  Barrowclough  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted, permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Simpson)  on  26
    April 2018.

The Background

 5. The claimant relied upon his durable relationship with an EEA national,
    Ms Marlena Opara who is a Polish national.  The  uncontested  evidence,
    which was accepted by the judge, was that the  claimant  and  Ms  Opara
    began their relationship in September 2006 and started living  together
    in January 2007.  They lived  together  until  March  2014  when  their
    relationship broke down and Ms Opara returned to Poland.

 6. The claimant contended that he had resided in the UK in accordance with
    the 2006 Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five  years,  in  a
    durable relationship with Ms Opara, between March 2009 and March  2014.
    The claimant relied on the fact that he had been  granted  a  residence
    card as an "extended family member" in September 2009 and that prior to
    that, and at least back to  March  2009,  he  had  been  in  a  durable
    relationship with Ms Opara.  Those two periods,  when  added  together,
    amounted to five years' continuous lawful residence in accordance  with
    the 2006 Regulations.

 7. Judge Barrowclough accepted that Ms Opara had  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights during that period.  That is no longer in issue and I  need  say
    no more about it.

 8.  Further,  Judge  Barrowclough  accepted  the  basis  upon  which   the
    claimant's case was  put  as  giving  rise  to  a  permanent  right  of
    residence based upon the claimant's relationship,  as  a  durable  one,
    between March 2009 and March 2014.  The judge's reasons are  succinctly
    set out in paragraph 7 of the determination as follows:

         "7.  Put shortly, I accept and agree with Mr  Rashid's  submissions
             on the appellant's behalf.  On the basis  of  the  uncontested
             evidence before me that the appellant and his EEA  sponsor  Ms
             Opara  were  cohabiting  from   January   2007   until   their
             relationship ended in March 2014, and  in  the  light  of  the
             respondent's concession that Ms Opara  was  exercising  Treaty
             rights in the UK for a continuous period of five years  before
             leaving the UK and  returning  to  Poland,  I  find  that  the
             appellant acquired the right to reside in the  UK  permanently
             as a family member of an EEA national with whom he resided  in
             the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  2006  Regulations  for   a
             continuous  period  of  five  years,  pursuant  to  Regulation
             15(1)(b).  Accordingly, and  for  these  reasons,  his  appeal
             succeeds and is allowed.  In  my  judgment  the  appellant  is
             entitled to a permanent residence card as  confirmation  of  a
             right to reside in the UK, pursuant to the 2006 Regulations".





The Issue

 9. It was accepted by Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of  State,
    that the claimant was  resident  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations from the date he was issued with a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member in September 2009 until his  relationship  broke
    down in March 2014.  That is a period of four  years  and  six  months.
    However, Mr Howells did not accept that the claimant  could  rely  upon
    his durable relationship prior to the issue of that card so as to 'bolt
    on' a further period between March 2009 and September 2009 in order  to
    establish a period of five years' continuous  residence  in  accordance
    with the 2006  Regulations.   Mr  Howells  submitted  that,  until  the
    Secretary of State exercised his discretion to issue a  residence  card
    under reg 17(4), the claimant was not a "family member" as  defined  in
    reg 7(3) read with reg 8(5).  He could not,  therefore,  establish  for
    the purposes of reg 15(1)(b) that he was a "family member"  of  an  EEA
    national residing in the UK in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for
    a continuous period of five years.

10. Mr Rashid, who represented the  claimant,  relied  upon  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in  Macastena  v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1558.   He
    submitted that, in that case, the court had accepted that an individual
    could rely upon the period of his durable relationship  even  prior  to
    the issue of a  residence  card  once  a  card  had  been  issued.   He
    submitted that the outcome in Macastena, where the individual  had  not
    been entitled to rely upon his durable relationship, was dependent upon
    the fact that in that case no card had ever  been  issued.   Here,  the
    Secretary of State had exercised his discretion to  issue  a  residence
    card in September 2009.  Mr  Rashid  submitted  that,  given  that  the
    application was made in May 2009, the Secretary of State must have been
    satisfied that the claimant was in  a  durable  relationship  with  his
    partner at least from March 2009.  Indeed, the judge had found that  as
    a fact in his decision.

The Law

11. The relevant domestic provisions are found  in  the  2006  Regulations.
    These have  subsequently  been  superseded  by  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052) which are materially the same as  those
    applicable to this appeal.

12. The claimant relies upon reg 15(1)(b) as the basis  for  his  permanent
    right of residence.  That provides as follows:

         "15. (1)      The following persons acquire the right to  residence
                  in the United Kingdom permanently -


                  ...


                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not an  EEA
                      national but who has resided in  the  United  Kingdom
                      with  the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  these
                      Regulations for a continuous period  of  five  years;
                      ..."


13. A "family member" of an EEA national is defined in reg 7  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  Regulation 7(1) sets out a number of individuals who will
    be "treated as the family members" of another person.  These include  a
    spouse or civil partner; the direct descendants of an individual or  of
    his spouse or civil partner who are under 21 or who are dependent  upon
    that individual, his spouse or  civil  partner;  and  dependent  direct
    relatives in the ascending line of that individual, his spouse or civil
    partner.

14. Regulation 7(1)(d) goes on to  state  a  further  situation  where:  "a
    person who is to be treated as the family member of that  other  person
    under paragraph (3)".

15. Regulation 7(3) provides as follows:

         "Subject to paragraph (4), a  person  who  is  an  extended  family
         member  and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family   permit,   a
         registration certificate or a residence card shall  be  treated  as
         the family member of the relevant EEA national for as  long  as  he
         continues to satisfy the conditions in Regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or
         (5) in relation to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or
         card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked".


16. The claimant does not fall, and this is not contentious, within any  of
    the categories in reg 7(1)(a)-(c) so as to  be  treated  as  a  "family
    member" of his partner.  His entitlement is said to flow from the  fact
    that he is an "extended family member" as defined in reg  8(5)  of  the
    2006 Regulations which provides as follows:

         "A person  satisfies  the  condition  in  this  paragraph  [and  is
         therefore an 'extended family member'] if the person is the partner
         of an EEA national (other than a civil partner) and  can  prove  to
         the decision maker that he is in a durable  relationship  with  the
         EEA national".


17. The judge, of course, accepted that the claimant and his  partner  were
    in a durable relationship and, therefore, the claimant falls within reg
    8(5).  However, unless and until he is issued  with  a  residence  card
    under reg 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations, the claimant is not a  "family
    member" of his partner by virtue of reg 7(3).

18. This distinction  is  important  for  two  reasons.   First,  the  2006
    Regulations only confer a right of residence on a "family member" of an
    EEA national exercising Treaty rights.  That is the case in relation to
    the 'initial right of residence' under reg 13(2) and in respect of  the
    'extended right of residence' after three months under reg 14(2).

19. Secondly, a 'permanent right of residence' under reg 15(1)(b)  is  only
    acquired by a "family member" of an EEA national who has been  residing
    in the UK in accordance with the  2006  Regulations  for  a  continuous
    period of five years.  Regulation 15(1)(b) provides as follows:

         "The following persons shall acquire the right to residence in  the
         United Kingdom permanently -

         ...

         (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself  an  EEA
             national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the
             EEA national  in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
             continuous period of five years; ..." (my emphasis)

20. The scheme of the 2006 Regulations is, therefore, clear.  Only  "family
    members" as defined in reg  8  have  a  right  of  residence  and  can,
    therefore, 'clock up' a period  of  five  years'  continuous  residence
    under the 2006 Regulations in order to acquire  a  permanent  right  of
    residence under reg 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations.

21. By contrast, a person who does not fall  within  the  definition  of  a
    "family member" in reg 7(1)(a)-(c) but, instead, is an "extended family
    member" falling within reg 8, and for the purposes of  this  appeal  in
    particular reg 8(5) because he or she is the partner of an EEA national
    in a durable relationship, has no right of residence in  the  UK  until
    issued with a residence card under reg 17(4) which is in the  following
    terms:

         "17. (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence  card  to  an
                  extended family member not falling within Regulation  7(3)
                  who is not an EEA national on application if -

                  (a)  the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended
                      family  member  is  a  qualified  person  or  an  EEA
                      national with a permanent right  of  residence  under
                      Regulation 15; and

                  (b)  in all the circumstances it appears to the  Secretary
                      of State appropriate to issue the residence card".

22. Regulation 17(5) goes on to state:

         "17. (5)      Where the Secretary of State receives an  application
                  under  paragraph  (4)  he  shall  undertake  an  extensive
                  examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant
                  and if he  refuses  the  application  shall  give  reasons
                  justifying the refusal unless  this  is  contrary  to  the
                  interests of national security".

23. Once the document is issued, and it is  a  discretionary  decision,  by
    virtue of reg 7(3) the "extended family  member"  is  "treated  as  the
    family member of the relevant EEA national" for so long as  he  or  she
    satisfies the condition that makes  him  or  her  an  "extended  family
    member"  under  reg  8  -  in  this  case,  he  remains  in  a  durable
    relationship with their partner.

24. Although I was not taken directly to the Citizens' Directive (Directive
    2004/38/EC) ("the Directive") which the 2006 Regulations seek  to  give
    effect to, the  distinction  between  "family  members"  and  "extended
    family members" is replicated, and derived from,  the  Directive.   The
    definition of a "family member" found in reg  7  is  derived  from  the
    definition of 'family  member'  in  Art  2.2  of  the  Directive.   The
    Directive is stated to apply to all  Union  citizens  who  move  to  or
    reside in a Member State other than that of which they are  a  national
    and to their 'family members' as defined in Art 2.2 when those  "family
    members" accompany or join them (see Art 3.1).  Likewise,  the  initial
    right of residence, the right of residence after three months  and  the
    acquisition of a permanent right of residence are  applicable  only  to
    "family  members"  of  EU  nationals  (see  Arts  6.2,  7.2  and   16.2
    respectively).

25. What are termed "extended family members" in the 2006  Regulations  are
    dealt with in the Directive in Art 3.2 which provides as follows:

         "Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence  the
         persons concerned may have in their  own  right,  the  host  Member
         State  shall,  in  accordance  with   its   national   legislation,
         facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:

         (a)  any other family members, irrespective of  their  nationality,
             not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2  who,
             in the country from which they have come,  are  dependants  or
             members of the household  of  the  Union  citizen  having  the
             primary right of residence, or where  serious  health  grounds
             strictly require the personal care of the family member by the
             Union citizen;

         (b)  the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
             relationship, duly attested.

         The host Member State shall undertake an extensive  examination  of
         the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
         residence to these people".

26. As will be clear, Art 3.2 covers those  "extended  family  members"  as
    defined in reg 8 of the 2006 Regulations referring to  them  as  "other
    family members" or, and importantly for the purposes  of  this  appeal,
    the partner of a Union citizen who has a  "durable  relationship,  duly
    attested".

27. It is clear from the jurisprudence of the Court of  Justice  that  only
    "family members" as defined in Art 2 of the Directive have a  right  of
    residence derived from the EU national.  Those "other  family  members"
    or individuals in a "durable relationship, duly attested" with  the  EU
    national do not, by virtue of the Directive, have a right of residence.
     In SSHD v Rahman and Others (Case C-83/11) [2013] Imm AR 1,  the  CJEU
    concluded that Art 3.2 did not oblige Member States to accord  a  right
    of entry or residence to those "other family members"  or  those  in  a
    "durable  relationship"  with  the  EU  national.   Rather,  the   CJEU
    recognised that the Directive  imposes  an  obligation  to  "facilitate
    entry  and  residence"  following  the  undertaking  of  an  "extensive
    examination of the personal circumstances" of the individuals (see also
    SSHD v Banger [2018] EUECJ C-89/17 (12 July 2018) at [31]).  That is to
    be effected by national legislation, which confers  a  wide  discretion
    upon the Member States when  selecting  the  criteria  but  that  those
    criteria must be consistent  with  the  normal  meaning  of  the  terms
    "facilitate" (also Banger, at [38]-[40]).

28.  That  scheme  precisely  mirrors  what  is  contained  in   the   2006
    Regulations.  Those Regulations require, when an individual who  claims
    to be an "extended  family  member"  such  as  the  claimant  makes  an
    application, that there be "an extensive examination  of  the  personal
    circumstances" of that individual (see reg 17(5)) in order to determine
    whether the individual has established  they  are  a  "extended  family
    member" and whether it is appropriate to issue a  residence  card  (see
    reg 17(4)).  It is only once the residence card is issued that the 2006
    Regulations recognise that an individual who has established that  they
    are an "extended family member" has a right of residence  because  they
    are then (but only then)  treated  as  a  "family  member".   There  is
    nothing, in my judgment, in  that  scheme  which  is  contrary  to  the
    Directive.  The Directive does not confer any right of  residence  upon
    an  "extended  family  member"  but  recognises  that  their  right  of
    residence must be facilitated after an "extensive examination" of their
    personal circumstances.  That is exactly what  occurred  in  this  case
    following the application for a residence card relying upon  reg  8  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  There is nothing in the Directive which requires
    a Member State, following that process,  to  confer  retrospectively  a
    right of residence upon the "extended family member".

29. The position is, of course, otherwise for an individual who  asserts  a
    right of residence as a "family member", e.g. as the spouse of  an  EEA
    national.  Both the 2006 Regulations and the Directive confer  a  right
    of residence upon  a  family  member  of  an  EEA/EU  national  who  is
    exercising Treaty rights.  That right exists  irrespective  of  whether
    the "family member" is issued with a  residence  card.   Any  residence
    card is merely evidence of the right of residence already conferred  by
    the 2006 Regulations and Directive.

30. However, the Directive confers no right of residence upon "other family
    members" or those in a "durable relationship,  duly  attested"  falling
    within Art 3.2.  Under the 2006 Regulations a  right  of  residence  is
    conditional upon the  issue  of  a  residence  card  under  reg  17(4).
    Consequently, a person in a durable relationship with  an  EU  national
    will not have a right of residence  in  the  UK  until  issued  with  a
    residence card.

31. In the case of the claimant, his right of  residence,  therefore,  only
    arose in September 2009 when he was issued with a residence card.  That
    residence card did not purport to, nor did  it,  retrospectively  grant
    the claimant a right of residence backdated, on the claimant's case, at
    least to March 2009.  He could not, therefore, establish  that  he  had
    resided in the UK  in  accordance  with  the  2006  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years as a "family member" (which he did  not
    become until September 2009 when the  residence  card  was  issued)  in
    order to establish a permanent right of residence under reg (15)(1)(b).



32. That conclusion is, in my judgment, entirely consistent with the scheme
    of the Directive.  In particular, Art 16.2, using language reflected in
    reg 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations, only confers a permanent right of
    residence upon "family members" who have legally resided with the Union
    citizen in the Member State for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years
    (although it is not necessary that they actually  reside  together:  PM
    (EEA - spouse -"residing with")  Turkey  [2011]  UKUT  89  (IAC)).   Of
    course, a "family member" is defined in Art 2.2 of  the  Directive  and
    does not include an individual, such as  the  claimant,  who  is  in  a
    durable relationship.

33. Mr Rashid, however, sought to counter that interpretation of  the  2006
    Regulations and the Directive by reliance upon the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Macastena.  In that case, the claimant sought to  assert  a
    "permanent right of residence" based  upon,  what  he  claimed  was,  a
    period  of  five  years  lawful  residence  in  accordance   with   the
    Regulations, some of which time he was a spouse of an EEA national  and
    some of which time he had been in a durable relationship with  the  EEA
    national.  He claimed that he had a permanent  right  of  residence  in
    order to contend that he could only be deported on "serious grounds  of
    public policy or security" (rather than merely on the grounds of public
    policy, security  or  public  health)  under  reg  21(3)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

34. In Macastena, the claimant had not applied for, nor been issued with, a
    residence card under reg  17(4)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   He  had,
    however, married the EU national and sought to rely upon a period prior
    to his marriage, when it was accepted he was in a durable relationship,
    which, when added to the relevant period of his marriage, amounted to a
    period of five years' residence in the UK.  The period  of  time  in  a
    durable relationship which he needed to 'add on' in  order  to  succeed
    was only 5 days.

35. The Court of Appeal rejected the claimant's reliance upon any period of
    residence in the UK prior to his marriage when  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship.  Longmore LJ (with whom  King  and  Coulson  LJJ  agreed)
    rejected the claimant's contention at [15]-[20] as follows:

         "15. It may well be that, if Mr  Macastena  had  applied  for  (and
             received) a  residence  card  as  an  extended  family  member
             pursuant to regulations 17(4) and (5) of the 2006  regulations
             on the basis of his durable relationship with Ms L,  the  time
             of  that  durable  relationship   could   count   towards   an
             acquisition of permanent right  of  residence,  just  as  time
             spent with a retained right of residence after his divorce did
             so count.  But Mr Macastena never made  such  an  application.
             All that had happened before he left for Kosovo to get married
             to Ms L was that he had entered the United Kingdom  unlawfully
             on 3rd July 2005 and he had unlawfully remained here.   It  is
             true that Mr Macastena's solicitors, in the light of his  wish
             to marry Ms L in August 2008, on 29th July 2008  notified  the
             Secretary of State of his  unlawful  presence  in  the  United
             Kingdom and informed her that he had been  living  with  Ms  L
             since September 2007.   They  did  not,  however,  ask  for  a
             residence card on that basis; they asked and  were  granted  a
             Visa Disclaimer form so that Mr Macastena (with  Ms  L)  could
             return to Kosovo and get married there.  It was only after the
             marriage that Mr Macastena was issued first with an EEA Family
             Permit as Ms L's spouse  (enabling  him  to  re-enter  on  5th
             September 2008) and in due course with a residence card as the
             spouse (family member as per the 2006 regulations) of  an  EEA
             national working in the United Kingdom.

         16.  Mr Macastena now argues that the Secretary of  State  knew  of
             his durable relationship with Ms L  and  has  never  contested
             that it existed for some time before his marriage.   That,  it
             is said, is enough for that durable relationship to  be  added
             to his time as  a  spouse  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  a
             permanent right of residence.

         17.  That cannot be right.  An extended family member can  only  be
             issued with a residence card  on  the  basis  of  his  durable
             relationship with an EEA national if the  Secretary  of  State
             has undertaken  'an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
             circumstances of the applicant'.  That has never happened  and
             can only happen after an application for a residence  card  is
             made.  Merely notifying the Secretary of State that one is  in
             a durable  relationship  is  nowhere  near  enough  either  to
             constitute such  extensive  examination  or  to  require  such
             examination to  be  undertaken.   FTT  Judge  Clark  was  with
             respect  wrong  to  think  that  time  spent  in   a   durable
             relationship with Ms L could just be added to  time  spent  as
             her spouse, provided that the First Tier Tribunal  itself  was
             satisfied that there had been a  durable  relationship  before
             the marriage.

         18.  This is confirmed (if confirmation is needed) by the analogous
             case of CS (Brazil) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  480;  [2010]  INLR
             146 which considered regulations 8(5) and 17(4)  of  the  2006
             regulations,  along  with  the  relevant  provisions  of   the
             Citizens Directive, Directive 2004/38/EC pursuant to which the
             regulations were enacted.  The applicant in that case was  not
             a foreign criminal asserting a right  of  permanent  residence
             but a Brazilian homosexual who had a durable relationship with
             an Italian man which had come to an end at the  same  time  as
             CS's own three year leave to remain expired  on  17th  January
             2007.  He then applied for further  leave  to  remain  on  the
             ground that, if he had applied for a residence card while  the
             durable relationship existed, he would have obtained one which
             would have been valid  for  5  years  pursuant  to  regulation
             17(6).   His  application  was  refused  in  July  2007.    He
             submitted that, since he had had an available  putative  right
             before the end of his relationship,  that  right  should  have
             been a powerful factor for the Secretary of State to take into
             account when deciding in July 2007 whether to extend his leave
             to remain.

         19.  Laws LJ (with whom Hooper and Toulson LJJ  agreed)  held  that
             CS's argument failed, saying (para 13):-

                  'In July 2008  the  appellant  had  no  rights  under  the
                  Directive nor under the Regulations.  It is  obvious,  but
                  important, that article 3(2)(b) [of the Directive] and reg
                  8(5) are both expressed in the  present  tense.   By  July
                  2007 the  appellant  clearly  had  no  entitlement  to  be
                  considered for residence as an extended family  member  as
                  such, for at that time he did not possess that status.  In
                  my  judgment,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  simply  not
                  required in July of that year to undertake  the  art  3(b)
                  exercise  ...  I  do  not  accept  that  the   appellant's
                  potential or putative rights, that could  have  been  made
                  good during the  durable  relationship,  give  rise  as  a
                  matter of law to a duty after that relationship  was  over
                  upon the shoulders of the Secretary of  State  to  address
                  the historic fact of those putative rights in  making  her
                  discretionary decision in July 2007 ...'

         20.  Likewise, in the present case there was, in  my  judgment,  no
             duty on the Secretary of State  to  take  into  account,  when
             considering whether Mr Macastena should be deported, the  fact
             that he could have applied for a residence  card  pursuant  to
             regulation 17(4) during his durable relationship with Ms L and
             would have been entitled to an extensive  examination  of  his
             personal circumstances which might well have resulted  in  the
             issue of a residence card to him.  Not only is the  definition
             of extended family member in regulation 8(5) expressed in  the
             present tense, so also is regulation 17(4)".

36. At [22]-[24], Longmore LJ dealt with the position  under  the  Citizens
    Directive and the case of Rahman to which I have  already  referred  as
    follows:

         "22. Mr Gill's argument was  that  Article  3(2)  of  the  Citizens
             Directive requires the host Member State, in  accordance  with
             its national legislation, to 'facilitate entry and  residence'
             for

                  'a partner with whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
                  relation, duly attested'

             and that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  facilitate  such
             residence if he ignored  the  durable  relationship  which  Mr
             Macastena had with Ms L.

         23.   Such  facilitation,  however,  is  a  matter   for   national
             legislation; moreover, the host Member State  is  mandated  by
             Article 3(2) itself to 'undertake an extensive examination  of
             [the applicant's] personal circumstances'.  Mr  Gill  did  not
             contend that the UK's national legislation was incompatible or
             inconsistent with the Citizens Directive and, for that reason,
             I have referred only to the 2006 regulations.

         24.  Mr Gill also relied on the decision of the Court of Justice of
             the European Union in Rahman v SSHD  [2013]  QB  249  for  the
             propositions (1) that (as per para 22) the Member States  must
             make it possible for persons  in  a  durable  relationship  to
             obtain a decision on their application that is founded  on  an
             extensive examination of their personal circumstances and,  in
             the event of refusal, is justified by reasons and (2) that (as
             per  para  24)  the  Member  State  had  to  ensure  that  its
             legislation contained criteria which are consistent  with  the
             normal meaning of the  word  'facilitate'  and  which  do  not
             deprive Article 3(2) of its effectiveness.  But Mr Gill  could
             not point to criteria contained in the legislation  which  are
             inconsistent with the  word  'facilitate'  or  which  deprived
             Article  3(2)  of  its  effectiveness.   In  para  22  of  its
             decision, the CJEU itself envisaged that an application had to
             be made if Article 3(2) was to be invoked.  That is  confirmed
             as a matter of English and European law by  Aladeselu  v  SSHD
             [2013] EWCA Civ 144; [2014] INLR 85 in which Richards LJ  said
             (para 65):-

                  'It should be emphasised that a finding that an  applicant
                  comes within reg 8 does not confer on him any  substantive
                  right  to  residence  in  the  UK.   Whether  to  grant  a
                  residence card is a matter for decision by  the  Secretary
                  of State in the exercise of a broad discretion  under  reg
                  17(4), subject  to  the  procedural  requirements  in  reg
                  17(5).  All this is underlined by the observations of  the
                  court in Rahman as  to  the  nature  of  the  host  Member
                  State's obligations under Art 3(2) of the  Directive  (see
                  para [29] above).  In  the  present  case,  as  the  Upper
                  Tribunal noted, the Secretary of State has yet to consider
                  the applicants' cases pursuant to reg 17(4) and (5)".

37. Mr Rashid relied upon, in effect, the first sentence of  Longmore  LJ's
    judgment at [15] which,  he  submitted,  indicated  that,  although  Mr
    Macastena could not rely upon his period  of  residence  in  a  durable
    relationship prior to  his  marriage,  the  position  would  have  been
    different if he had applied for and  received  a  residence  card.   He
    submitted that Longmore LJ accepted that in  those  circumstances  "the
    time of that durable relationship could count towards an acquisition of
    a permanent right of residence".  In this  case,  Mr  Rashid  submitted
    that the claimant had been issued with a residence  card  in  September
    2009 and, therefore in accordance with the judge's factual finding that
    the durable relationship existed at least from March 2009, the claimant
    had established the necessary five years' continuous residence.

38. I do not accept that argument.  First, there is nothing in the  passage
    relied upon in Longmore LJ's judgment to suggest that he was  accepting
    that even a period before the residence card was issued could be  taken
    into account towards the acquisition of a permanent right of residence.
     Secondly, the substance of Longmore LJ's reasoning runs counter to  Mr
    Rashid's submission.  The Court of  Appeal  repeatedly  emphasised  the
    distinction drawn in the Directive  between  the  rights  of  residence
    conferred upon "family members" and the (lesser) right  to  'facilitate
    entry and residence' for, inter alia, those in a  durable  relationship
    (at [22]-[23]) together with the reinforcement of that  distinction  by
    the CJEU in Rahman (at [24]).  Further, Longmore LJ cited with approval
    at [24] what was said by Richards LJ in the case of Aladeselu (at [65])
    that:

         "It should be emphasised that a finding  that  an  applicant  comes
         within Reg 8 does not  confer  on  him  any  substantive  right  to
         residence in the UK".

39. In my judgment, the Court of Appeal's decision in  Macastena  confirms,
    and applies, the scheme of the 2006 Regulations and Directive  which  I
    have set out above,  drawing  the  distinction  between  the  right  of
    residence of a  "family  member"  and  the  absence  of  any  right  of
    residence for an "extended family member" until  a  residence  card  is
    issued  by  the  Secretary  of  State  under  reg  17(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  Only from that point in  time  do  the  2006  Regulations
    confer upon the "extended family member", a right of residence  because
    from that point in time they are treated as a "family member" and  may,
    if appropriate, rely upon the rights of  residence  recognised  in  reg
    13(2) and 14(2).  Then, and only then, does  the  individual  begin  to
    acquire a period of lawful residence under the 2006  Regulations  which
    can count towards establishing a "permanent right of residence" on  the
    basis of residing in the UK in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for
    a continuous period of five years under reg 15(1)(b).

40. For these reasons,  therefore,  Judge  Barrowclough  erred  in  law  in
    finding that the  claimant  had  established  the  required  period  of
    residence under reg  15(1)(b)  of  the  2006  Regulations  and  so  was
    entitled to a permanent residence card.

Decision

41. Consequently, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    claimant's appeal involved  the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision is set aside.

42. I re-make the decision dismissing the claimant's appeal under the  2006
    Regulations.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            14 December 2018

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal. there can be no fee award.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            14 December 2018





