
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05745/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2020                   |On 22 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MARTIAL PAUL
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr A Berry, Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reading I shall refer to the appellant as the Secretary  of
    State and to the respondent as Mr Paul.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson ("the judge"), promulgated on  2  July
    2018, by which he allowed Mr Paul's appeal.

 3. As will become clear, this case involves a number  of  unusual  issues,
    both procedural and substantive. I wish  to  state  at  the  outset  my
    gratitude  to  both  representatives  for  the  assistance  they   have
    provided. Both have acted with consummate professionalism  and  clarity
    of advocacy. In particular, Mr Deller has approached this case not only
    with a depth of legal knowledge, but also a degree of humanity which in
    my judgment was entirely appropriate in the circumstances.

 4. In terms of the essential and non-controversial factual background, the
    following can be stated at this point. Mr  Paul  is  a  citizen  of  St
    Lucia, born on 28 September 1959 and was by  birth  a  Citizen  of  the
    United Kingdom and Colonies ("CUKC"). His parents came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1961, leaving him in the care of his grandparents.  He  came
    to the United Kingdom on 22 January 1974, at which point he was granted
    indefinite leave to enter  ("ILE").  He  arrived  in  possession  of  a
    passport in which he was described as a British  subject.  He  went  to
    live with his parents and settled into the life of this country. He has
    resided here ever since.

The first procedural issue: was there a valid appeal before  the  First-tier
Tribunal?

 5. The procedural issues begin with the decision  against  which  Mr  Paul
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal in the first place.

 6. 12 July 2005, Mr Paul made  an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain ("ILR"), an application that, for reasons set out later in  this
    decision, was unnecessary.

 7. For reasons which the Secretary of State has been  entirely  unable  to
    provide (with no criticism of Mr  Deller),  this  application  was  not
    decided until 5 April 2016 (the decision letter is dated 4 April  2016,
    but the date of determination of the application itself is said to be 5
    April). The decision letter provides a detailed assessment of Mr Paul's
    claim to satisfy relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules and  with
    particular reference to Article 8 ECHR. Towards the end of the  letter,
    it is stated that the decision was appealable under section 82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

 8. On the 6 April 2016, and again for reasons  which  remain  unexplained,
    the Secretary of State issued a decision to  remove  Mr  Paul  (IS.151B
    notice),  pursuant  to  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"). This decision was also  said
    to attract a right of appeal, arising from regulation 26  of  the  2006
    Regulations. It is manifestly the case that Mr Paul's circumstances had
    nothing whatsoever to do with EU law.

 9. Mr Paul proceeded to appeal against the latter decision,  although  the
    type of decision being appealed against was said to be  one  concerning
    human rights (the relevant box to this effect is ticked on  the  notice
    of appeal). He specifically stated that his case had nothing to do with
    the 2006 Regulations and was in fact based entirely on ECHR rights.

10. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal, the judge took the
    view that the right of appeal had arisen under the statutory regime  in
    place before the changes brought about by the Immigration Act 2014  and
    the consequent changes to  Part  5  of  the  2002  Act.  He  noted  the
    irrelevance of the 2006 Regulations to Mr Paul's case.

11. On proper analysis, and as agreed by both  representatives  before  me,
    the right of appeal in fact arose under the statutory regime as amended
    by the 2014 Act. By virtue of article 8 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    (Commencement No. 4, Transitional and Saving Provisions and  Amendment)
    Order 2015/371, article 9 of the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No.
    3, Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014 was amended. This had
    the effect of applying  the  old  statutory  regime  to  a  variety  of
    decisions made on or after 6 April 2015 where the relevant  application
    had been made before certain dates. However, the  continued  effect  of
    the safety provisions did not apply if the  decision  in  question  was
    "also a refusal of... a human rights claim".

12. Two questions arise as a result: first, was Mr Paul's  application  for
    ILR a human  rights  claim?;  second,  was  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision refusing that application a refusal of a human rights claim?

13. It  is  now  common  ground  that  Mr  Paul's  application  did  indeed
    constitute a human rights claim. I agree. The assertion that he  should
    be granted ILR on the basis of long residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    necessarily involved the claim that he had established a private and/or
    family  life   in   this   country   and   that   his   removal   would
    disproportionately  interfere  with  that  protected  right.  This   is
    consistent with case-law (including MY (refusal of human rights  claim)
    Pakistan [2020] UKUT  89  (IAC))  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  own
    guidance as set out in "Rights of Appeal" version 10, published on  the
    18 December 2020, at page 10, where it is stated that applications made
    under paragraph 276B Immigration Rules will be considered  to  be  what
    are described as "human rights applications" (the previous versions  of
    this guidance are identical in substance).

14. Therefore, the answer to the first question is "yes".

15. The Secretary of State's guidance states that the starting  point  will
    be that a refusal of a relevant application will give rise to  a  right
    of appeal. That is clearly supportive of Mr Paul's  position  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was a refusal of his human rights  claim.
    Further, the decision letter itself confirms that Mr Paul had  asserted
    that his removal from the United Kingdom would breach Articles 3 and  8
    ECHR. The letter expressly considers these provisions, with  particular
    emphasis on Article 8 within the context of  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules and without. On any rational view, the Secretary of State engaged
    with the human rights claim and went on to refuse it in  all  respects.
    Finally, the letter expressly states that there was a right  of  appeal
    attached to the refusal of Mr Paul's application for ILR.

16. The answer to the second question is also "yes".

17. It follows that the decision to remove Mr Paul with  reference  to  the
    2006 Regulations is, and always has been, a legal red  herring.  Whilst
    the decision to remove would have been validly made under section 10 of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, my conclusion that  there  had  in
    any event been a refusal of a  human  rights  claim  is  sufficient  to
    dispose of the first procedural issue.

18. The fact that the judge erroneously believed that the appeal  arose  in
    the context of the old statutory regime is beside the point. There  had
    been an appealable decision and there was a  valid  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

19. The appeal was heard in June 2018. I am unclear as  to  why  there  was
    such a delay in Mr Paul's case coming before the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I  have  already  addressed  the  judge's  erroneous  approach  to  the
    applicable appellate regime and need say nothing more about it.

21. The judge went on to set out Mr Paul's history. He records that in  the
    United Kingdom in 1974, Mr Paul had three children, born in 1979, 1980,
    and 1982. He had worked, received medical treatment, and spent time  in
    prison. I note that Mr Paul had been convicted in 1990 of rape, threats
    to kill, and assault occasioning actual bodily harm, offences for which
    he was sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment.

22. The judge summarised the arguments put by Mr  Paul's  counsel  (not  Mr
    Berry) to the effect that Mr Paul had a right of abode  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It was recorded that the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  had
    essentially conceded that the appeal should be allowed on this basis.

23. The judge found as a fact that Mr Paul had entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 22 January 1974 in order to join his parents here and  that  he  had
    resided in this country continuously  ever  since.  He  found  that  Mr
    Paul's mother had been a CUKC and had  been  able  to  settle  in  this
    country as a result. He also found that Mr Paul himself had been a CUKC
    as well. With reference to the Immigration Act 1971  ("the  1971  Act")
    and the relevant Immigration Rules in force at the time  of  Mr  Paul's
    arrival in this country, the judge ultimately concluded  that  Mr  Paul
    had possessed an entry certificate and that at all  material  times  he
    had had a right  of  abode.  Accordingly,  the  judge  found  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was unlawful in failing to recognise this
    status. Under the subheading "Notice of  Decision",  the  judge  stated
    that "I allow this appeal" (on a correct application of the  applicable
    statutory regime, he should have stated that the  appeal  succeeded  on
    Article 8 grounds).

The second procedural issue: was the appeal abandoned?

24. I turn next to the second of the procedural complications in this case.
    Although  the  Secretary  of  State  originally   refused   Mr   Paul's
    application for ILR (thereby refusing his human  rights  claim  at  the
    same time), following the promulgation of  the  judge's  decision,  she
    subsequently decided that a grant of ILR was appropriate. The grant was
    made on 11 February 2019.

25. Following the grant of permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  a
    rule 24 response  was  provided  by  Mr  Paul's  representatives.  This
    contained the stated position that the grant of ILR  in  February  2019
    resulted in the appeal being treated as abandoned. The rule 24 response
    was subsequently resiled from.

26. The question arises as to whether the appeal  did  indeed  fall  to  be
    treated as abandoned pursuant to section 104(4A) of  the  2002  Act  by
    virtue of the grant of ILR.

27. As with the right of appeal issue,  both  representatives  are  now  in
    agreement that the appeal was not to be treated as abandoned. Again,  I
    agree. The reason for this involves me  stating  at  this  juncture  my
    conclusion on the substantive issue in this case, namely that  Mr  Paul
    has, since his arrival in this country in January 1974, had extant  ILE
    and that the grant of ILR was a nullity. There was no  effective  grant
    of leave and section 104(4A) of the 2002 Act did not apply. The reasons
    underlying my conclusion on this issue will be set out in due course.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

28. The grounds asserted that the judge had been wrong to conclude that  Mr
    Paul continued to have a right of abode in the United Kingdom.  It  was
    accepted that he had acquired a right of abode as of  22  January  1979
    having resided in the United  Kingdom  for  5  years.  However,  on  22
    February 1979 St Lucia gained its independence with the effect that  Mr
    Paul became a national of that country, thereby  losing  his  right  of
    abode in the United Kingdom. He could not have become a British citizen
    upon enactment of the British Nationality Act  1981  (which  came  into
    force on 1 January 1983). The grounds acknowledged that Mr  Paul  might
    still be deemed to have ILR, but the judge allowed  the  appeal  on  an
    erroneous basis.

29. The application for permission to appeal was made some eight months out
    of time, as acknowledged by the Secretary of State  at  the  time.  The
    explanation provided was that there appeared to be no real prospect  of
    success initially, but that an apparent threat of legal challenge by Mr
    Paul prompted the late application to be  made.  The  application  then
    came before the First-tier Tribunal for decision. It is clear from  the
    reasons provided by the judge considering the application that she  was
    not extending  time.  However,  the  actual  notice  of  decision  (the
    conclusion stated above the  horizontal  line  on  the  notice)  simply
    stated that the application was being "refused". When  the  application
    was renewed to the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb correctly
    stated that the First-tier Tribunal had "refused" the  application  and
    there was no longer any issue relating to timeliness. Judge  Grubb  saw
    merit in the Secretary of State's grounds and duly granted permission.

30. This aspect of proceedings explains why there was yet further delay  in
    Mr Paul's case being dealt with.

Conclusions on error of law

31. As with all material aspects of this case, Mr Deller and Mr  Berry  are
    in agreement that the judge erred in law when concluding that  Mr  Paul
    had an extant right of abode in the United Kingdom.

32. I gratefully adopt the analysis provided by Mr Berry in paragraph 9  of
    his first skeleton argument:

         "...he [Mr Paul] ceased to be a CUKC on 22 February  1979  when  St
         Lucia achieved independence within the Commonwealth, see the  Saint
         Lucia Termination of Association Order 1978 (No. 1900). He became a
         St Lucia citizen under the Independence Constitution of  St  Lucia,
         article 99(1). In such circumstances, there was no basis for him to
         retain CUKC status under the Saint Lucia Modification of Enactments
         Order 1978 (No. 8099), article 3. Absent CUKC status, there was  no
         other basis for him to hold a statutory right of abode  in  the  UK
         under the 1971 Act, s2 (as then in force)."

33. Thus, the premise on which the  judge  allowed  Mr  Paul's  appeal  was
    fundamentally flawed. It follows that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside.

Re-making the decision in this case

34. It is to be noted that at this stage Mr Paul has become  the  appellant
    once more and  the  Secretary  of  State  resumes  her  status  as  the
    respondent.

35. This case is very much confined to its own particular facts and  should
    not be seen as providing any precedent regarding the position of  other
    long-term  residents  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  are  citizens   of
    Commonwealth countries.

36. I am once again in agreement  with  the  considered  position  of  both
    representatives. I conclude that Mr Paul's ILE remained "protected"  by
    virtue of section 1(5) of the  1971  Act,  notwithstanding  St  Lucia's
    independence in 1979 and the extinguishing of his right of abode in the
    United Kingdom. This has had the effect that the ILE continued  and  is
    extant. Mr Paul's application for ILR 2005  was  therefore  unnecessary
    and the subsequent grant of that status in 2019 was a nullity.

37. The legal route by which this conclusion has  been  arrived  at  is  as
    follows.

38. Mr Paul's mother entered the United  Kingdom  in  1961,  prior  to  the
    enactment of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1962.  Thus,  she  entered
    without control or restriction as to the period she was able to  reside
    here. On commencement of the 1971 Act on 1 January 1973, she acquired a
    statutory right of abode in the United Kingdom under  section  2(1)(c),
    having been by that  time  ordinarily  resident  and  settled  in  this
    country for the previous five years.

39. Mr Paul entered this country as the minor child of parents  settled  in
    United Kingdom. At that time, section 1(5) of  the  1971  Act  read  as
    follows:

         "(5). The rules [the Immigration Rules] shall  be  so  framed  that
         Commonwealth citizens settled in the United Kingdom at  the  coming
         into force of this Act and their wives and  children  are  not,  by
         virtue of anything in the rules, any less free to come into and  go
         from the United Kingdom and if this Act had not been passed."

40. Section 1(5) had the effect of preserving for Mr Paul the freedom  from
    restrictions and time limits arising out of the Commonwealth Immigrants
    Act 1962, as amended by the 1968 Act of the same name. This was because
    both Mr Paul's parents were residing in the United Kingdom at the point
    of his admittance, his mother was a Commonwealth citizen,  and  he  was
    under 16 years of age. Therefore,  no  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules from 1973 onwards could reduce the benefits consequent  upon  the
    initial grant of ILE to Mr Paul. This legal status and protection arose
    by operation of law (i.e. the 1971 Act)  and  not  as  a  result  of  a
    permissive act by the executive.

41.  Section  1(5)  remained  in  force  as  at  the  date  of  St  Lucia's
    independence in 1979. In this way, that provision was, as Mr Berry  put
    it, "always speaking" to Mr Paul's circumstances and the  loss  of  the
    right of abode in 1979 did not also result in him losing the  statutory
    protections afforded by section 1(5). Indeed, as a citizen of St Lucia,
    Mr Paul remained a Commonwealth citizen  and  the  beneficiary  of  the
    statutory protection. In short,  he  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully, albeit as a person subject to immigration control (which  she
    had not been whilst enjoying the right of  abode  for  the  very  brief
    period in 1979).

42. By virtue of section 1 of the Immigration Act 1988, section 1(5) of the
    1971 Act was repealed. However, article 3 of the Immigration  Act  1988
    (Commencement No.1) Order 1988/1133,  provided  that  those  wives  and
    children of a Commonwealth citizen settled in the United Kingdom  on  1
    January 1973 who had come to this country after that  citizen  and  who
    had already been benefiting from the protection offered by section 1(5)
    would continue to do so. It is  accepted  by  both  parties  that  this
    ongoing protective measure applied to Mr Paul. I agree.

43. In this way (which I have somewhat  foreshortened  here,  intending  no
    disrespect to the research and lucid exposition provided  by  Mr  Berry
    and ultimately  supported  by  Mr  Deller,  who  has  applied  his  own
    considerable knowledge to the issue), the conclusion is reached that Mr
    Paul has resided lawfully in the United  Kingdom  with  ILE  since  his
    arrival here on 22 January 1974.

44. There are two important consequences of this. First, it is accepted  by
    Mr Deller that the decision of 5 April 2016 refusing to grant  Mr  Paul
    ILR and at the same time refusing his human rights  claim  is  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 on one  or  other  of  two
    bases: either it is not in accordance with the law under  Article  8(2)
    because Mr Paul already had ILE and there are no grounds  on  which  to
    remove him pursuant to the refusal of  the  claim;  alternatively,  the
    decision is a disproportionate  interference  with  Mr  Paul's  obvious
    private  life (and possibly family life) in the United Kingdom.

45. The second agreed consequence is that the purported  grant  of  ILR  in
    February 2019 was a nullity as Mr Paul already had ILE. The  fact  that
    Mr Paul had mistakenly believed that he needed to apply for  ILR  makes
    no difference to this. In this way,  the  abandonment  provision  under
    section 104(4A) of the NIAA 2002 is not  triggered  because  there  has
    been no legally effective grant of leave.

46. Bringing these very unusual circumstances together, I conclude that the
    respondent's  refusal  of  the  human  rights   claim   constitutes   a
    disproportionate interference with Mr Paul's private life, as protected
    by Article 8. The decision is therefore unlawful under section 6 of the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

47. On this basis, Mr Paul succeeds in his appeal.

48. Following a discussion with the representatives at the hearing  on  the
    issue of outcomes, it was thought that the most appropriate  action  to
    be taken by the  Secretary  of  State  in  light  of  my  findings  and
    conclusions would be to issue Mr Paul with a no  time  limit  biometric
    residence permit or to endorse a passport to like  effect.  I  have  no
    power to order this, but I would expect the Secretary of State to adopt
    the appropriate measures to remedy the situation in which Mr  Paul  has
    found himself.



Notice of Decision

49. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

50. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

51. I re-make the decision by allowing Mr Paul's appeal on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor             Date:  5 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  a  full  fee
award of �140.00.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  5 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
