
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ea/05548/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 1 October 2020                    |On 7 October 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            GBENGA HANSON ADEWOLE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 seCRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  G  Clarke,  dismissing  his  appeal  under   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the   EEA
    Regulations"), against a decision of the respondent made on  1  October
    2019 to refuse to issue  him  with  a  residence  card  confirming  his
    permanent right of residence as the family member of an EEA national.

 2. The appellant is married to [JM], a Latvian citizen. That marriage took
    place on 10 October 2015.  Prior to that, the  appellant  had  made  an
    application for confirmation of his right of residence as  the  durable
    partner and so an "extended family member" of Ms [M]. That  application
    was refused on 2 September 2015, and the appellant exercised his  right
    of appeal against  that  decision  but,  before  the  hearing,  he  had
    obtained permission  to  marry  and  he  and  his  wife  had  done  so.
    Following the hearing, the appellant was granted an EEA residence  card
    valid until 29 November 2021 on the basis that he satisfied  regulation
    7 of the EEA Regulations.

 3. The appellant's case is that he is entitled to a  card  confirming  his
    permanent right of residence as he has completed a continuous period of
    five years residence ("the qualifying period")  and  that  this  period
    began on 1 September 2014 when he began cohabiting with his now wife.

 4. The respondent considered that as the appellant had not previously been
    accepted under regulation 8(5) of the EEA regulations, the  time  spent
    in a claimed durable relationship prior to the marriage  could  not  be
    taken into account in assessing whether he had completed the qualifying
    period of five years. That started on the date of his marriage.

 5. On appeal, the judge identified the issue as whether the appellant  can
    be simultaneously a family member under reg 7 of  the  EEA  regulations
    and  an  extended  family  member  under  reg  8  of  the  Regulations,
    concluding  [21]  that  the  definition  of  "extended  family  member"
    excludes those who are family members. The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not, given the provisions of those regulations, be both
    an extended family member and a family member [23] and that [24]  there
    was no basis in law for him to rely on any rights he may  have  accrued
    as an unmarried partner  from  1  October  2014  to  the  date  of  his
    marriage.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in that he had  not  considered  whether  the  appellant  had
    resided in the United Kingdom lawfully under the EEA regulations on the
    basis he had met the requirements of being in  a  genuine  and  durable
    relationship, and that this period, prior to marriage, should have been
    taken into account; that  is,  that  the  periods  spent  in  different
    capacities under reg 8 and then reg 7 should be added together.

 7. On 13 May 2020, First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge granted permission to
    appeal.

 8. On 31 July 2020, my  directions  in  this  matter  were  issued.  Those
    directions are annexed to this decision, but it  is  relevant  to  note
    that they provided as follows:

         "3.  On a preliminary view of the case, it appears that the  author
         of the grounds was unaware of Kunwar (EFM - calculating periods  of
         residence) [2019] UKUT 63 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal held:

             Following Macastena v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1558 , it is  clear
             that it is not possible to aggregate time spent in  a  durable
             relationship before the grant of  a  residence  document  with
             time spent after a  residence  document  is  issued,  for  the
             purpose of the calculating residence in  accordance  with  the
             Regulations.

         4.   Kunwar  was  approved  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v
         Aigbangbee [2019] EWCA Civ 339.

         5.  In the circumstances, the appellant will need  to  explain  why
         these decisions do not apply to this appeal."

 9. Neither party has objected to this appeal being  determined  without  a
    hearing. The Tribunal has the power to  make  the  decision  without  a
    hearing under Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2)  requires  me
    to have regard to the views  of  the  parties.   bearing  in  mind  the
    overriding objective in Rule 2 to enable  the  Tribunal  to  deal  with
    cases fairly  and  justly,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case where no objection to a decision being  made
    in the absence of a hearing that it would be right to do so.

10. The response from the appellant -  that  it  is  factually  correct  to
    assert that the facts of Kunwar apply in this case,  is  in  effect  an
    admission that the appeal  cannot  succeed.  There  is  no  purpose  in
    delaying my decision until 10 October 2020 as the appellant  requested.
    While it is  not  in  doubt  (and  the  respondent  accepts)  that  the
    appellant will have acquired five years' lawful residence on 10 October
    2020, as there is no material error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, there is nothing to be remade. The appellant can make  a
    fresh application to the respondent in due course.

11. In essence, in claiming to  have  completed  the  five-year  qualifying
    period, the appellant argues that all time spent as an extended  family
    member prior to the issue to him of any residence  card  can  be  taken
    into account. That is simply wrong in law as is  clear  from  Macastena
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1558 and Aibangbee [2019] EWCA  Civ  339;  and,  Kunwar
    (EFM - calculating periods of residence) [2019] UKUT 63 (IAC).

12. The headnote in Kunwar, a decision approved by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Aibangbee states:

         (1)  An  "extended  family  member"  ("EFM")  of  an  EEA  national
         exercising Treaty rights in the UK (such as a person in  a  durable
         relationship)  has  no  right  to  reside  in  the  UK  under   the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations until he or she is  issued  with  the
         relevant residence  documentation  under  reg  17(4)  of  the  2006
         Regulations (now reg 18(4) of the 2016 Regulations).

         (2)  Following Macastena v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1558 , it is  clear
         that it is not possible  to  aggregate  time  spent  in  a  durable
         relationship before the grant of a  residence  document  with  time
         spent after a residence document is issued, for the purpose of  the
         calculating residence in accordance with the Regulations.

         (3)  Once such a document  is  issued  however,  then  the  EFM  is
         "treated as a family member" of the EEA national and may then  have
         a right to reside under the Regulations (reg 7(3)).

         (4)  Consequently, a person in a "durable relationship" with an EEA
         national can only be said to be residing in the UK  "in  accordance
         with" the Regulations once a residence  document  is  issued.  Only
         periods of residence following the issue of the documentation  can,
         therefore,  count  towards  establishing  a  'permanent  right   of
         residence;' under reg 15 based upon 5 years'  continuous  residence
         "in accordance with" the Regulations.

         (5)  The scheme of the 2006 and 2016 Regulations in respect of EFMs
         is consistent with the Citizens' Directive (Directive  2004/38/EC).
         The Directive does not confer a right of residence on an individual
         falling  within  Art  3.2  including  a  person   in   a   "durable
         relationship, duly attested" with an EU national but  only  imposes
         an obligation to "facilitate entry  and  residence"  following  the
         undertaking  of  an  "extensive   examination   of   the   personal
         circumstances" of individuals falling within Art 3.2.

13. The law is clear. In order  to  qualify  for  permanent  residence,  an
    individual must have spent five years residing in accordance  with  the
    EEA regulations.  The EEA  Regulations,  and  Directive  2004/38/EC  on
    which they are based draw a distinction between a "family member" whose
    right of residence starts when the individual become  a  family  member
    on, for example as here, marriage and an "extended family member" whose
    right of residence arises only once the Secretary of State  has  issued
    the appropriate residence card.   The  Court  of  Appeal  has  made  it
    abundantly clear that time spent prior to the issue of  a  card  to  an
    extended family member cannot be counted towards lawful residence under
    the EEA Regulations.

14. Further, in this case, the appellant was never issued with a  residence
    card as an extended family member. That is because, as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge correctly noted,  the  definition  of  "extended  family
    member" expressly excludes those  who  are  family  members  which  the
    appellant had become on 10 October  2015,  well  before  any  residence
    document was issued.

15. Accordingly, while the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    address the relevant case law and appeared to assume  wrongly  [23]that
    the appellant might have accrued rights  prior  to  his  marriage,  the
    conclusion it reached was unassailably  correct.  The  appellant  could
    not, as a matter of law, succeeded in his appeal

16. For these reasons, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

    Endnote

17. It is worrying that the application made in this case  was  made  after
    Macastena, Kunwar and Aibangbee were handed down.  It  is  not  at  all
    clear how the appellant could have been advised  to  proceed  with  the
    application, let alone the appeal. Neither could, as a matter  of  law,
    have succeeded. It is equally of concern that neither  party  drew  the
    relevant decisions to the attention of the First-tier  Tribunal  either
    at appeal or in applying for permission to appeal, despite the  parties
    being under a duty to assist the Tribunal.  The net result  is  that  a
    significant amount of judicial time and public funds, as  well  as  the
    appellant's costs, have been wasted.

Notice of Decision & Directions
    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
       an error of law and I uphold it.
       Signed                                Date 1 October 2020
       Jeremy K H Rintoul
       Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



ANNEX - DIRECTIONS ISSUED ON 31 JULY 2020

      1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the light of the present
         need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and  the
         overriding objective expressed in the Procedure  Rules[1],  I  have
         reached the provisional view,   that  it  would  in  this  case  be
         appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

          a) whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
             involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

          b) whether that decision should be set aside.

      2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:

          i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of the
             assertion of an error of law, and on the question whether  the
             First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set aside if error of
             law is found, to be filed and served on all other  parties  no
             later than 14 days after this notice is sent out (the date  of
             sending is on the covering letter or covering email);

         ii) Any other party may file and serve submissions in response, no
             later than 21 days after this notice is sent out;

        iii) If submissions are made  in  accordance  with  paragraph  (ii)
             above the party who sought permission to appeal may  file  and
             serve a reply no later than 28 days after this notice is  sent
             out.

         iv) All submissions that  rely  on  any  document  not  previously
             provided to all other  parties  in  electronic  form  must  be
             accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.

      3. On a preliminary view of the case, it appears that  the  author  of
         the grounds was unaware of Kunwar (EFM  -  calculating  periods  of
         residence) [2019] UKUT 63 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal held:

             Following Macastena v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1558 , it is  clear
             that it is not possible to aggregate time spent in  a  durable
             relationship before the grant of  a  residence  document  with
             time spent after a  residence  document  is  issued,  for  the
             purpose of the calculating residence in  accordance  with  the
             Regulations.

      4. Kunwar was approved by the Court of Appeal  in  SSHD  v  Aigbangbee
         [2019] EWCA Civ 339.

      5. In the circumstances, the appellant will need to explain why  these
         decisions do not apply to this appeal.

      6. Any party who considers that despite  the  foregoing  directions  a
         hearing is necessary to consider the questions set out in paragraph
         1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons for  that  view  no
         later than 21 days after this notice is sent out and they  will  be
         taken into account by the Tribunal.  The directions in paragraph  2
         above must be complied with in every case.

      7. If this Tribunal decides to set aside the decision  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal for error of law, further directions  will  accompany
         the notice of that decision.

      8. Documents and submissions filed in response to these directions may
         be sent  by,  or  attached  to,  an  email  to  [email]  using  the
         Tribunal's reference number (found at the top of these  directions)
         as the subject line.  Attachments must  not  exceed  15  MB.   This
         address is not generally available for  the  filing  of  documents.
         Service on the Secretary of State may be  to  [email]  and  to  the
         original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction,  by
         use of any address apparent from the service of these directions.

-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

