
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05735/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 April 2017                              |On 8 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C MARTIN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

               the secretary of state FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                                   S B D T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge L  James  promulgated  on  10  October  2016,
    allowing the respondent's appeal against the decision of the respondent
    made on 10 May 2016 to refuse his application for a residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right of permanent residence under the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA  Regulations")  as
    the spouse of a person who had ceased activity.   The  applicant  is  a
    citizen of Trinidad and Tobago.  On 3 May 2014, he married  [BA]  ("the
    sponsor"), a German citizen who has been resident in the United Kingdom
    and since 2001 has worked for a number of  nursing  agencies.  He  last
    worked on 30 July 2015 but has been unable to return to work  owing  to
    illness as he is permanently incapacitated due to ill-health.

 2. On 18 November 2015 the respondent applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right of permanent residence pursuant to Regulation
    15(1)(d) of the EEA Regulations.

 3. On 10 May 2016 the Secretary of State refused the  application  on  the
    basis that the respondent did not fulfil the requirements of Regulation
    15(1)(b) as, in order to qualify for  permanent  residence  under  that
    provision he had to have been an EEA family  member  for  a  continuous
    period of five years  and  to  have  resided  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations.  This letter contains a number  of  errors  including  the
    reference to the sponsor being a Dutch national and stating that as the
    applicant had no alternative basis of stay in  the  United  Kingdom  he
    should now make arrangements to leave.

 4. The respondent appealed against  this  decision  requesting  that  this
    matter be dealt with on the papers.  The grounds of appeal do,  however
    aver that the Secretary of  State  has  erred  in  applying  Regulation
    15(1)(b) as opposed to Regulation 15(1)(d).

 5. The judge found that:-

      i) the application clearly stated that the respondent  is  the  family
         member of an EEA national who had ceased activities [6] and is thus
         based on Regulation 15(1)(d).

     ii)  the  Secretary  of  State  had  misunderstood  the  basis  of  the
         applications  [7];  that  the  sponsor  met  the  requirements   of
         Regulation 5(b) as a worker who had ceased activity;  that  he  had
         been resident in the United Kingdom for more than two  years  prior
         to 30 October 2015, the date at which he ceased work [8]; that this
         was permanent [9]; and, the respondent satisfied  the  requirements
         of Regulation 15(1)(d), having concluded he was the  family  member
         of the sponsor

 6. The judge allowed the appeal on that basis.

 7. Although accepting that she  had  mischaracterised  the  basis  of  the
    application and had made a number of additional errors in  the  letter,
    the Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:

      i) The sponsor had acquired the  permanent  right  of  residence  well
         before he had married the respondent and was thus not residing as a
         worker under Regulation 6(1)(b);

     ii) As the sponsor had previously  acquired  permanent  residence,  the
         judge was not entitled to hold that the sponsor was  a  worker  who
         had ceased activity as he could not have  been  a  worker  who  had
         acquired the right of permanent residence by becoming a worker  who
         had ceased activity

 8. On 30 January 2017 Acting Resident Judge Appleyard granted permission.

 9. The matter first came before Judge Martin on 15  March  2017  when  the
    Secretary of State was represented by Mr K Norton, a Senior  Presenting
    Officer.  That hearing was adjourned.

10. On that occasion, the argument put by the Secretary of State  was  that
    an individual  could  not  simultaneously  be  an  individual  who  had
    acquired  the  permanent  right  of  residence  through   five   years'
    continuous residence and an individual who had acquired permanent right
    of residence owing to ceasing the activity

11. That is not the argument which was pursued by Mr Deller who changed his
    position from what had been said by Mr Norton.

12. Mr Deller accepted, after some probing by the panel, that  it  was  the
    Secretary of State's case that although on a literal reading of the EEA
    Regulations, it could be said  that  the  respondent  did  qualify  for
    permanent residence as a family member  of  a  worker  who  had  ceased
    activity, this needed to be construed in the context of the Citizenship
    Directive (Directive 2004/38/EC) ("the Directive")  under  Articles  16
    and 17  of  which  the  respondent  would  not  qualify  for  permanent
    residence.  He accepted that he was, unusually, asking the Tribunal  to
    interpret the Regulations more strictly than they appear on their  face
    so as to conform with the  Directive  although  he  accepted  that  the
    Article 37 of the Directive provides that it would not affect any laws,
    Regulations or administrative provisions laid down by  a  member  state
    which would be more favourable to the persons covered by the Directive.

13. We did not need to hear from Mr Bazini.  We dismissed the Secretary  of
    State's appeal for reasons which we now give.

Decision

The Law

14. Neither the EEA Regulations nor the Directive define "worker" except by
    reference to Article 45  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the
    European Union ("TFEU").

15. Regulation 5 of the EEA Regulations provides, so far as is relevant, as
    follows:-



         "5.-(1) In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person  who
         has ceased activity"  means  an  EEA  national  who  satisfies  the
         conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         ...




         (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

         (a) he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a worker or
         self-employed person as a result of a permanent incapacity to work;
         and

         (b) either-

             (i) he resided in the United  Kingdom  continuously  for  more
             than two years prior to the termination; or

             (ii) the incapacity is the result of an accident at work or an
             occupational disease that entitles him to a pension payable in
             full or in part by an institution in the United Kingdom.

         ...

         (7) For the purposes of this regulation-

         (a) periods of inactivity for  reasons  not  of  the  person's  own
    making;

         (b) periods of inactivity due to illness or accident; and

         (c) in the case of a worker, periods  of  involuntary  unemployment
         duly recorded by the relevant employment office,

         shall be treated as periods  of  activity  as  a  worker  or  self-
         employed person, as the case may be".


16. Regulation 7 provides, so far as is relevant as follows:-



         "7.-(1) Subject to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
         Regulations the following persons shall be treated  as  the  family
         members of another person-

         (a) his spouse or his civil partner;

         ...


17. The right of permanent  residence  is  set  out  in  Regulation  15  as
    follows:-

         "15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
         the United Kingdom permanently-

             (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United  Kingdom  in
             accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period  of
             five years;

             (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an
             EEA national but who has resided in the  United  Kingdom  with
             the EEA national in accordance with these  Regulations  for  a
             continuous period of five years;

             (c) a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;

             (d) the family member of a worker or self-employed person  who
             has ceased activity;

             (e) a person who was the family member of a  worker  or  self-
             employed person where-

                  (i)the worker or self-employed person has died;

                  (ii)the family member resided with him immediately  before
             his death; and

                  (iii)the  worker  or  self-employed  person  had   resided
                  continuously in the United Kingdom for at  least  the  two
                  years immediately before his death or the  death  was  the
                  result of an accident at work or an occupational disease;

         (f) a person who-

             (i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
             Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and

             (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family member  who  has
             retained the right of  residence".


18. Given the nature of the submissions made by Mr Deller we considered  it
    also a necessary to have regard to Articles 16 and 17 of the  Directive
    which provide, so far as is relevant, as follows:-
       'Article 16
       General rule for Union citizens and their family members
       1. Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period of
       five years in the host Member State shall have the right of permanent
       residence there. This right shall not be subject  to  the  conditions
       provided for in Chapter III.
       2. Paragraph 1 shall  apply  also  to  family  members  who  are  not
       nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with  the  Union
       citizen in the host Member State for  a  continuous  period  of  five
       years.
       3. Continuity  of  residence  shall  not  be  affected  by  temporary
       absences not exceeding a total of six months a year, or  by  absences
       of a longer duration for  compulsory  military  service,  or  by  one
       absence of a maximum of 12 consecutive months for  important  reasons
       such  as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,  serious  illness,   study   or
       vocational training, or a posting in another Member State or a  third
       country.
       4. Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be lost only
       through absence from the host Member State for a period exceeding two
       consecutive years.
       Article 17
       Exemptions for persons no longer working in the host Member State and
       their family members
       1. By way of derogation from  Article  16,  the  right  of  permanent
       residence in the host Member State shall be enjoyed before completion
       of a continuous period of five years of residence by:
       ...
       (b) workers or self-employed persons who have resided continuously in
       the host Member State for more than two years and stop working  there
       as a result of permanent incapacity to work.
       If such incapacity is the  result  of  an  accident  at  work  or  an
       occupational disease entitling the  person  concerned  to  a  benefit
       payable in full or in part by  an  institution  in  the  host  Member
       State, no condition shall be imposed as to length of residence;
       ...
       For the purposes of entitlement to the rights referred to  in  points
       (a) and (b), periods of employment spent in the Member State in which
       the person concerned is working shall  be  regarded  as  having  been
       spent in the host Member State.
       Periods of involuntary unemployment duly  recorded  by  the  relevant
       employment office, periods not worked for reasons not of the person's
       own making and absences from work or cessation of work due to illness
       or accident shall be regarded as periods of employment.
       3. Irrespective of nationality, the family members of a worker  or  a
       self-employed person who are residing with him in  the  territory  of
       the host Member State shall have the right of permanent residence  in
       that Member State, if the worker or self-employed person has acquired
       himself the right of permanent residence in that Member State on  the
       basis of paragraph 1.
       ...'

19. It is the consistent case law of the  CJEU  that  "worker"  within  the
    Directive is the same as "worker" as set out in the TFEU, and must,  be
    construed widely - see for example Jessy St Prix v SSWP [2014] CJEU  C-
    507/12 at [31] and [33].

20. Mr Deller  was  unable  to  provide  us  with  any  authority  for  the
    proposition that "worker" can be interpreted to exclude those who  have
    also acquired the status of permanent residence.  We conclude  that  it
    cannot.  Not all workers acquire permanent residence, nor  is  being  a
    worker a pre-condition to acquiring that status as students, the  self-
    employed and the self-sufficient can also acquire that  status.  It  is
    also evident that workers who have acquired permanent residence do  not
    lose that status if they cease to be  workers  through  ceasing  to  be
    economically active by simply choosing not to work.   It  follows  that
    the reference to "worker" in reg.5 cannot be confined to those who have
    not yet acquired permanent residence.

21. The different circumstances in which an individual  acquires  permanent
    residence set  out  in  Reg.  15  (1)  are  separate  and  to  be  read
    disjunctively; there is no basis in the  EEA  Regulations  for  reading
    into reg. 15  (1)  (d)  any  requirement  or  proviso  restricting  its
    application to  circumstances  where  the  EEA  national  had  not  yet
    acquired permanent residence.

22. In reaching that conclusion, we  accept  that  the  provisions  of  the
    Directive  as  set  out  above  are  less  generous.  Unlike  the   EEA
    regulations, article 17.3 of the Directive limits the circumstances  in
    which a family member of an EEA national acquires a permanent right  of
    residence after less than five years' lawful residence to the situation
    where the EEA national has ceased activity to situations in which  that
    person has acquired the permanent right of residence on  the  basis  of
    ceasing activity,

23. That the Directive underpinning the EEA Regulations is less generous is
    not a basis for interpreting them  to  have  the  same  effect  as  the
    Directive.   Article 37 of the Directive expressly provides that it the
    Directive shall not affect any laws,  Regulations  or  provisions  laid
    down by a member state to be more favourable to the persons covered  by
    the Directive. Consequently, and in the light of Recital  29  that  the
    Directive should not affect more favourable national provisions,  there
    is no merit whatsoever in the Secretary of State's  arguments  in  this
    case.

24. For these reasons, we find that properly construed, reg. 15 (1) (d)  of
    the EEA Regulations applies to the family members of workers  or  self-
    employed persons who have ceased activity, irrespective of whether  the
    worker  or  self-employed  person  had   already   acquired   permanent
    residence.

25. We now turn to the facts of this appeal. It is not  disputed  that  the
    sponsor has now ceased activity or that prior to ceasing  his  activity
    he was a worker.  He was clearly in active employment as  is  shown  by
    the evidence adduced.  It is not in dispute either that the  respondent
    as the husband of the sponsor is a member of his family, nor  that  the
    sponsor had resided continuously in the United Kingdom  for  more  than
    two years prior to the termination of his economic activity.   On  that
    basis, the sponsor meets the requirements of reg.  5  (3)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, and is thus, a worker who has ceased activity  as  defined
    in reg. 5 (1).

26. Accordingly, we consider that on the proper construction of  Regulation
    15(1)(d) the respondent had acquired the permanent right  of  residence
    and thus, by operation of Regulation 18(2)(a) is entitled to  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of that right.

27. For these reasons, we find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law and we uphold it.

28. Mr Bazini's applied for his costs in this matter and we have  therefore
    made directions in respect of that application which are set out below.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS & DIRECTIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and we uphold it.

 2. We direct:

      i) Any application by the respondent for his costs to be paid  by  the
         Secretary of State must be made in writing within 10  working  days
         of the issue of this decision, and must be limited to  3  sides  of
         A4.  It must also be accompanied by a Schedule of Costs so that the
         Upper Tribunal can make a summary assessment.

     ii) Any response by the Secretary of State to that application must  be
         served within 10  days  of  service  on  her  of  the  respondent's
         application.

    iii) If the Secretary of  State  does  not  reply  to  the  respondent's
         application within the time provides, she will  be  deemed  not  to
         object to the application for costs and  the  Upper  Tribunal  will
         proceed to determine it accordingly.


Signed                                  Date 4 May 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



