
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05535/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd June 2017                             |On 25th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                               Mr Kamran Ijaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Canada born on 22nd  December  1990.   He
    appealed the Respondent's decision of  4th  May  2016  refusing  him  a
    residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  as  he  is
    married to a German national, Iqra Ahmed.   His  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Moran on 21st November 2016  and  was
    dismissed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 30th November 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hodgkinson  on  10th  May
    2017.  The permission states that the judge did not consider all of the
    documentary evidence before  him,  in  particular  the  fact  that  the
    Sponsor, having lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  nine  years,  had
    acquired  a  permanent  right  of  residence  in   respect   of   which
    "appropriate  evidence  supporting  this  fact"  was  submitted.    The
    permission states that the judge  considered  the  appeal  solely  with
    reference to the indication that the Sponsor was currently  a  student.
    The judge found that she is a student but that she does  not  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 4(d)(ii) and (iii) of the Regulations.  This
    has not been challenged.  The  judge  noted  that  in  the  Appellant's
    relevant application form he stated that the Sponsor  had  a  permanent
    right of residence in the UK.  Despite this the judge did  not  proceed
    to consider this and made no further reference to it in  his  decision.
    The permission states that there appear to have been  documents  before
    the judge which he  should  have  considered  in  the  context  of  the
    question of permanent residence but which he  did  not  consider.   The
    permission states that these were clearly relevant to the  question  of
    whether the Sponsor had acquired a permanent  right  of  residence  and
    whether, if this is the case, she was  required  at  the  date  of  the
    decision, to be exercising treaty rights at all.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response but it is not helpful as it states that the
    appeal was determined on the papers and  the  Respondent  has  not  had
    sight of the further evidence relied on by the Appellant and so is  not
    in a position to concede whether the judge's failure  to  consider  the
    documents amounted to a material error.

The Hearing

 4. There was no appearance by the Appellant or by a representative on  his
    behalf.  The Presenting Officer made submissions.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that the permission  states  that  the
    judge should have made a finding on the Sponsor's permanent  residence.
    The permission also states that the judge  did  not  consider  all  the
    evidence before him or the fact that the Sponsor  has  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom for nine years and has permanent residence.

 6. I was asked to consider the Appellant's application form  which  is  in
    the original Respondent's bundle.  At category 4.2  the  Appellant  has
    ticked the box which states "I am the family member of an EEA national
    who has a permanent right of residence in the UK."  I was then referred
    to Section 10(1) of the application form.  The Appellant has ticked the
    box which states "The  Sponsor  has  a  document  certifying  permanent
    residence."  He goes on to state that  he  is  enclosing  the  relevant
    document with the application and gives  a  reference  number  but  the
    reference number appears to be a national insurance  number.   This  is
    not proof of permanent residence.  He submitted  that  nowhere  in  the
    evidence is there a permanent residence card so it was not possible for
    the judge to decide whether it is factually correct  that  the  Sponsor
    has permanent residence in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that it is
    correct that the judge failed to deal with this but  at paragraph 13 of
    his decision he states that that although he accepts that  the  Sponsor
    is a student she does not meet the terms of the definition  of  student
    in Regulation 4(d).  He submitted that there has been no  challenge  to
    this finding.  Paragraph 4(d)(ii)  states  that  a  student  must  have
    comprehensive  sickness  insurance  covering  the  United  Kingdom  and
    Regulation 4(d)(iii) states that the Sponsor must assure the  Secretary
    of State by means of a declaration or by such equivalent means  as  she
    personally chooses that she has sufficient resources not  to  become  a
    burden on the social assistance system of the United Kingdom during her
    period of residence.  He submitted that for the Appellant to succeed it
    has to be shown that the Sponsor has permanent residence and  there  is
    no evidence of the  Sponsor  having  comprehensive  sickness  insurance
    cover and there is no evidence of her  resources.   She  also  has  not
    submitted evidence of her resources for  a  five  year  period  of  her
    choosing since coming to the United Kingdom.

 7. He submitted that even if the judge erred by failing to deal  with  the
    Sponsor's permanent residence the error is not material.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that a lot of evidence  was  submitted
    showing tax credits for the Sponsor's parents.  He submitted that  this
    goes against the Sponsor being self-sufficient.

 9. He submitted that in the refusal letter the Respondent has not assessed
    the Sponsor having permanent residence, but  the  refusal  letter  does
    state that there is insufficient evidence to show that the  Sponsor  is
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom under  Regulation  6  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is insufficient evidence to
    show that the Sponsor has permanent residence and there is insufficient
    evidence to show that she is exercising treaty rights.  I was asked  to
    find that there is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision.

11. Although the judge at paragraph 8  of  his  decision  states  that  the
    Appellant ticked the box that he  was  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national who has a permanent right of residence, rather  than  being  a
    qualified person, the judge does not take this point any further.

12. Based on the evidence before the judge he was correct to find that  the
    Sponsor is a full-time student at the University of West London but  he
    was also correct to find that she  does  not  meet  the  definition  of
    student under Regulation 4(d).  No permanent residence  card  has  been
    submitted.  There is no evidence of  comprehensive  sickness  insurance
    cover and there is no evidence of sufficient resources over a five year
    period.

13. I find therefore that even if the  judge  had  gone  further  with  the
    permanent residence of  the  sponsor,  the  Appellant  could  not  have
    succeeded in his application for a residence card as a family member of
    an EEA national who has a permanent right of residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom as there was insufficient evidence to  show  this.   The  judge
    should have taken this further but it would have made no difference due
    to a lack of sufficient evidence and therefore this is not  a  material
    error of law.

14. The judge also finds that there is insufficient evidence before him  to
    show that the Sponsor in this case is exercising treaty rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He has explained this properly in his decision.

15. There are therefore errors of law on the part of the judge but they are
    not material errors of law.  Having a national  insurance  number  does
    not mean that the owner of that number has permanent residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

16. I find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision promulgated on 30th  November  2016  and  the
    judge's decision dismissing the appeal must stand.

17. Anonymity has not been directed.






Signed                              Date 24 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
