
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
EA/05424/2016

                                             EA/05425/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                    |
|On 25th October 2017                   |  On 21st November 2017        |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                            Mr Zahid Hussain Shah
                      Miss Syed (aka Syeda) Kokab Riaz
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UK VISA SECTION
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Mustafa, Counsel, instructed by Solicitors' Inn
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellants before the First-tier Tribunal  were  (1)  Mrs  Zeeshan
    Akhtar, (2) Mr Zahid Shah, born on 2nd December 1983 and (3) Miss  Syed
    (also referred to as Syeda in some of the paperwork) Riaz, born on 30th
    December 1998.  The Sponsor was Mr Syed Riaz Hussain Bibi.  He  is  the
    husband of Mrs Zeeshan Akhtar. The  two  other  Appellants  were  their
    adult children. The Appellants had appealed against the Entry Clearance
    Officer's  decision  to  refuse  them  entry  clearance   pursuant   to
    Regulation 26 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.  It  is  only
    Miss Riaz's appeal which is before me today, but for  reasons  I  shall
    explain below, I also refer to Mr Shah's matter.

2.    The appeals had been listed before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Hagan
    at Birmingham on 4th January 2017.  The judge had considered the matter
    as requested on the papers and he had said in part in his  decision  as
    follows:

         "12.      I  have  considered  whether  the  Appellants  meet   the
             conditions to be treated as family members for the purposes of
             paragraph 7 of the Regulations.  The first  Appellant  is  the
             Sponsor's spouse and so is a  family  member  under  paragraph
             7(1)(a).  I have seen a copy of the nikah nama, supported by a
             certified translation.  In the case of the  second  and  third
             Appellants, they are the Sponsor's children.  To qualify under
             paragraph 7(1)(b), they must each show, firstly, that they are
             a direct descendant.  That is not in dispute.  They must  also
             show that they are each under 21, or else a dependant ...",


    and at paragraph 14:


         "14.     I am satisfied that the Sponsor is a qualified person, and
             that the first Appellant is a family member for  the  purposes
             of paragraph 7, and so I am satisfied that she is entitled  to
             a residence card.  I cannot be satisfied that the  second  and
             third Appellants are entitled to residence  cards  since  they
             have not established that they are family members.   Paragraph
             17(1) obliges the Respondent to issue a residence card if  the
             requirements are met.  It has not been  established  that  all
             the requirements are met",


    Therefore, the position was that Mrs Akhtar's appeal  was  allowed  and
    the appeals of the children, i.e.  Zahid  Shah  and  Syeda  Riaz,  were
    dismissed.


3.    The two  adult-child  Appellants  appealed  against  the  FTT  Judge's
    decision.  Their applications for permission to  appeal  had  come  for
    consideration before Designated Judge Woodcraft on  23rd  August  2017.
    He considered  the  grounds  of  appeal  which  said  as  follows  (the
    grammatical mistakes are as in the original grounds of appeal):

         "The Appellants had applied for family settlement  visas  according
         to  the  proscribed  instructions  and  provided  the  necessitated
         documents along with the Visa Application Forms.  The learned  Visa
         Officer, however, has refused a grant of visas by  raising  certain
         objections/queries spelt out in his order  dated  31/02/2016  which
         appear to be illogical and proves laxity on the part of the ECO  as
         would be observed by examining the  replies  being  submitted  here
         under in seriatim.  We did appeal against the  refusal  orders  but
         the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Hagan had again refused  for
         my two children.  He allowed the appeal for me the  mother  of  the
         both children.


         ...


           . That the both Appellants  are  genuine  persons  to  join  the
             Sponsor  (his  real  father)   who   is   EEA   national   and
             working/settled in UK and he Sponsor is able to  maintain  and
             accommodate the Appellants and himself easily without recourse
             of public funds.  So the Appellants fulfil the requirements of
             Regulation 27(1)(b) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

           . That the objection of the Honourable Judge  in  the  light  of
             Regulation 27(1)(b) is not made out so  grant  the  Appellants
             settlement visa for UK."

4.    Judge Woodcraft said in part as follows:

         "The grounds of onward appeal argue that the appeal of  the  mother
         of the Appellants was allowed and therefore  their  appeals  should
         have been allowed in line with hers.  The first Appellant  is  said
         to be dependent upon his father and the second Appellant  is  still
         under 21.   The  judge  dealt  with  the  issue  of  dependency  at
         paragraph 13 of the determination  and  that  argument  is  a  mere
         disagreement with the result.  It discloses no  arguable  error  of
         law.


         In the case of the first Appellant,  however,  the  judge  arguably
         erred in finding that the second Appellant's date of birth was 1988
         when in fact it was 1998, making the second Appellant  still  under
         21 and thus arguably able to satisfy Regulation 7(1)(b) of the 2006
         Regulations.   Permission  to  appeal  is  granted  to  the  second
         Appellant only."


5.    At the hearing before me today Mr Mustafa said that  it  was  accepted
    in the Respondent's Rule 24 Reply that there was an  error  of  law  in
    respect of Miss Riaz.  However,  insofar  as  the  other  Appellant  is
    concerned, Mr Zahid Shah, as he was an extended family member then that
    was the main point and that when one looked  at  paragraph  13  of  the
    judge's decision it  was  clear  this  needed  further  evaluation  and
    consideration.  I pointed out to Mr Mustafa that there was a difficulty
    for him because Judge Woodcraft made it very clear that only Miss  Riaz
    was granted permission  to  appeal.   Mr  Shah  had  not  been  granted
    permission to appeal.  Mr Mustafa said his  solicitors  had  instructed
    him quite recently. He said he wondered whether  in  the  circumstances
    there could be an application submitted out of time.  As I pointed out,
    there was no such application before me and indeed it appears  that  in
    any  event  it  would  be  significantly  out  of  time  with  no  real
    explanation as to what the problem and the difficulties  have  been  to
    have caused the delay.  The simple position is that it  was  only  Miss
    Riaz's appeal that was to be considered today, not Mr  Shah's.  In  any
    event, Mr Shah had the real hurdle of showing  there  was  evidence  of
    dependency because he was aged over 21  whereas  his  sister  was  not.
    There was no sufficient evidence of dependency before the Judge.

6.    I also heard from Ms Pettersen on behalf of  the  Respondent.  In  the
    circumstances, because of the concession properly made by Ms  Pettersen
    that the judge did materially err in law in respect of the age of  Miss
    Riaz, then Regulation 7 comes to the aid of Miss Riaz.  Regulation 7 of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 makes it  clear  who  is  to  be
    viewed as a family member.  It states, insofar as relevant:

         "The following persons shall be treated as the  family  members  of
         another person -


         (b)      direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner
             who are -


             (i) under 21",


     I interpolate to say that when the grounds of appeal were lodged  they
    incorrectly said that Miss Riaz's date of birth was 1988 and I  suspect
    because the judge was dealing with this matter on the  papers  he  took
    that date of birth to be correct and he thereby assumed that Miss  Riaz
    was ten years older than she actually was.  So, the mistake was that of
    those who completed the application form, but as was pointed out to  me
    during the hearing today, when the  original  appeal  itself  had  been
    lodged to the Tribunal against the Respondent's decision,  the  correct
    date of birth was used showing that Miss Riaz was indeed under 21 years
    of age.


7.    Against that backdrop it is clear in my mind that there is a  material
    error of law in relation to appeal of Miss Riaz.   I  set  aside  Judge
    O'Hagan's decision in respect of Miss Riaz.  I remake the decision  and
    I allow the appeal of Miss Riaz pursuant to  Regulation  7(1)(b)(i)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  She is a family member for the purposes  of  the
    EEA Regulations but I make it clear again, insofar Mr Shah is concerned
    he was not granted permission to appeal.  His appeal remains  dismissed
    and for the avoidance of doubt, even if that matter was before me it is
    clear that the judge made sufficiently reasoned findings in respect  of
    the dependency issue.  Mr Shah would have to show  dependency  for  the
    purpose of Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) and clearly there were ample findings
    in that regard and there is no reason for me to go behind those.

Notice of Decision

There was an error of law in the Judge's decision in respect of  the  appeal
relating to the appeal of Miss Riaz. I set aside that decision.
I remake the decision relating to Miss Riaz and allow  her  appeal  pursuant
to Regulation 7.

For the avoidance of doubt, I have added reference to  the  original  appeal
of Mr Riaz but he had  not  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  Judge
Woodcraft. Mr Riaz's appeal remains dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

A Mahmood

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood                                Date:  25
October 2017

