
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
EA/05130/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 May 2018                             | On 9 May 2018                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                             ms Sujitra poolsup
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Thailand.  Her  date  of  birth  is  24
    January 1988.


2.   The appellant made an  application  for  a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("2006
    Regulations") on 30 November 2016. The application was refused  by  the
    respondent on 15 May  2017  because  the  appellant  had  not  provided
    evidence that she was the family member of a person  exercising  treaty
    rights.



The decision of the FtT

3.       The appellant appealed. Her  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge T. Thorne in a decision promulgated on  1  August  2017,
    following a hearing on 12 July 2017. The appeal was determined  on  the
    papers at the request of the appellant. The judge found  that  the  EEA
    national was exercising family rights, but dismissed the appeal because
    he found that the appellant had not established that she was  a  family
    member of the EEA sponsor.

4.      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien  granted  permission   to   the
    appellant on 1 February 2018.


The grounds of appeal

5.    The grounds argue that the judge dismissed  the  appeal  on  a  ground
    that was not raised as an issue by the respondent. It was  accepted  by
    the respondent that the appellant  was  a  family  member  of  the  EEA
    national, in this case her husband.

The error of law

6.       Mr Bramble conceded that the judge materially erred for the  reason
    raised in the grounds. The decision to dismiss the appeal on this basis
    was not open to the judge. This is a material  error  of  law  and  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside.  The  respondent  accepted
    that the appellant was a family member of the EEA national.  The  issue
    was whether the EEA national was exercising treaty rights and  on  this
    issue the judge found in the appellant's favour. It  follows  that  the
    judge should have allowed the appeal.  I remake the appeal and allow it
    under the 2006 Regulations.


7.      The appeal is allowed under the 2006 Regulations.



Signed
                                             Date 2 May 2018

Joanna McWilliam

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



