
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05117/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2018                              |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MISS SAFIYYAH CADER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PRETORIA, SOUTH AFRICA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, Afrifa and Partners solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  On 31 March 2016, she applied
    for an EEA family permit to join her aunt who is a Portuguese  national
    residing in the UK.  She therefore relies  on  EU  law  rights  as  the
    extended family members of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in
    the UK.  Her application was refused by  the  Respondent  on  13  April
    2016.   The Respondent gave the Appellant a right of appeal.

 2.  On 29 June 2017, the appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turquet.  By a decision promulgated on 3 July  2017  ("the  Decision"),
    the Judge dismissed the appeals on the basis that there  was  no  valid
    right of appeal.  She did so in reliance on the  case  of  Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) ("Sala").  At that time,  Sala
    represented the law on appeal rights for extended family  members  and,
    as a reported decision of this Tribunal, the Judge was bound to  follow
    it.  However, in the case of Khan v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the Court of Appeal held that Sala was
    wrongly decided.  That is now also confirmed by the Supreme Court in SM
    (Algeria) v Entry Clearance Officer, UK Visa  Section  [2018]  UKSC  9.
    Sala has therefore been overturned and is no longer good law.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought on the sole ground that the  Judge  was
    wrong to find that there was no valid right of appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal the Decision was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  on
    25 January 2018 in the following terms:-

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
         decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Turquet)  who,  in  a
         determination promulgated on 3rd July 2017 found that the Appellant
         had no right of appeal against a decision made by the Respondent to
         refuse to grant her an EEA family permit.

         2.   I am satisfied that there is an arguable error of law in  this
         decision in view of the guidance in Khan v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
         1755."

 4. Based on supervening case law, there is a clear error  of  law  in  the
    Decision based on the Judge's finding, premised on Sala, that  she  had
    no jurisdiction to decide the appeal.  Accordingly,  I  set  aside  the
    Decision.

 5. Mr Akohene was initially disposed to argue that I  should  re-make  the
    Decision.  However, having considered the matter  and,  in  particular,
    that  there  are  no  factual  findings  made  at  all  concerning  the
    Appellant's case, he indicated that the appeal should be remitted.  Mrs
    Kiss for the Respondent did not object to that course.

 6. The effect of the error of law was to  deprive  the  Appellant  of  the
    ability to have her case considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   No
    factual findings have been made at all on her case.  Having  regard  to
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statements of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Chambers, I agree that it is appropriate to remit the  appeal  for  re-
    hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Turquet

Decision
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Turquet
promulgated on 3 July 2017 is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.

Signed[pic]                         Dated:  20 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
