
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05238/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on:         |
|On 22 May 2019                       |On 30 May 2019                       |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                Elizabeth [O]
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Lateef Kareem, solicitor with Atlantic Solicitors

For the respondent:    Ms Nathalia Willocks-Briscoe, a Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse her a derivative right  of  residence  as  the  mother  of  a
    Swedish child, who is 3 years old.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.

Background

 2. The respondent refused to grant the appellant  a  derivative  right  of
    residence because she had failed  to  provide  evidence  that  the  EEA
    national child was self-sufficient as required by Regulation  16(2)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016,  or  that
    there was valid comprehensive sickness insurance.  There was no dispute
    that this appellant, as the EEA national child's mother, is her primary
    carer, nor that the child would be  unable  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom, were the appellant  to  be  required  to  return  to  Nigeria.
    There was no evidence as to whether the appellant and her  child  would
    be able to live in Sweden.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 3. The appellant did not produce to the First-tier Tribunal,  nor  to  the
    Upper Tribunal,  any  schedule  of  her  income  and  expenditure,  nor
    supporting evidence thereof.  There was no evidence  about  her  having
    purchased comprehensive sickness insurance for the child.

 4. The First-tier Judge put the case back to the afternoon, at which  time
    a manuscript income and expenditure account was produced  which  showed
    support from Mr [A], who is not said to be the child's father, and from
    her church, which was equal to the expenditure  she  alleged  to  have.
    There were no supporting documents.

 5. First-tier Judge Dineen concluded that he could not be  satisfied  that
    the appellant's child was self-sufficient and that  the  appellant  had
    failed to engage with concerns on that point in the refusal letter.

 6. At [10], the Judge said this about the sickness insurance point:

         "10. Moving on  to  the  question  of  insurance,  the  appellant's
         representative has produced some documents  relating  to  an  Aviva
         policy which appear in the appeal bundle,  but  that  is  a  policy
         which does not appear still to be in effect.  At  the  hearing,  he
         handed up further documents indicating that a policy  of  insurance
         with Aviva was currently held and is  due  to  expire  next  month.
         However,  those  documents  did  not  make  clear  what  cover  was
         provided."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

Grounds of appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, alleging that  there  was
    'overwhelming  evidence'  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that   the
    appellant met the requirements of the Rules and that,  applying  Magill
    v. Porter [2001]  UKHL  67  and  other  more  recent  authorities,  the
    immigration judge had exhibited a closed mind and/or had prejudiced the
    appeal,  such  that  the  appellant  was  denied  'the  most  important
    requirement of natural justice, the opportunity to be heard'.

 8. Mr Kareem,  who  settled  the  grounds  and  has  appeared  throughout,
    asserted that he had 'insisted that [the appellant] should be given the
    opportunity to be heard before the Tribunal' and that the appellant had
    not yet recovered from the shock of not being permitted to do  so.   He
    asserted that he had been sent out of the room, with his client,  while
    the  Judge  had  an  unsupervised  discussion  with  the  Home   Office
    Presenting Officer, then re-admitted and the appeal  dismissed  without
    any evidence being given.  No record of  proceedings  or  statement  of
    truth from Mr Kareem or the appellant was produced with the grounds  of
    appeal.

Permission to appeal

 9. An allegation of bias by a Judge is a serious  matter.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  this
    experienced First-tier Judge  had  shown  bias  by  'not  allowing  the
    appellant to present her case  before  the  [First-tier  Tribunal],  by
    preventing her representative to do the examination-in-chief,  and  for
    the Home Office to cross-examine her if necessary'.

10. The Judge granting permission noted that it was  difficult  to  clarify
    what had occurred at the hearing by reference to the Judge's notes, but
    that if the allegations were  made  out,  unfairness  would  have  been
    shown.

11. The appeal was referred to the Principal  Resident  Judge  to  consider
    further directions.

Rule 24 Reply

12. There was no Rule 24 Reply by the respondent.

Judge's comments

13. PRJ  O'Connor  directed  Judge  Dineen  to  respond  to  the  grant  of
    permission.  Judge Dineen said that he had given his decision orally in
    the presence of the  parties  on  the  day  of  the  hearing,  and  had
    refreshed his memory from the file, but could not recall, some 3 months
    after the hearing, who had been present apart from the appellant and Mr
    Kareem.  He noted that the issues  had  been  narrowed  down  to  self-
    sufficiency and comprehensive sickness insurance.  He noted the paucity
    of evidence  from  the  appellant  and  Mr  [A]  as  to  her  financial
    circumstances and that he had stood the appeal  out  to  allow  her  to
    improve the evidence before him.

14. The evidence had not been much improved by the extra  time.   He  could
    not imagine that he would have prevented oral evidence being  given  if
    the appellant wanted to give it, and if  it  was  to  be  more  than  a
    repetition of the contents of her witness statement.   The Judge  noted
    that

         "13. The grounds of application do not  state  what  such  evidence
         would have been, had it been presented, or the extent to  which  it
         would have remedied any shortcoming in the appellant's documents or
         written statement.

         14.  If I had prevented the giving of such oral evidence, I find it
         difficult to imagine that  there  would  not  have  been  immediate
         reasoned protest from the appellant's representative,  particularly
         as the grounds of application for permission to appeal  state  that
         there is overwhelming evidence before the Tribunal.

         15.  I have not seen, as I would have expected  to  see  if  I  had
         wrongly excluded oral evidence, any statement made on the  day,  as
         soon as possible thereafter, or at any time  subsequently,  setting
         out the appellant's account of what happened at  the  hearing,  and
         stating the evidence she would have given.  The first I have  heard
         of the matter is in the grounds of application  for  permission  to
         appeal, which I received on 08/04/19. ...

         17.  If it is intended to suggest that I discussed the  appellant's
         case with the Home Office Presenting Officer in the absence of  the
         appellant, I make it clear that I do not accept that I  would  make
         such a basic and improper error."

15. The Judge's response was disclosed to the parties in  a  Memorandum  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor dated 15 April 2019.

16. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

17. At the hearing, I asked Mr Kareem to indicate the evidence on which  he
    relied in his assertion that the Judge  was  biased  and  excluded  the
    appellant from giving oral evidence. I asked whether he had prepared  a
    statement of truth and brought  with  him  a  copy  of  his  record  of
    proceedings to support these extremely serious allegations.

18. Mr Kareem said he had not understood that he needed to do so.   In  the
    absence  of  any  witness  statement  from   the   appellant   or   her
    representative to say what she would have said, or what occurred at the
    hearing, I checked the Judge's notes,  and  asked  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    whether the respondent's record of proceedings indicated that there had
    been any such issue at the  hearing,  and  in  particular,  whether  Mr
    Kareem had raised the matter directly with the Judge.

19. I observed that the Judge's notes do not record any  objection  by  the
    representative on the day  of  the  hearing,  and  on  my  enquiry,  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe said that the  brief  record  of  proceedings  on  the
    respondent's file did not do so either.

20. Mr Kareem then began to give evidence about what had  occurred  at  the
    hearing, but Ms Willocks-Briscoe observed, correctly and having  regard
    to the guidance of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ortega  (remittal;  bias;
    parental relationship) [2018] 298 (IAC), that if Mr  Kareem  wished  to
    give evidence, he could not also represent the appellant.

21. I gave directions, giving Mr Kareem until 12 noon the following day, 23
    May 2019, to provide me with a statement of truth, and the respondent a
    right to respond by 12 noon today, following which I indicated  that  I
    would decide whether to deal with the appeal on the papers, or to  list
    it for a further hearing.  In the latter case,  Mr  Kareem  might  find
    himself  professionally  embarrassed  and  need  to   arrange   another
    representative for the appellant.

22. Mr Kareem's statement of truth was received on 23  May  2019  at  12:32
    hours, 32 minutes outside the deadline I had given  him.   He  did  not
    exhibit any record of  proceedings,  having  admitted  frankly  at  the
    hearing the previous day that he had kept no notes  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal proceedings.  Nothing has been received from the respondent.

23. Having considered how to proceed, I am satisfied that  a  further  oral
    hearing is unnecessary and that I can proceed to decide this appeal  on
    the documents and submissions before me.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

24. The material parts of Mr Kareem's statement of truth are as follows:

         "... 4. I attended the hearing with the appellant, and the case was
         called around 12 noon. The matter was set back to  be  heard  after
         lunch.

         5.   On getting back, the Judge did complain that  our  bundle  did
         not contain the  Income  and  Expenditure  Schedule,  therefore  we
         should prepared [sic] same and exhibit  it  within  our  documents.
         The matter was set back again to be heard at 3.00 p.m.

         6.   We got back to the Court at 3.00 p.m., presented the  Schedule
         as directed.  The Learned Judge directed  that  the  appellant  and
         myself to leave.  I confirm that he was alone with  the  Presenting
         Officer.  No reason was given  prior  to  us  leaving  why  it  was
         necessary for us so to do.

         7.   We were called back about 15 Minutes later only for the  Judge
         to tell us again that he thinks the Insurance the Client  exhibited
         is comprehensive and that there is no evidence of money coming from
         her Sponsor into her account therefore he was going to dismiss  the
         appeal.

         8.   I confirm that the Appellant gave no oral evidence before  the
         Learned Judge.  I submitted that it will  be  in  the  interest  of
         justice that the Learned Judge permits us to present our  case  and
         the initial concerns that were raised  would  be  addressed.   This
         request was refused.

         9.   The Learned Judge then indicated that  he  would  dismiss  the
         appeal.  Upon receipt of the written determination, it is confirmed
         that the appeal was dismissed.

         10.  I state that I  am  fully  aware  of  my  duties  towards  the
         Tribunal.  I  am  aware  also  of  my  duties  to  my  client.   My
         contemporary notes and the record of the  Tribunal  would  indicate
         that there was no reception of evidence nor did the case proceed as
         it should normally."

25. There are no notes exhibited to this statement and it is unclear to  me
    what 'contemporary notes' are meant, given that Mr Kareem  told  me  at
    the Upper Tribunal hearing that he had made no  notes  at  all  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.

26. I have examined the purported witness statements of the  appellant  and
    Mr [A], relied upon by Mr Kareem.   Neither  is,  in  fact,  a  witness
    statement, as they are unsigned and undated: they are no  more  than  a
    statement of proof.

      a) The appellant's proof of evidence indicates  that  she  would  have
         said that  she  and  her  daughter  have  verifiable  comprehensive
         sickness insurance and 'the necessary supports from friends and our
         local church so  as  to  not  recourse  to  public  funds  for  our
         maintenance and accommodation'.

      b) Mr [A]'s proof of evidence indicates that he would have  said  that
         he knew the appellant  through  the  Winners  Chapel  International
         Church Dartford United Kingdom and is employed as an IT consultant.
          He would have said  that  'aside  from  the  assistance  that  the
         appellant is receiving from  the  church,  Winner's  Chapel,  as  a
         member, and also from other church members, I do personally  assist
         her too by providing food stuffs and other necessities for her  and
         the daughter.  I also give her cash on a regular basis'.

    Mr [A] does not say how much he gives the applicant and there is  still
    no signed statement from either of them.

Analysis

27. The proper treatment of an allegation  of  bias  against  a  Judge  has
    recently been the subject of a decision by the President of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Mr Justice Lane, sitting with Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt in PA
    (protection claim: respondent's enquiries; bias) [2018] UKUT 337 (IAC):

         "2.  Allegations of judicial bias

         (1)  An allegation of bias against a judge is a serious matter  and
         the appellate court or tribunal will expect all proper steps to  be
         taken by the person making it, in the light of a response from  the
         judge. ...

         (4)  As a general matter, if Counsel  concludes  during  a  hearing
         that a judge is behaving in an inappropriate manner, Counsel has  a
         duty to raise this with the judge.

         (5)  Although each case will turn on its own  facts,  an  appellate
         court or tribunal may have regard to the fact that a  complaint  of
         this kind was not made at the hearing or, at least, before  receipt
         of the judge's decision.

         (6)  Allegations relating to what occurred at a  hearing  would  be
         resolved far more easily if hearings  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         were officially recorded."

28. There is before me no evidence that the alleged  refusal  to  hear  the
    appellant's oral evidence was raised with the Judge at the  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 23 January 2019, nor Mr  Kareem's  suspicion  that  the
    Judge had discussed the appeal with the Home Office Presenting Officer,
    in the absence of the appellant.

29. The grounds of appeal assert that had she given evidence, the appellant
    would have been able to clarify the level  of  cover  of  the  sickness
    insurance she obtained for herself and the EEA citizen child, and  that
    she has a 'common law right to a fair hearing'  such  that  she  should
    have been allowed to give oral evidence.  For the latter, the appellant
    relied on the decision of the former President of the Upper Tribunal in
    Alubankudi (appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 542 (IAC) which at [6]-[[8]
    says this:

         "6.  Every litigant enjoys a common law right to  a  fair  hearing.
         This entails fairness of the procedural, rather  than  substantive,
         variety. Where a breach of this right is  demonstrated,  this  will
         normally be considered a  material  error  of  law  warranting  the
         setting aside of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal:  see  AAN
         (Veil) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 102 (IAC) and MM  (Unfairness;  E&R)
         Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC). The  fair  hearing  principle  may  be
         viewed as the unification of the two common law maxims audi alteram
         partem and nemo judex in causa  sua,  which  combine  to  form  the
         doctrine of natural justice, as it was formerly  known.  These  two
         maxims are, nowadays, frequently expressed in the terms of a  right
         and a prohibition, namely the litigant's right to  a  fair  hearing
         and the prohibition which precludes a Judge from adjudicating in  a
         case in which he has an interest.

         7.    Further  refinements  of  the  fair  hearing  principle  have
         resulted in the development of the concepts of  apparent  bias  and
         actual bias. The latter equates  with  the  prohibition  identified
         immediately above. In contrast, apparent bias, where invoked, gives
         rise to a somewhat more  sophisticated  and  subtle  challenge.  It
         entails the application of the following test:

             "The question is  whether  the  fair-minded  observer,  having
             considered the facts, would conclude that  there  was  a  real
             possibility that the tribunal was biased." ...

         8.   The authorities place due emphasis on the requirement that the
         hypothetical reasonable observer is duly  informed.  This  connotes
         that the observer is in possession of all material facts. See,  for
         example, Taylor v Lawrence [2002] EWCA Civ  90,  at  [61]  -  [63].
         Furthermore, the hypothetical fair minded observer is a  person  of
         balance  and  temperance,  "  ...  neither  complacent  nor  unduly
         sensitive or suspicious", per Lord Steyn in Lawal at [14]. Finally,
         it is appropriate to emphasise that the doctrine of  apparent  bias
         has its roots in a principle of  some  longevity  and  indisputable
         pedigree, namely the requirement that justice not only be done  but
         manifestly be seen  to  be  done:  see,  for  example,  Davidson  v
         Scottish Ministers [2004] UKHL 34."

30. I am guided also by the judgment of the House of  Lords  in  Magill  v.
    Porter at [101]-[102] in the opinion of Lord Hope  of  Craighead,  with
    whom Lord Bingham, Lord Steyn, Lord Hobhouse and Lord Scott of  Foscote
    agreed:

         "102.    In my opinion however it  is  now  possible  to  set  this
         debate to rest. The Court of Appeal took the opportunity in  In  re
         Medicaments and Related Classes of Goods (No 2) [2001] 1 WLR 700 to
         reconsider the whole question. Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers MR,
         giving the judgment  of  the  court,  ...  summarised  the  court's
         conclusions, at pp726H-727C:

             "85. When the Strasbourg jurisprudence is taken into  account,
             we believe that a modest adjustment of the test in R  v  Gough
             is called for, which makes it plain that it is, in effect,  no
             different from the test applied in most  of  the  Commonwealth
             and in Scotland.  The  court  must  first  ascertain  all  the
             circumstances which have a bearing on the suggestion that  the
             judge was biased. It must then ask whether those circumstances
             would lead a fair-minded and  informed  observer  to  conclude
             that there was a real possibility, or a real danger,  the  two
             being the same, that the tribunal was biased."

         103. I respectfully suggest that your Lordships should now  approve
         the modest adjustment of the test in R v  Gough  set  out  in  that
         paragraph. It expresses in clear and simple language a  test  which
         is in harmony with the objective test which  the  Strasbourg  court
         applies when it is considering whether the circumstances give  rise
         to a reasonable apprehension  of  bias.  It  removes  any  possible
         conflict with the test which is now applied  in  most  Commonwealth
         countries and in Scotland. I  would  however  delete  from  it  the
         reference to "a real danger". Those words no longer serve a  useful
         purpose here, and they are not used in  the  jurisprudence  of  the
         Strasbourg court. The  question  is  whether  the  fair-minded  and
         informed observer, having considered the facts, would conclude that
         there was a real possibility that the tribunal was biased."

31. I ask myself, therefore, what facts have been established,  the  burden
    being on the appellant.   The  answer  is  'none'.   There  is  a  bare
    assertion,  not  supported  by  Mr  Kareem's  non-existent  record   of
    proceedings, nor by the brief record of proceedings of  the  respondent
    or the Judge's notes, that an experienced First-tier Judge excluded the
    oral evidence of the appellant and spoke in private to the Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, having excluded the appellant and  Mr  Kareem  from
    the hearing room.  Mr Kareem had a duty to take a proper  note  of  the
    hearing, to raise any such allegations directly with the Judge  at  the
    hearing, and to ensure that they were properly recorded in  his  record
    of proceedings and that of the Judge.  He did none of that.

32. There is also no evidence that the oral evidence, even  if  given,  was
    relevant.  This was a case which turned on the documentary evidence  as
    to the extent of any insurance which the appellant and her EEA  citizen
    child have, and also, whether she (via her mother, the  appellant),  is
    financially self-sufficient.  In respect  of  that  issue,  the  appeal
    before Judge Dineen was woefully ill-prepared.

33. There was no evidence to support the applicant's very rough income  and
    expenditure account, even when produced late in the  afternoon  of  the
    hearing, although she had been on notice since the refusal letter  that
    both the insurance and self-sufficiency questions were in issue.   Such
    evidence as there was indicated that far  from  being  self-sufficient,
    the appellant was half-supported (on her figures) by a friend from  her
    Church, and relied on charity from her church for the other half of her
    needs, receiving  'financial  and  material  support  from  the  church
    welfare system' as set out in a letter of 1 February  2018,  which  did
    not descend to particulars of what she received.

34. It is not clear to me what the appellant's  oral  evidence  would  have
    done to improve that information: certainly,  her  proof  of  evidence,
    even if unchallenged, was no more than a bare assertion  that  she  was
    kept from poverty and  dependence  on  benefits  by  the  kindness  and
    charity of Church members.    The  First-tier  Judge  was  entitled  to
    regard that as not discharging the burden of proving that the appellant
    and her EEA citizen child were self-sufficient.

35. I am not satisfied that the evidence before me could lead a fair-minded
    and informed observer, fully informed of the circumstances (so  far  as
    possible  on  this  evidence)  to  conclude  that  there  was  a   real
    possibility that the First-tier Judge was biased.

36. There is no reliable evidence that the Judge did refuse  to  admit  the
    appellant's oral evidence or collude with the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer in the manner alleged.

37. Nor, setting aside the question of bias, do the grounds  establish  any
    material error of law in the Judge's decision.  The evidence  of  self-
    sufficiency was not there, nor was there evidence that the Aviva policy
    was for comprehensive sickness cover.

38. This appeal is hopeless and is dismissed.



DECISION

39. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         24 May 2019               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson




