
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05050/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral decision given following hearing|On 22 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |
|On 5 December 2019                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                 Smerald [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Blackwood, Counsel instructed by Morgan Pearse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Albania, who  has  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent, who on 10 July 2018 refused  to
    grant him a residence card which he had applied for on the  basis  that
    he was entitled to a derivative residence card as a  primary  carer  of
    his son, who was at the time 3  years  old  and  an  EU  citizen.   The
    child's mother is a Polish citizen and contained within the file is the
    son's Polish passport.  The relationship between the appellant and  the
    mother of the child had broken down and the  appellant  has  day-to-day
    care of the son.

 2. It is common ground between the parties that pursuant to Regulation  16
    of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  the  appellant  would  be
    entitled to a derivative right of residence if first he  can  establish
    that his son is "in education" and secondly  (by  Regulation  16(4)(b))
    his son would "be unable to continue  to  be  educated  in  the  United
    Kingdom if the  person  left  the  United  Kingdom  for  an  indefinite
    period".

 3. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal but  in
    a decision given by myself immediately following a hearing on 30  April
    2019 before a panel of the Upper  Tribunal  consisting  of  myself  and
    (then) Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup, the Tribunal found that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal had contained a material  error  of
    law.  The issue at that time was whether or not  the  appellant's  son,
    who was then 3 years old and was attending nursery education  could  be
    said to be "in education"  for  the  purposes  of  European  law.   The
    Tribunal  considered  that  the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting   the
    submission that it was were not adequately reasoned and that that issue
    was sufficiently arguable on the facts to have required  the  judge  to
    engage more fully with it.

 4. We accordingly decided that the decision must be remade and the  appeal
    was retained in the Upper Tribunal where it was again listed before  me
    on 30 September 2019 at which time the case was not ready  for  hearing
    and I gave further directions, which directions are  within  the  file.
    To summarise the state of play as at  that  time  there  was  no  issue
    between the parties as to whether or not the appellant was  a  "primary
    carer" of his son because plainly he was at least one  of  the  primary
    carers and therefore everything else being equal, would be entitled  to
    a derivative right of residence.   The  two  issues  which  had  to  be
    established were first, whether the appellant's son could  properly  be
    said to be "in education" and secondly whether, if so, the  appellant's
    removal from the UK would require his son to leave with him.

 5. So far as the first issue is concerned, matters have moved on since the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal because it is now agreed by  the
    respondent that (as normally happens when a child gets older) he is now
    unarguably in education, because he is now at a state  primary  school.
    So, the arguments which might have been in issue (which is whether  and
    if so to what extent  nursery  education  can  qualify  him  for  these
    purposes) is entirely academic.  It is agreed that as  the  appellant's
    son is "in education", for the purposes of the EEA Regulations the only
    issue now that remains to be determined is whether or not, in the words
    of Regulation 16(4)(b)  the  appellant's  child  "would  be  unable  to
    continue to be educated in the United Kingdom" if the appellant were to
    be removed from the UK.  If it is the case that he would have to  leave
    with his father for practical purposes, then the appellant is  entitled
    under the Regulations to a derivative right of residence.  Mr Avery, on
    behalf of the respondent, does not seek to persuade the  Tribunal  that
    this construction of the applicable law is in any  way  wrong.   It  is
    also common ground, this being an EEA appeal, that  I  have  to  decide
    this issue on the basis of the position as it is today,  and  that  the
    standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.

 6. The evidence on this issue appears to be all  one  way.   There  is  no
    evidence  other  than  that  the  appellant  has  sole  responsibility,
    certainly day-to-day, for the upbringing of his son and that the mother
    has effectively no involvement in his upbringing at all.   There  is  a
    statutory declaration which is on file whereby the mother has stated in
    terms that the appellant "has been the sole carer for [their son's] day-
    to-day living and care including supporting him fully financially since
    [July 2017]".  The child's mother  continues  by  stating  that  "I  am
    unable at this  stage  to  look  after  my  son  both  emotionally  and
    financially and [am] fully reliant on [the appellant]  to  continue  to
    look after my son and his welfare".

 7. The mother then continues as follows:

         "I am emotionally unstable and financially unable to look after  my
         son.  I have many personal problems and if [the appellant]  was  to
         leave the country I will be forced to send my son ... with him."

 8. Given that the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities  I  am
    quite satisfied that it is more likely than not in the circumstances of
    this case that if this appellant were to be removed from  the  UK,  his
    son would be obliged to leave with him, because  as  the  sole  primary
    carer who has any interest in caring for his son, it would  practically
    not be possible for his son to remain in the UK without him.  It  would
    not be appropriate to take a young child  into  care  in  circumstances
    where both parents believe that it is in that child's best interests to
    remain with his father.

 9. It follows that because the appellant's son is in  education  and  that
    unless the appellant were to be allowed to remain in this  country  his
    son, a Polish citizen and therefore an EU citizen, would not be able to
    continue to be educated in the United Kingdom if he left, the appellant
    is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the UK pursuant  to  the
    2016 EEA Regulations.

10. It follows that his appeal must be allowed and I so find.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent  refusing  to
grant him a derivative right to reside in the UK as the primary carer  of  a
child in education in the UK is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
Date:    14 January 2019
