
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05130/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2020                           |On 12 January 2021            |
|Extempore decision                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                        Mr Ramajeyam Sriskantharajah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Paramjorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kovats, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  A
    Hall promulgated on 20 November 2019, in which he dismissed the  appeal
    of the appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  born  in  1979,  against  a
    decision of the respondent  dated  13  September  2019  to  refuse  his
    application for an EEA residence card as the extended family member  of
    an "EEA national".  The  sponsor  to  that  application  had  been  the
    appellant's brother, an Italian citizen and therefore an EEA national.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    two bases.  First, that the judge had arguably erred in relation to his
    treatment of the evidence concerning the appellant's claimed dependency
    on the sponsor in Sri Lanka.  Secondly, whether it  was  necessary  for
    the sponsor to have been the head of the household he shared  with  the
    appellant in Sri Lanka.

 3. The respondent provided a Rule 24 notice on 30 June 2020.

Factual Background

 4. The sponsor in moved to Italy from Sri Lanka on a work visa in 2007.  I
    was informed by Mr Paramjorthy on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
    sponsor acquired  Italian  citizenship  and  therefore  became  an  EEA
    national in the year 2009.  The only indication as to the date  of  the
    acquisition of his Italian nationality and the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is that which is set out at [45] which  states  that  the
    earliest time at which the judge below could ascertain that the sponsor
    acquired Italian nationality was on 24 March 2010.  For the purposes of
    this appeal, I accept Mr Paramjorthy's submissions that  the  sponsor's
    nationality was acquired in the year 2009.  Nothing turns on whether it
    was 2009 or 2010.

 5. In August 2008, the appellant arrived in this country having  travelled
    via Laos and Thailand  from  Sri  Lanka.   His  case  is  that  he  was
    dependent upon the sponsor before and subsequent to  his  arrival  and,
    accordingly, meets the requirements of the definition of  an  "extended
    family member" in the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").

 6. The judge discussed what took place in Sri Lanka, and  found  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had given incredible evidence concerning  the
    support needs the appellant had in that country.   At  [47],  he  found
    that the appeal could not succeed because  the  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom in August 2008 and the sponsor did not enter until April
    2011.  During that intervening period, found the judge,  the  appellant
    was clearly not a member of the sponsor's household.  The judge did not
    find that he was financially dependent  on  the  sponsor  during  those
    times as insufficient evidence had been provided to establish that.  He
    also found at [51] that it had  not  been  proved  to  the  balance  of
    probability standard that during the same period the appellant had been
    a member of the sponsor's household which  was  the  other  basis  upon
    which the requirement to be an extended family member could  have  been
    met on the facts of this case.

 7. In submissions,  Mr  Paramjorthy  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    although did not rely on paragraph 5, in which it  was  contended  that
    the judge erred in relation to the issue of dependency in Sri Lanka.



Discussion

 8. While the grounds of appeal contend that the judge erred in relation to
    the  possible  combinations  and  dates  of  dependency  and  household
    membership in the country of origin and the host Member State,  on  any
    view it was impossible for this appeal to  have  succeeded  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The sponsor did not become an EEA national  until
    after the appellant had arrived in this country.  The appellant arrived
    here in August 2008 and it was not until 2009 that the sponsor acquired
    Italian nationality, arriving in this country in 2011.   Regardless  of
    the level of prior dependency or household status of the  appellant  in
    relation to the sponsor before that point, it is not possible  for  the
    appellant to have met any of the requirements of the  2016  Regulations
    on account of this factual matrix.  As the respondent sets out  in  the
    Rule 24 notice, the case of Moneke [2011] UKUT 341 held as following at
    the second paragraph of the headnote,

         "In either case the dependency or membership of the household  must
         be on a person who is an EEA national at the  material  time.   For
         this reason, it is essential that Tribunal  Judges  establish  when
         the sponsor acquired EEA nationality."

 9. The requirements of the 2016 Regulations  imposed  on  extended  family
    members require either prior  dependency  upon  the  sponsor  or  prior
    household membership in relation to the  sponsor  before  the  extended
    family member's arrival in this country: see  regulation  8(2)  of  the
    2016  Regulations.   By  definition,  given  the   sponsor   in   these
    proceedings  did  not  acquire  an  EEA  nationality  until  after  the
    appellant had arrived and began to live in this country, it was  simply
    not possible on any view of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
    for the appellant to have been able to establish his claim to have been
    an extended family member.  Accordingly, there is no basis  upon  which
    the appeal before the judge below could possibly have been allowed  and
    accordingly any errors the judge may or may not have made  in  relation
    to his assessment of the evidence are  simply  immaterial.   For  those
    reasons this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 16 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
