
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05769/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 13 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                      yudelka altagracia pujols paulino
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P V Thoree, Solicitor from Thoree & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of  the  Dominican  Republic  against  a
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  her  a
    residence card as the family member, in this case the wife, of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. I remind myself that it is not my function to engage in a free  ranging
    review of all that the First-tier Tribunal  did  but  to  consider  the
    First-tier Tribunal's reasons for dismissing the appeal and the grounds
    that criticise that decision.

 3. In outline, the Secretary of State decided  that  the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of  convenience.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  agreed  and  the
    grounds of appeal allege that that decision was wrong.

 4. I begin by  considering  in  detail  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is the appellant's case that her  relationship  with  the
    European Economic Area National commenced on 30 April  2015  after  she
    met him at his sister's birthday party at the beginning of that  month.
    She said that cohabitation commenced on 15 August 2015  at  an  address
    beginning "Flat 27", that they decided to marry on  29  June  2017  and
    they did marry on 28 March 2018.  The  application  was  refused  on  9
    August 2018 and the decision was appealed.

 5. The respondent gave reasons in a Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  dated  9
    August  2018.    The   respondent   was   particularly   concerned   by
    inconsistencies between the appellant's account of her relationship and
    answers given by the appellant's husband during  a  marriage  interview
    with an officer of the respondent.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the  two  issues  for  him  to
    determine were whether the marriage is a marriage of convenience and in
    order to achieve that end if reliance can  be  given  to  the  marriage
    interview notes.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal heard from the appellant and from the  European
    Economic  Area  National.   It  is  not  disputed   that   there   were
    difficulties in the evidence.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that
    there were three dates given by the appellant's husband  in  answer  to
    questions about the time of his arrival in the United Kingdom  none  of
    which appear to be correct.  There was a  purported  tenancy  agreement
    relating to Flat  27  but  it  was  not  signed  by  the  parties.  The
    appellant's husband had used a different address in an  application  in
    2016. The appellant's husband claimed not to know his sister's  address
    in Vauxhall where he stayed for a month when he first  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom and he claimed  to  have  moved  to  Flat  27  from  his
    sister's address in Vauxhall a month after his date  of  arrival  which
    would have been 29 May 2015 but the tenancy  agreement  did  not  start
    until August 2015.  The appellant's husband  claimed  to  have  started
    seeing her on 15 May 2015 even though he had said elsewhere that he had
    not arrived in the United Kingdom until 29 May 2015.  He claimed not to
    know the address where the appellant had been living before,  according
    to the appellant and her husband, moving into  the  husband's  address.
    The appellant's husband claimed to have moved to Flat 27 together  with
    the appellant on 15 May 2015 before he admitted to being in the  United
    Kingdom and before the tenancy agreement dated August 2015.  Further he
    could not remember the name of the restaurant where he proposed to  his
    wife (the appellant) or where he kept the engagement ring when he  made
    his proposal saying, variously, that the ring was "inside in a flan" or
    "in my hand".  Although he claimed to have received  utility  bills  in
    joint names none were produced and he could not  agree  with  his  wife
    about the precise nature of his occupation.  There are  other  examples
    given.  It might fairly be said that the appellant's husband  was  "all
    over the place" in interview.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave many reasons to support his  finding
    that the marriage was probably a marriage  of  convenience.   Paragraph
    numbered 30, although it is in fact a  continuation  of  paragraph  28,
    gives as a reason "the total lack of any family members of the Register
    Office wedding ceremony (not even the EEAN's London-based  sister  with
    whom he stayed on first arriving here)" and  the  "total  lack  of  any
    family members at  the  restaurant  celebration"  and  the  "resounding
    (astonishing   even)   total   lack   of   any   supporting   witnesses
    (friends/colleagues) appearing at the appeal hearing".

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

10. Before me Mr Thoree  relied  on  the  grounds.   The  first  ground  of
    substance, at number 3, says "it is submitted that the IJ erred in law,
    in that the applicant (sic) was unfairly prejudiced given that IJ  only
    considered her Spanish husband's interview notes and not hers".

11. This was said to be unfair.  This criticism is not made out.  It  is  a
    cause of the vexation that the Secretary of State  did  not  provide  a
    copy of the wife's interview notes.   It  appears  that  she  had  been
    ordered to do that.  For  some  reason  she  only  produced  the  notes
    relating to the husband.  This would have been  a  much  more  powerful
    point if there was some reason to think that something exculpatory  had
    said in the wife's interview that had been ignored.  There is no reason
    to think that.  All the interview notes could do, as far as I can  make
    out, is to confirm the discrepancies that concerned  the  Secretary  of
    State.  There is no material irregularity in  the  judge  deciding  the
    case without waiting for the further evidence.

12. The grounds then complain that it is  the  appellant's  husband's  case
    that he suffers from a severe memory problem.  He attributes this to  a
    suffering a fall as a child and has provided a letter from the  doctor.
    The letter is described as unchallenged but the letter does not seem to
    provide any explanation for poor memory.  It confirms an  injury  on  5
    April 1994 attributed to a fall.  The treatment seemed to be  rest  and
    observation and then "follow-ups".  As far as I can see  there  was  no
    independent evidence to support the  contention  that  the  appellant's
    husband had a medical explanation for being a poor historian.

13. However, even if there was such an explanation, it would not assist the
    appellant.  The fact that  there  may  be  (I  have  not  seen  it)  an
    independent explanation for his  inability  to  answer  straightforward
    questions in a reliable way does not make the answers he gave any  more
    helpful or reliable.  It simply means that it might be unfair  to  make
    something negative out of his answers.

14. In addition to problems in the appellant's husband's account, the judge
    was particularly concerned at the absence of family support.  Not  only
    was there  no  family  support  before  the  judge  but  there  was  no
    suggestion of family support at the marriage ceremony or at a meal that
    followed.

15. I appreciate there is some correspondence supporting the claim that the
    appellant and her husband are "a genuine couple" but it  is  in  rather
    general terms  and  not  explained.   Without  the  advantage  of  oral
    evidence which is subject to  cross-examination  the  judge  cannot  be
    expected to apply very much weight to such  evidence.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find the explanation for the lack of family  support  being
    attributed to an unexplained argument to be contrived.

16. This is a case where  the  judge  was  persuaded  the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience because the only evidence he had  that  was  in
    any way consistent or helpful is the evidence of the appellant herself.
     That had to be set against her husband's inability ("failure" might be
    a better word) to give  supportive  evidence,  the  lack  of  any  oral
    evidence of any family members  or  friends  and  the  failure  of  the
    documentary evidence to indicate prolonged cohabitation.

17. I did not agree that the  judge  erred  by  allowing  the  respondent's
    representative to cross-examine the witness.  The fact  that  a  person
    has a memory problem does not necessarily mean they  cannot  be  cross-
    examined fairly and it certainly does not mean  that  cross-examination
    is inherently oppressive or otherwise  improper.   There  are  ways  of
    dealing with people who have difficulties.  Typically, arrangements can
    be made before the hearing to discuss what should be done.  There is no
    suggestion that such measures were ever asked for in this case.  It  is
    not an error in law failed to anticipate something which did  not  seem
    to be a problem at the time.

18. There was some dispute before me that  exactly  what  happened  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It was never said in the grounds that  there  was
    an application for an adjournment and it was really too  late  to  take
    that point now.  These are the kind of things that need  to  be  raised
    before the hearing when proper preparation can be  made.   Taken  as  a
    whole I am persuaded that there is no material error here and I dismiss
    the appellant's appeal.

19. There is no unlawful behaviour on the part of the Tribunal  here.   The
    proceedings were not unfair.   The  judge  has  reached  a  permissible
    decision on the totality of the evidence.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 August 2019                  |




