
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05318/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|29 November 2018                              |7 December 2018               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                QUATHU KAPANDA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 29 October 2018 I wrote to the parties as follows:

         "In this case,  permission  to  appeal  has  been  granted  in  the
         following terms:

             "The grounds assert that the judge erred in  determining  that
             the appellant did not have primary care of the  child  in  the
             absence of a residence order made in her favour and in failing
             to take into account the copy of a residence  order  that  was
             sent to the judge after the hearing and before the appeal  was
             determined.

             The file reflects that a copy of an interim order  made  on  4
             December 2015  providing  that  the  appellant's  child  shall
             reside with her was provided to the judge on  28  April  2018,
             prior to promulgation of  the  decision.   The  order  is  not
             referred to in the judge's decision and there  is  nothing  to
             suggest the judge considered  whether  or  not  to  admit  the
             evidence, or if the judge did so, any reasons for refusing  to
             admit it.  The existence of the order was clearly in issue  in
             the appeal, as the  appellant  referred  to  it  in  her  oral
             evidence and its absence was  a  substantial  reason  for  the
             judge not accepting the appellant was the primary care of  her
             British citizen child.  The failure to consider whether or not
             to admit the document amounts to an arguable error of law."

         I have reviewed the file.  The grounds appear indeed to have merit.



         In the circumstances I  propose  to  set  aside  Judge  Gillespie's
         determination for error of law  and  remit  the  appeal  for  fresh
         determination by the First-tier Tribunal.  Any submissions  to  the
         contrary will be considered if received within 21 days of the  date
         of this letter."

 2. No response has been received.

 3. I now allow the appeal to this Tribunal, set aside the  decision  under
    appeal on the ground of error of law.  I remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal and direct that it be determined afresh.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 29 November 2018.
