
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/05738/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |                              |
|                                              |On 9 January 2019             |
|On 15 October 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                       Tamer Ahmed Abdelaziz Mohamaden
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Egypt who was  born  on  22
    August 1982.  He married  Ms  Najeeb,  who  is  a  British  citizen  on
    Christmas Day 2014 in Egypt and initially they lived together in Cairo.
     It is the appellant's case that subsequently he and his wife moved  to
    Portugal where from September 2015 until September 2016  his  wife  was
    exercising treaty rights as an EEA  national  working  in  another  EEA
    country such that when they then subsequently moved to the  UK  he  was
    entitled to  a  residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 2. Although the application was  made  under  Regulation  9  of  the  2006
    Regulations it is common ground between the parties that  by  the  time
    the  application  was  considered  by  the  respondent  it  had  to  be
    considered under Regulation 9 of the 2016 Regulations which is slightly
    different.  That Regulation has itself also subsequently  been  amended
    in that Regulation 9(2) now includes (d) and (e) which provides that an
    applicant had to be a member of the EEA national's family during all or
    part of their joint residence in the EEA state (not the  UK)  and  that
    their "genuine family life" was "created or strengthened"  during  that
    period of residence.

 3. The appellant's application for a residence card as the spouse  of  his
    wife was refused by the respondent who did not  accept  notwithstanding
    the evidence that had been provided that  he  had  in  fact  ever  been
    resident in Portugal.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  and  he  apparently
    initially attended the Tribunal (representing himself) where  his  case
    was adjourned after about five hours because of lack of court time.  He
    subsequently decided that in light of the strength (as he believed  it)
    of the evidence which had been adduced  there  was  no  reason  why  he
    should spend another day waiting in the Tribunal so he  asked  for  his
    appeal to be considered on the papers which it  was.   The  appeal  was
    considered on the papers by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  K  Hussain
    sitting at Birmingham on 15 May2018, but in the  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated seven days later on 22 May 2018 Judge Hussain dismissed the
    appeal.

 5. The appellant now appeals  against  this  decision  leave  having  been
    granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald on 22  August
    2018.

 6. There are essentially three grounds on which this appeal is made.   The
    first is that the judge failed to take account of the considerable body
    of evidence which had been adduced on  behalf  of  the  appellant  when
    deciding the appellant had not shown on the  balance  of  probabilities
    that he had been resident in Portugal at all.  The second is that given
    the strength of the evidence and the judge's failure to have regard  to
    some  of  that  evidence,  his  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he was living in Portugal was not adequately reasoned.
      It is fair to say  although  it  is  not  so  stated  in  terms,  the
    effective argument certainly implicit within the  appellant's  grounds,
    is that in light of this evidence that finding was perverse.  The third
    ground is that given that the appellant had in fact turned up with  his
    wife originally at the first hearing the judge's apparent consideration
    as a factor against the appellant that he had  not  turned  up  to  the
    hearing to have his evidence tested was not a finding properly open  to
    him.

 7. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Moran presented  a  consolidated  bundle
    setting out the various pieces of evidence in a  comprehensive  fashion
    in order to assist the Tribunal, as this had not previously  been  done
    as the appellant had been representing himself.  He essentially  relied
    upon the grounds.  On behalf of the  respondent,  Mr  Whitwell  briefly
    attempted to argue that the judge's decision was sustainable because he
    had considered the question of genuineness and  had  been  entitled  to
    have regard to the difficulties which the appellant and  any  appellant
    would have in  establishing  that  the  evidence  he  had  adduced  was
    reliable at a hearing where the evidence was not tested.   For  reasons
    which will appear below, I did not accept that that submission was well-
    founded.

Discussion

 8. At paragraph 7 the judge set out that the  basis  of  the  respondent's
    decision was that "he [that is the  Secretary  of  State]  doubted  the
    appellant's evidence and gave clear reasons for  that  decision".   The
    judge considered that the  Secretary  of  State  "had  provided  cogent
    reasons for refusal which rather placed the onus on  the  appellant  to
    prove otherwise on the  balance  of  probabilities".   The  judge  then
    remarked that

         "A key feature of the refusal was that the appellant's  credibility
         was clearly in issue, a matter that  he  could  best  address,  one
         would have thought, by presenting himself for cross-examination and
         also to have his evidence on the various requirements of Regulation
         9 tested".

    The judge then noted that the appellant had discharged  his  solicitors
    and that "inevitably this affected the weight I could ... afford to his
    evidence".

 9. I have already noted that the appellant  had  previously  attended  the
    Tribunal himself and it was not his fault that  that  hearing  had  not
    gone ahead.  Also, in order for this finding  to  be  sustainable,  the
    judge needed to demonstrate that he had considered the  evidence  which
    was in fact before him, which is a matter to which I will turn below.

10. With regard to that evidence, the judge summarised it at paragraph 8 as
    follows:

         "8.  The appellant has presented an extensive  and  well  presented
             bundle of evidence which meticulously seeks to answer each  of
             the Secretary of State's concerns raised in his letter.  There
             is extensive evidence from witnesses, photographs  and  social
             media messages as well as witness statements not only from the
             appellant and his wife but also witnesses  from  Portugal  and
             friends and family who visited them in Portugal."

11. However, the judge then continues as follows:

         "Whilst the evidence may have been supportive of his case, I  could
         not be satisfied as to its veracity without it being  tested  given
         the doubts that had been raised by the Secretary of State about the
         appellant's credibility."

12. That finding might be arguably  sustainable  had  that  been  the  only
    evidence which the judge had had before him.  However, there was  other
    evidence which does not on the face of it fall  within  this  category.
    That is first evidence that the sponsor the appellant's wife had indeed
    been working in Portugal and secondly the evidence that  the  appellant
    had himself been granted a residence card whilst  in  Portugal  on  the
    basis that he was the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights within Portugal.  That is not evidence which on its  face  could
    properly be challenged without more, and it is difficult to see, absent
    an allegation (which does not appear  to  have  been  made)  that  this
    document was not genuine, how the assertion made by the appellant  that
    he had been present with his wife  whilst  she  was  exercising  treaty
    rights in Portugal could  properly  be  challenged.   In  my  judgment,
    absent challenge to this document, that finding appears to be perverse.
     In any event I agree with the submission made within the grounds  that
    it is not adequately reasoned.

13. The judge went on to find that in any event, he was not satisfied as to
    the genuineness of the move to Portugal because it may have  been  that
    the  only  reason  for  that  move  was  in  order  to  circumvent  the
    Immigration Rules which otherwise would apply to non-EEA  nationals  on
    entry to the UK.  The difficulty with this finding  is  first  that  it
    failed to take account of the respondent's own guidance and indeed  the
    Directives of the EU and secondly that it does not follow the  guidance
    given by the courts including the Tribunal.  So far as the guidance  is
    concerned, the appellant relies at paragraph 12 of the grounds  on  the
    respondent's guidance "Free Movement Rights: Family Members of  British
    Citizens; 25 October 2017" which is as follows:

         "However, if one of the reasons for moving to another member  state
         was to avoid the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  the
         residence in that member state was in any event genuine...then  the
         intention to avoid the requirements of the Immigration Rules is not
         in itself sufficient to refuse to issue a residence card".

14. At paragraph 15 of the grounds the appellant also  relies  on  Articles
    7(1) and (2) of Directive 2004/38/EC which states as follows:

         "Article 7 - Right of residence for more than three months

          1. All union citizens shall have the right of  residence  on  the
             territory of another members state for a period of longer than
             three months if they;

             (a)  are workers or self-employed persons in the  host  member
             state...

          2. The right of residence  provided  for  in  paragraph  1  shall
             extend to family members who are not  nationals  of  a  member
             state, accompanying or joining the union citizen in  the  host
             member state, provided  that  such  union  citizens  satisfies
             conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c)..."

15. Reliance is also placed on  the  decision  of  the  CJEU  as  to  "true
    intention" in Akrich v UK (Case C - 109/01) which is said (at paragraph
    11 of the grounds) to be as follows:

         "Where the marriage between the national of a member state and  the
         national of a non-member state is genuine [it is not  suggested  in
         this case that it is not]  the  fact  that  the  spouses  installed
         themselves in another member state in order, on their return to the
         member state which the former is a national, to obtain the  benefit
         of rights  conferred  by  community  law  is  not  relevant  to  an
         assessment of their legal situation by the competent authorities in
         the latter state."

16. Very fairly  and  usefully  at  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Whitwell,
    representing the respondent provided the Tribunal with a  copy  of  the
    decision of the Inner House Court of Sessions Scotland  in  AA  v  SSHD
    [2017] CSIH 38 in which the decision  in  Akrich  was  considered.   Mr
    Whitwell in particular referred  the  Tribunal  to  what  was  said  at
    paragraph 54 of this decision, as follows:

         "It is entirely correct to say that the  mere  fact  of  moving  to
         another country to take advantage of more favourable treatment will
         not itself constitute abuse of rights.  However, that does not mean
         the intention is irrelevant to the question of a whether a  genuine
         residence has been established.   The  appellant  relied  upon  the
         following passage in UPC:

             "Furthermore, the exercise of a fundamental  freedom  for  the
             purpose of benefiting from the more favourable legislation  of
             another member state does not in itself suffice to  constitute
             abuse of that freedom (see, to that effect, Case  C  -  196/04
             Cadbury  Schweppes  and  Cadbury  Schweppes  Overseas  EU:  C:
             2006:544, paragraph 37)"

         A similar passage is  found  in  Torresi  (para  50).   We  do  not
         disagree with this, as far as it goes.  However, it is not at  odds
         with the conclusion which we have reached.  In Torresi (para 46) as
         in O  and  B,  the  subjective  element  indicative  of  abuse  was
         described as being artificially creating the conditions required to
         obtain the right in question.  That too reflects the  concern  with
         the genuineness of the activity undertaken: it is not the intention
         to benefit from a more favourable legislation in one country  which
         constitutes  abuse:  it  is  that  the  conditions  which  must  be
         satisfied to obtain that benefit have never genuinely existed which
         may do so.  In determining whether they did  genuinely  exist,  the
         intention of the individual will be one of several  factors  to  be
         taken into account".

17. In this case, I am entirely satisfied that there was  an  abundance  of
    evidence before the judge, which he did not consider properly  (and  in
    particular that the appellant had himself been granted a residence card
    in  Portugal)  which  may  well  have  satisfied  that  judge,  had  he
    considered that evidence properly (as I will have to in a moment)  that
    the EEA national  (the  sponsor)  had  been  genuinely  working  within
    Portugal and that for that period of time the  appellant  was  properly
    entitled to the residence card he had been granted and that during that
    period his family life was strengthened.

18. It follows that for the reasons I have set out above  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside  and  the  decision  must  be
    remade.

19. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Whitwell did not seek to suggest that I
    could not remake the decision myself on the basis of the evidence which
    was now before the Tribunal and I propose to do so.

20. I have myself considered all the material which was before the Tribunal
    below and which is now before me, and I have also had  the  benefit  of
    seeing  further  material  in  the  form  of  bank   statements   which
    establishes that the appellant's wife is now exercising  treaty  rights
    in this country, in that she is now working for HSBC and is in  receipt
    of regular monthly payments from them (as a matter of record,  I  would
    add that it appears that in any event she is earning above the level of
    income which would be  necessary  for  her  husband,  who  demonstrated
    during the hearing in front of me that he speaks excellent English,  to
    be entitled to a spousal visa in any event).  Mr Whitwell did not  seek
    to challenge any of this evidence, and in these circumstances there  is
    no need for a further hearing.

21. On the basis of  the  evidence  before  me  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is entitled to a residence card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national (his British citizen wife who has  returned  to  this  country
    having exercised treaty rights in Portugal,  where  the  appellant  had
    been with her).  Accordingly this appeal  must  be  allowed  and  I  so
    order.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain as  containing
a material error and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  him  a
residence card is allowed under the EEA Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig      Date:    17 December 2018








