
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05423/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                  RANA NIAZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who has divorced his spouse,
         an EEA national with Latvian citizenship.   He has appealed against
         a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  ('FtT')  sent  on  15  March
         2019, in which  it  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
         decision refusing to grant him a residence  card,  based  upon  his
         former relationship with his ex-spouse.

      2. Although the respondent's decision  letter  raised  two  issues  of
         concern: insufficient evidence that the  ex-spouse  was  exercising
         Treaty rights and a failure to provide a passport /  identity  card
         for the ex-spouse, at the FTT hearing the respondent  conceded  the
         former issue as no longer being in dispute.   There  was  therefore
         only one issue in dispute before the  FtT.   This  is  because  the
         respondent accepted that all the requirements  of  the  Immigration
         (EEA) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regs') were met, save  regulation
         21(5).  The respondent did not accept that the appellant provided a
         valid national identity card or passport in the  name  of  his  EEA
         national ex-wife.

      3. In grounds of appeal prepared on behalf of  the  appellant  it  was
         argued, inter alia, that the FtT erred in law in  failing  to  take
         into account an email exchange confirming the appellant's  evidence
         that his ex-spouse refused to provide him with her passport.   This
         email exchange is to be found at pages  28  to  29  of  the  bundle
         before the FtT.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  FtT  Judge
         Parkes.  The respondent submitted a rule 24  notice  dated  22  May
         2019, seeking to uphold the decision of the FtT.

      4. At the hearing before me Mr Bates conceded that the FtT's  decision
         contains the errors of law identified in the grounds of appeal  and
         that the decision should be remade by me, and allowed.

      5. I am satisfied that Mr Bates' concession was entirely  appropriate.
         The FtT's adverse credibility finding that the ex-spouse would  not
         have refused to have provided her passport, yet have  been  willing
         to have provided her tax documents, fails to take into account  the
         clear explanation to be found in the string of emails  between  the
         appellant and his ex-spouse between June  2018  and  January  2019.
         This is an error of law and I set aside the FtT's decision.

      6. Both parties accepted that I  could  remake  the  decision  without
         hearing any evidence  by  allowing  the  appeal.   The  appellant's
         marriage irretrievably broke down  (hence  the  decree  nisi  order
         dated 24 January 2018) and there  was  an  understandably  lack  of
         amicable relations between the parties.  This  is  clear  from  the
         string of emails between them.  The ex-spouse felt able to give her
         tax documents but not  her  passport  and  gave  apparently  cogent
         reasons for this.  The 2016 Regs make it  clear  at  regulation  42
         that the Respondent may accept alternative evidence of identity and
         nationality "where the person is unable to obtain  or  produce  the
         required  document  due  to  circumstances  beyond   the   person's
         control".  I am satisfied that the appellant  has  been  unable  to
         provide  ex-spouse's  passport  due  to  circumstances  beyond  his
         control.

      7. The appellant explained that the respondent had previously provided
         him with a residence card based upon his marriage to an EEA citizen
         and her nationality had not changed.  Indeed, at the hearing before
         the FtT the respondent's representative accepted that the ex-spouse
         was exercising Treaty rights - in order to do so she must have been
         an EEA citizen.  Mr Bates checked the file and was able to  confirm
         the identity of the  ex-spouse  -  see  Rehman  (EEA  Regs  2016  -
         specified evidence) [2019] UKUT 000195.

      8. The decision of the FtT contains an error of law and is set  aside.
         I re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.


Signed   UTJ Plimmer   Dated

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer    19 July 2019

