
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/05234/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On Thursday 13 June 2019             |On Thursday 27th June 2019           |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  ROMAN [O]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Sowerby, Counsel instructed by Shanthi & Co


                       DECISION, REASONS AND DIRECTION

BACKGROUND

      1. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.  For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as
         they were in the First-tier Tribunal albeit that the  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department is technically the Appellant in  this
         particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against  a  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard promulgated on  30  July  2018
         ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
         Respondent's decision dated 16 May 2017  refusing  the  Appellant's
         application for a residence card under  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2016  ("the  EEA  Regulations")  as  the
         spouse of an EEA national, Ms [YR] (referred to by the Judge as "Ms
         [Y]" which is the name I therefore use hereafter).  The  Respondent
         contends that the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience.   The  Judge
         concluded that it was a genuine marriage.

      2. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Paul
         Chambers on 18 September 2018 but granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         McWilliam on 7 May 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "...It is arguable that the judge did not  take  into  account
             the interview transcripts and resolve issues  of  conflict  in
             the evidence relied upon by the respondent."

      3. The appeal  comes  before  me  to  consider  whether  the  Decision
         contains an error of law and, if so, either to re-make the decision
         in this Tribunal or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for
         re-making.

      4. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Melvin explained that  he  was  in
         some difficulties in presenting the Respondent's  case  as  he  had
         been sent the file relating to the Appellant's  wife  and  did  not
         therefore have the documents  on  which  the  Respondent's  grounds
         relied.  He did have  a  copy  of  some  documents  but  not  those
         referred to in the grounds.   He  would  have  some  difficulty  in
         arguing the appeal without sight of  the  relevant  documents.   Mr
         Sowerby expressed some sympathy  with  the  position  in  which  Mr
         Melvin found himself but objected to any adjournment of the hearing
         as the Appellant was ready to proceed.

      5. Having ascertained that the documents which Mr Melvin did not  have
         were relatively few  and  short,  I  refused  the  adjournment  and
         arranged for copies to be provided to Mr Melvin.  The case was  put
         back in the list whilst copies were organised, and I gave Mr Melvin
         a short break before the re-start of the hearing  to  consider  the
         copy documents.

GROUNDS, RULE 24 STATEMENT AND SUBMISSIONS

      6. Mr Melvin relied in his  submissions  on  the  renewed  grounds  as
         pleaded.  Those are that the Judge failed to consider  the  content
         of the marriage interview which had been  produced  at  an  earlier
         hearing which was adjourned to allow the Appellant to consider  its
         content.   The  Respondent  also  took  issue  with   the   Judge's
         acceptance at [20] of the Decision of the evidence of Ms  [Y].   In
         the course of that paragraph, the Judge referred  to  the  evidence
         provided by an Immigration Officer during a visit  to  the  address
         said to be shared by Ms [Y] and the Appellant and to the  discovery
         there of  the  Appellant's  ex-partner,  Ms  [R].   The  Respondent
         contends that the Judge failed to consider  whether  this  evidence
         pointed to the Appellant living at that address with Ms [R]  rather
         than with Ms [Y].  The Judge is  also  said  to  have  ignored  the
         evidence that the Appellant had been working  in  the  UK  using  a
         false identity (said to be relevant to his credibility).   Finally,
         the Appellant had, by the time of the hearing, returned voluntarily
         to Mexico.  It is said that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  that
         factor when assessing the genuineness of the marriage.

      7. Mr Melvin relied in  submissions  on  two  matters  in  particular.
         First, he reiterated the point that the Judge failed  to  reference
         the marriage interview and the discrepancies therein.   Second,  he
         pointed out that the evidence might suggest that the Appellant, his
         ex-partner, the child and Ms  [Y]  were  all  living  at  the  same
         address.  The Appellant and his ex-partner have a  child  together.
         The Judge had failed to take that evidence into account.

      8. Mr Sowerby relied on the Rule 24 response.  That submits that  "the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge ..  addressed  himself  properly  to  the
         evidence before him and reached adequately-reasoned  findings".  It
         refers to the Judge's finding that the witnesses  were  compelling.
         It is said that reasons were provided  for  the  finding  that  the
         marriage was genuine at [14] to [26] of the  Decision.   The  Judge
         had referred to the marriage interview and minute sheet at [18]  of
         the Decision and took into account  the  circumstances  surrounding
         the visit to the address at [20] of the  Decision.   He  also  took
         into account the Appellant's voluntary return to  Mexico  ([22]  of
         the Decision).

      9. Mr Sowerby pointed out, in  addition,  that  the  current  decision
         under appeal followed two previous refusals  which  relied  on  the
         marriage interview and property visit.   The Respondent's  decision
         under appeal on this occasion reads as follows so far as relevant:

             "It is also noted that you  have  previously  been  refused  a
             residence card on 2 previous occasions on the  basis  of  your
             marriage to your EEA sponsor following  a  home  visit  and  a
             marriage interview respectively.

             On this occasion you have not submitted sufficient evidence to
             convince the secretary of state that this marriage is genuine.
              You have only submitted some  photographs,  one  council  tax
             bill dated March 2016 that your EEA sponsor is not listed  on,
             5 general letters and 1 joint bank statement.

             It is also noted that in 2003 you were refused asylum  as  the
             dependent of your then  spouse  [CSR],  also  that  a  divorce
             certificate from this first marriage has never  been  seen  by
             this department to accept it as dissolved  and  that  on  your
             current marriage certificate you are stated as single.

             Therefore,  this  relationship  is   still   deemed   one   of
             convenience in order to benefit your immigration status."

     10. Mr  Sowerby  accepted  that  the  answers  given  at  the  marriage
         interview were not referred to in the Decision but pointed out that
         the Judge had heard evidence from Ms [Y].  The  Judge  also  had  a
         witness statement from the Appellant although, as Mr Melvin pointed
         out in reply, that was largely concerned with  his  departure  from
         the UK.  As Mr Sowerby also pointed out, many of the answers in the
         marriage interview were not discrepant as the earlier  reasons  for
         refusal letter had accepted.  For that reason, even if  there  were
         an error in failure to deal with the content of that record, it was
         not material.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     11. The Respondent does not suggest that the Judge has  misapplied  the
         case-law in relation to marriages of convenience.  He sets out  the
         relevant  passages  from  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
         convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) and Rosa v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14  at  [12]  of  the
         Decision.  As there recorded, therefore, the position is  that  the
         legal burden of proof throughout remains with the Respondent to the
         balance of probabilities but that, once the Secretary of State  has
         discharged his evidential burden, that burden  then  shifts  to  an
         appellant to rebut that evidence.

     12. The Decision has to be read against  that  background.   The  Judge
         recorded at [14] of  the  Decision  the  Respondent's  reasons  for
         refusal on this occasion and  that  this  depended  on  information
         gathered during the Respondent's  previous  interactions  with  the
         Appellant.  Although he does not expressly find at that point  that
         the evidence was sufficient to discharge the evidential burden,  it
         must be assumed that he accepted this because he then moved  on  to
         consider the  Appellant's  case  countering  the  evidence  of  the
         Respondent.

     13. The Judge dealt first with the reasons  based  on  the  Appellant's
         continuing marriage  to  Ms  [R].   The  Judge  accepted  that  the
         Appellant's assertion that he was  never  married  to  Ms  [R]  was
         inconsistent with an earlier asylum interview where  the  Appellant
         said he was married to  her.   He  also  accepted  that  there  was
         inconsistency between a "UKBA minute sheet dated the 21st  November
         2012" when the Appellant apparently stated that he lived  with  his
         two children and their mother but then changed his account and said
         that the children were in Mexico which is at odds with what he said
         in the marriage interview.  In relation to those aspects, the Judge
         said  that  "[u]ltimately   the   evidence   on   this   point   is
         unsatisfactory, but I am not satisfied  the  evidence  is  such  to
         support the respondent's contention Ms [R] and  the  appellant  are
         married".  I note that the Judge did not say either there or  later
         whether the inconsistencies there noted had any impact  and  if  so
         what impact on his later findings that the marriage to Ms  [Y]  was
         genuine. However, those are not directly  relevant  to  that  issue
         because the Appellant's case is that the relationship  between  him
         and Ms [Y] did not commence until February 2013.

     14. The crux of the Judge's finding that the  marriage  is  genuine  is
         based on the evidence of  Ms  [Y]  and  what  he  says  about  that
         evidence therefore bears setting out in full:

             "20.      Ms [Y] was a convincing witness.  She told me  about
             the circumstances of her relationship with the appellant  from
             beginning to date.  Their relationship is easy to  understand,
             it is their circumstances as they have been from time to  time
             that are curious.  They met when the appellant and Ms [R] were
             her tenants.  She describes how she started living at 63A with
             her daughter in 2010, [M].  She told me the appellant moved in
             with his partner and stepson in September 2012.  She described
             her relationship with the appellant at that time  as  landlord
             and tenant.   It  was  in  February  2013  she  describes  the
             relationship changing when he kissed her for the  first  time.
             By April 2013 she describes the relationship  as  more  solid.
             Ms [R] was still living at the address with her son until  the
             appellant told her about the relationship.  This is consistent
             with what Ms [R]  said  to  immigration  officials  when  they
             visited the 63A address on  the  6th  December  2014.   It  is
             recorded that she claimed the appellant "is dating a woman  by
             the name of [MY] and has been for approximately 2 years".  She
             went on to say the couple was on holiday at an hotel in London
             and she was staying at the house to  look  after  their  child
             while they were away.  Given the potential for Ms  [R]  to  be
             hostile  to  the  appellant  this  evidence  is   particularly
             probative.

             21.  She  then  gave  detailed  evidence  about  her  previous
             marriage and why she did not tell the  appellant  about  this.
             She also explained the need to find a tenant when her daughter
             moved out.  She told me that prior to 2012 she  did  not  know
             the appellant.

             22. She then described the nature of their relationship up  to
             the date he returned to Mexico and showed me the  evidence  of
             their daily contact since that time.  She  has  also  been  to
             visit him there since he left the UK.  I have a  copy  of  her
             flight details and boarding passes."

     15. Based on that evidence and the Judge's finding that Ms  [Y]  was  a
         compelling  witness,  he  expressed  himself  satisfied  that   the
         marriage between her and the Appellant was a genuine one.

     16. Turning back to  the  Respondent's  grounds  of  challenge  to  the
         Decision, I reject the last two of  those  grounds  concerning  the
         relevance of the Appellant's voluntary departure to Mexico and  the
         content of the UKBA Minute Sheet.  I have  already  noted  why  the
         UKBA Minute Sheet does not assist and the Judge was relying on  the
         credibility of Ms [Y] and not the  Appellant  and  so  it  was  not
         relevant in that regard.  If anything,  the  Appellant's  voluntary
         departure to Mexico helped rather  than  hindered  the  Appellant's
         case as there was evidence of continuing contact between him and Ms
         [Y] thereafter to the extent that she had travelled  to  Mexico  to
         see him.  The Respondent can scarcely  complain  of  the  Appellant
         doing the right thing and leaving the UK when he is told he  should
         do so.

     17. I am however more concerned about the Judge's failure to  refer  in
         any detail to the record of the visits to the  Appellant's  address
         and the marriage interview. There is an express  reference  to  the
         visit which took place on 6 December 2014 at [20] of  the  Decision
         and I accept that the Judge was entitled to  take  that  supportive
         evidence into account.  However, there is other  evidence  in  that
         and the record of the other visit  which  may  have  a  bearing  on
         whether the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  Ms  [Y]  is
         genuine.  Following the evidence from the visit on which the  Judge
         relies, the record of the visit on 6  December  2014  continues  as
         follows:

             "Ms [R] allowed us to have a look at the room that Mr [O]  and
             Ms [Y] share.  Andrew (Mr [O] and Ms [R]  child)  was  in  the
             room at the time.  The room contained  a  bunk  bed.   Ms  [R]
             claimed that Andrew sleeps on the top bed whilst Mr [O] and Ms
             [Y] sleep on the bottom bed.

             The other bedroom in the property's door was shut and  Ms  [R]
             would not allow us to have a look in this room, claiming  that
             her other son was in there with his friends."

         Whilst  there  may  be  that  innocent  explanation  for  why   the
         Appellant's ex-partner would not  allow  the  Immigration  Officers
         into the other room, the Judge ought  to  have  considered  whether
         this gave rise to any suspicion that the living  arrangements  were
         not as claimed.  Moreover, the sleeping arrangements  as  explained
         by the Appellant's ex-partner whilst possibly not  unique  were  at
         least unusual and the Judge ought to have considered what should be
         derived from this evidence as a whole  and  not  simply  that  part
         which supported the Appellant's case.

     18. The record of the visit on 15 February 2015 contains less by way of
         evidence either supporting or undermining the Appellant's case.  As
         appears from that record, the Immigration Officers sought  to  gain
         entry with "two adolescents" who were entering the property at  the
         time.  The Officers concluded that these were the children  of  the
         Appellant and his ex-partner.  There is  no  evidence  from  either
         about what occurred during that visit.  They are said to have asked
         the Officers if they had a warrant and when they said they did not,
         the children told them to wait whilst they went inside.   They  did
         not re-emerge, and the Officers left.  There is obviously no reason
         why an individual, particularly a teenager should  not  ask  if  an
         official has a  warrant  before  admitting  that  official  to  the
         premises but, coupled with the other report, the  Judge  should  at
         least have explained why  that  evidence  had  no  bearing  on  the
         question he had to answer.

     19. Turning then to the marriage interview, it  can  be  inferred  from
         what is said at [20] to [21] of the Decision that Ms [Y] was giving
         evidence about the details of the relationship in order  to  answer
         the inconsistencies relied upon by the Respondent emerging from the
         marriage interview (for example, the reason why she  had  not  told
         the  Appellant  about  her  previous  marriage  arises   from   the
         discrepancy in that  regard  between  the  answers  at  interview).
         However, the Judge ought to have had regard to  the  evidence  from
         that interview about the answers there given.

     20. I have carefully read the earlier reasons for  refusal  letter,  in
         particular that dated 27 January 2016 which is detailed in relation
         to the discrepant answers  relied  upon.  That  earlier  letter  is
         relied upon as part of the Respondent's  case  now.  None  of  that
         material is considered by the Judge.  Some of the discrepancies may
         be minor but they required to be explained.   There  are  what  are
         referred to as "statements" from the Appellant and Ms  [Y]  on  the
         Tribunal file which are not statements as such but rather point  by
         point responses to the discrepancies relied upon by the Respondent.
          It may be that when those are considered alongside  the  interview
         record, the same result may be reached.  However, those should have
         been considered with the evidence which the Judge considered to  be
         in the Appellant's favour.  They were not.

     21. Whether a marriage is one of convenience depends on the  Respondent
         establishing to a balance of probabilities that the marriage is not
         genuine.  However, I am unable to be satisfied as to the lawfulness
         of the Judge's conclusion when he has considered only the  evidence
         pointing in one direction. There is no balancing  of  the  evidence
         relied upon by both parties.  For that reason, I am satisfied  that
         the grounds disclose an error of law in the Decision.   As  I  have
         already indicated, whilst an analysis of  all  the  evidence  might
         lead to the  same  outcome,  that  is  not  necessarily  the  case.
         Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Decision should be set  aside,
         and the decision re-made.

NEXT STEPS

     22. For the above reasons, I set aside the Decision.  I have  carefully
         considered whether to retain this appeal in the Upper Tribunal  for
         re-making or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

     23. I am mindful of the fact that the Appellant remains in  Mexico  and
         may still be unable  to  give  evidence  at  the  hearing.   He  is
         apparently living in Acapulco and it may be  possible  for  him  to
         give evidence by video-link if he wishes to do  so.   There  is  no
         indication that he  wished  to  do  so  at  the  previous  hearing.
         However, I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal
         to  Taylor  House  in  case  he  wishes  to  take  that  course  as
         arrangements are likely to be easier to put in place there.

     24. The reason I have set aside the Decision is a failure  to  consider
         the Respondent's evidence.  As such, although the issue is a narrow
         one, the fact finding required may be more extensive,  particularly
         if the  Appellant  does  wish  to  give  evidence  himself.   I  am
         therefore satisfied that it is appropriate to remit the  appeal  to
         the First-tier Tribunal.    I do not preserve any of  the  previous
         findings as it will be necessary for a second Judge to consider  Ms
         [Y]'s evidence which lay at the heart of the Decision  as  a  whole
         and he/she should not be constrained by earlier  findings  when  so
         doing.

     25. Both parties were agreed that, if I found an error of law as I have
         done, it was more appropriate to remit the  appeal  for  re-hearing
         than to retain it in this Tribunal.

DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error  of  law.  I
    set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ian  Howard
    promulgated on 30 July 2018.  I remit the appeal to Taylor House for re-
    hearing before a Judge other than Judge Howard.

DIRECTION

    The Appellant is directed to notify the First-tier Tribunal  within  28
    days from the date when this decision is promulgated whether he  wishes
    to give evidence by video-link from Mexico at the remitted  hearing  so
    that arrangements can be made if necessary.



         Signed              [pic]            Dated: 25 June 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


