
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05874/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 June 2019                      |On 26 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                               Mohammad Irfan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees, Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  16th
    August 2018 to refuse his application for a  permanent  residence  card
    under  Regulation  15  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 (the 2016  Regulations).   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Aujla dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  21st  March
    2019.  The Appellant now appeals against that decision with  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien on 3rd May 2019.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claimed  that  he
    entered the UK in 2004 on a visitor's visa.  On 6th  December  2012  he
    was issued with a residence card as the unmarried  partner  of  an  EEA
    national, [MK].  On 5th December  2017  the  Appellant  applied  for  a
    permanent residence card under Regulation 15 of the  2016  Regulations.
    He indicated on the application form that he was unable to contact  the
    EEA  Sponsor  but  the  basis  of  the  application  was  that  he  had
    established a period of five years residence  in  accordance  with  the
    2016 Regulations.

 3. The Secretary of State refused that application.  The reasons given for
    refusal were that on 27th  September  2017  the  Appellant  arrived  at
    Heathrow  on  a  flight  from  Islamabad  and  was  interviewed  by  an
    Immigration Officer and during the course of his interview he said that
    he had gone to Pakistan on 14th August  2017  to  visit  his  wife  and
    children.  He told the Immigration Officer that he had got  married  in
    Pakistan in 1987 and that he had come to the UK  in  2004  on  a  visit
    visa.  The Secretary of State noted  that  in  the  application  for  a
    permanent residence card the Appellant had not provided any details  of
    his marriage in Pakistan nor had he provided a divorce certificate.  It
    was noted that the Home Office expected to see proof that any  previous
    relationship had permanently broken down and that no such evidence  had
    been provided in this case.  The Secretary of State further noted  that
    the Appellant had not provided a copy of the Sponsor's passport as  the
    relationship had broken down and that he was not willing to provide any
    financial documents.  The  Secretary  of  State  noted  that  the  bank
    statements  submitted  for  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  were  in
    individual names, the council tax statements and tenancy agreements had
    another name also listed on them and there was no substantial  evidence
    of joint financial commitments.  The Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application for permanent residence as the unmarried partner of an  EEA
    national saying that there was insufficient evidence  of  a  subsisting
    relationship for the required five year period.

 4. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  the  judge  identified  that
    there were two  main  issues  in  the  appeal  [9].   The  first  issue
    identified  was  whether  the  Appellant  had  completed  five   years'
    residence in the UK in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  before  the
    relationship between him and the Sponsor broke down.  The  judge  noted
    that, as the Appellant was not the spouse of the Sponsor he  could  not
    rely on retained rights.  The second issue was identified as being  the
    Appellant's marriage in Pakistan.  At paragraph 10 the judge noted that
    the case was put on the Appellant's behalf that he had resided with the
    Sponsor since 2010 and had therefore resided with  her  for  two  years
    before he made the application for a residence card in 2012.  The judge
    appears to have accepted the submission that, as the Sponsor  left  the
    Appellant in November 2017 and the relationship finally ended in  April
    2018, he had therefore  completed  five  years'  residence  before  the
    relationship ended.  At paragraph 22  the  judge  identified  that  the
    issue to be determined as whether or not he found  that  the  Appellant
    was free to  enter  into  a  relationship  with  the  Sponsor  when  he
    commenced the relationship in 2010.  The judge went on to find that the
    Appellant's account was not credible, that he did not find it plausible
    that the Appellant would divorce his wife of seventeen years with  whom
    he had four children,  in  the  circumstances  described  in  his  oral
    evidence, shortly before he came to the UK in  2004  [27].   The  judge
    noted that the Appellant had not provided any evidence of his  divorce,
    finding that, if he had genuinely divorced his wife as  claimed,  there
    would be some evidence of that.  The  judge  rejected  the  Appellant's
    account that he had legally divorced his wife before he entered into  a
    relationship with the Sponsor or at any time  during  his  relationship
    with her.  The judge went on to find at paragraph 29:

         "The Appellant was therefore not free to enter into a  relationship
         with the  sponsor  as  her  unmarried  partner  and  therefore  his
         relationship with her,  regardless  of  its  genuineness,  did  not
         qualify him to be granted a residence card as a result."

    The judge found that the Appellant was not a credible witness, that  he
    was married to his wife when he entered into the relationship with  the
    Sponsor and continued to be married to her during his relationship with
    the Sponsor and that there was no evidence  of  a  legal  divorce.   In
    those  circumstances  the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    established that he had continually resided in  the  UK  in  accordance
    with the Regulations for a period of at least five years as required by
    Regulation 15(1)(b) and dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal

 5. It is contended in the grounds that the judge made an error of  law  at
    paragraph 22 of the decision where he said:

         "There  was  no  dispute  between  the  representatives  that   the
         Appellant would not be free  to  enter  into  a  relationship  with
         another woman leading to a  grant  of  residence  card  if  he  was
         already married and that marriage had not been  legally  terminated
         before he entered into the relationship."

    Reliance  was  placed  on  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2016  Regulations
    contending that the test under the Rules is whether the relationship is
    durable and this does not depend on the Appellant proving  that  he  is
    legally divorced from any previous relationship or  whether  any  other
    relationship has broken down.  It is further contended that  the  judge
    erred in his approach to the determination  of  Judge  Callender  Smith
    promulgated on 11th March 2015 in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  son.
    Judge Callender Smith found that the Appellant's son  had  been  living
    with the Appellant and the EEA Sponsor since shortly after  he  arrived
    in the UK in June 2012 and that he had been financially and emotionally
    dependent upon the Appellant and his EEA partner while in Pakistan  and
    therefore allowed the Appellant's son's appeal under  Regulation  7  of
    the 2016 Regulations.  It is contended in the grounds  of  appeal  that
    the judge failed to give appropriate weight to this  decision.   It  is
    further contended that the judge failed to have regard  to  the  report
    from the Immigration Officer at page  71  of  the  Respondent's  bundle
    which shows that the Appellant was in fact released from  detention  at
    port following  confirmation  from  his  EEA  partner  that  they  were
    partners.  The grounds further contend that the  judge's  reasoning  at
    paragraph 22 is irrational.  At paragraph 22 the judge found  that,  if
    the Appellant's relationship with the Sponsor was sanctioned by the  UK
    authorities by granting him  a  residence  card  whilst  he  was  still
    married to his wife in Pakistan regardless of his separation from  her,
    "the UK authorities would in effect be approving a polygamous situation
    which is not possible or allowed under UK law".  It is  contended  that
    this is flawed in that the Appellant's marriage in Pakistan  is  not  a
    valid marriage in the UK and, in any event, he is not married to his UK
    Sponsor and the issue of polygamy cannot therefore arise.

 6. It is contended in the grounds of appeal that the judge took  a  flawed
    approach in that the starting point should have  been  Regulation  7(3)
    and that the judge was required to assess how long the couple  remained
    in a durable relationship and made no finding on this point.  The judge
    was required, it is contended, to  assess  whether  the  Appellant  had
    established  the  Sponsor's  exercise  of  Treaty   rights   for   five
    consecutive years and no findings on  this  issue  were  made.   It  is
    contended that the judge's focus on whether the Appellant was  divorced
    from his first wife was a focus on an irrelevant matter.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien
    who considered it arguable that the judge erred in focusing on  whether
    the couple are divorced rather than on whether  the  marriage  subsists
    and considered all grounds were arguable.

 8. The Secretary of State submitted a Rule 24  response  dated  10th  June
    2019 arguing that the grounds of appeal have no merit.  It is submitted
    that the judge has addressed the issues raised in  the  refusal  notice
    having canvassed the representatives as to the issues and  as  to  what
    needed to be decided.  It is contended that the issue to be decided was
    not whether the Appellant had committed bigamy and was in a  polygamous
    relationship, as suggested in the grant of permission, instead  it  was
    the issue raised in the  refusal  notice  that  no  evidence  had  been
    provided of  the  previous  marriage  or  divorce  certificate.  It  is
    contended that the judge considered this core issue and found that  the
    Appellant had not been truthful or provided credible evidence  that  he
    was divorced or that the relationship had broken down.  It is submitted
    therefore that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  addressed  the  issues
    before him and reached conclusions open to him on the evidence.

The hearing

 9. At the hearing Mr Rees submitted on behalf of the  Appellant  that  the
    judge failed to fully consider the issue in the appeal which is whether
    the Appellant meets the requirements of Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.  He submitted that the Appellant has established  that  he
    was in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national  from  2010  until
    April 2018.  In his submission there was a partial  split  in  November
    2017 but the relationship broke down in April 2018.  In his  submission
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  alighting  on  the  issue  of
    whether the Appellant had a divorce from his Pakistani wife but  failed
    to address the more fundamental issue  which  is  whether  a  religious
    marriage in Pakistan would have been recognised as a marriage in the UK
    and should have focused on the durability of the relationship with  the
    EEA national  under  Regulation  8(5).   In  his  submission  the  2012
    residence card was issued on the basis of  the  relationship  and  this
    issue was not raised  then.   Mr  Rees  accepted  that  the  five  year
    qualifying period began when the residence permit was granted.  In  his
    submission the EEA Sponsor was exercising  Treaty  rights  until  April
    2018.  In his submission the judge made a material error in focusing on
    the issue of the Appellant's marriage in Pakistan and in his  assertion
    in relation to the polygamous situation in light of the  fact  that  he
    was never married to the EEA national and his previous  marriage  would
    not be recognised under UK law.  He further submitted  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to make findings that the Sponsor's exercise of treaty
    rights had been for a period of five years up until 6th December  2017.
    Mr Rees accepted that the Appellant could not claim for any  period  of
    residence prior to the issue of the residence card on 6th December 2012
    and submitted that the five year  qualification  period  ended  on  6th
    December 2017.  He submitted that the judge failed to take  account  of
    the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callender  Smith  who,  he
    submitted, could not have allowed  the  son's  appeal  if  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant and the EEA national were not in a durable
    relationship at that time.

10. In response Mr Melvin submitted that the issue of the durability of the
    Appellant's relationship was not argued in the son's  appeal  therefore
    there was no misapplication of  the  principles  in  Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 which, in any event, was not argued before Judge  Callender
    Smith.  In his submission there was no evidence  that  the  Appellant's
    application in 2012 referred to his wife and children in Pakistan.   He
    submitted that the point taken by the judge about polygamy was not that
    there were two marriages but that there were two relationships.  In his
    submission the conclusions made by the judge were open to  him  on  the
    basis of the evidence  and  the  finding  as  to  Appellant's  lack  of
    credibility.  He further submitted that  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with the EEA national appears to have ended in November 2017  which  is
    short of the required five year  qualification  period.   He  submitted
    that the focus of the reasons  for  refusal  letter  was  the  lack  of
    evidence as to the breakup of the relationship in Pakistan.  There  was
    nothing from the ex-wife in Pakistan by way of evidence on this  issue.
    He further pointed out  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  Appellant's
    application form for permanent residence about his previous marriage.

11. Mr Rees responded by  highlighting  paragraph  11  of  the  Appellant's
    witness statement which he said indicated  that  the  relationship  was
    ongoing until April 2018.

12. We reserved our decision in relation to the  error  of  law  and  heard
    submissions from both  representatives  in  relation  to  remaking  the
    decision should we find an error of law in  the  decision.   Mr  Melvin
    submitted that the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the  EEA
    national broke down in November 2017.  He submitted that there  was  no
    evidence from HMRC or any other source to  show  that  the  Appellant's
    partner was exercising Treaty rights under the Regulations between 2012
    and 2017.  He submitted that the Appellant had not provided evidence of
    the marriage and claimed divorce in Pakistan.

13. Mr Rees submitted that there was extensive evidence in the  Appellant's
    bundle.   There  were  bank  statements  in  the  Sponsor's  name   and
    sufficient  evidence  of  her  exercise  of  Treaty  rights.   In   his
    submission the relationship did not finally break down until April 2018
    as the couple tried to reconcile between  March  and  April  2018.   He
    submitted that the EEA Sponsor has been working in the  UK  since  1999
    and throughout all of the relevant period.  In his submission there  is
    sufficient evidence in the Appellant's bundle that the EEA Sponsor  was
    exercising Treaty rights and that the relationship did  not  end  until
    April 2018.  In his submission this means that the requirements of  the
    2016 Regulations were met between 6th December 2012  and  6th  December
    2017.

Discussion and Conclusions

14. The relevant provisions of the 2016 Regulations are as follows:

    'Regulation 2(1)


    ...


    "durable partner" does not include-


    (a)  a party to a durable partnership of convenience; or


    (b)  the durable partner ("D") of a person ("P") where a spouse, civil
    partner or durable partner of D or P is already present in the United
    Kingdom and where that marriage, civil partnership or durable
    partnership is subsisting;


    "Family member"


    7. - ...


         (3)  A person ("B") who is an extended family member and  has  been
         issued with an EEA family permit, a registration certificate  or  a
         residence card must be treated as a family member of A, provided-


             (a)  B continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2),
             (3), (4) or (5); and


             (b)  the EEA family permit, registration certificate or
             residence card remains in force.


    "Extended family member"


    8. - (1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means  a  person
         who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation
         7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies a condition in paragraph (2),
         (3), (4) or (5).


         ...


         (5)  The condition in this paragraph is  that  the  person  is  the
         partner  (other  than  a  civil  partner)  of,  and  in  a  durable
         relationship with, an EEA national, and is able to  prove  this  to
         the decision maker.


    Right of permanent residence


    15. -    (1)  The following persons acquire the right to reside in  the
         United Kingdom permanently-


             ...


             (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not an EEA
             national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with the
             EEA national in accordance with these Regulations for a
             continuous period of five years;


    ...'


15. It is clear from the reasons for refusal letter that the focus  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse was the conclusion  that  there
    is insufficient evidence of a subsisting relationship for the  required
    five year period  under  Regulation  15(1)(b).   In  that  context  the
    Secretary of  State  raised  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  previous
    relationship in Pakistan and the lack of evidence  that  the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor had a subsisting relationship.

16. The starting point is Regulation 8(5).  It is not in dispute  that  the
    Appellant was granted a residence card under  Regulation  8(5)  on  6th
    December 2012 as the unmarried partner of an EEA national on the  basis
    that it was accepted that the Appellant was the partner  of  and  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national.  Accordingly, in  accordance
    with regulation 7(3), from that date the Appellant  was  treated  as  a
    family member.

17. As accepted by Mr Rees at the  hearing,  the  case  of  Kunwar  (EFM  -
    calculating periods of residence) [2019] UKUT  00063  (IAC),  clarifies
    that an extended family member does not have a right of residence until
    a residence card is issued by the Secretary of  State  at  which  stage
    s/he is treated as a family member and may only at that point begin  to
    acquire  a  period  of  lawful  residence  which  can   count   towards
    establishing a permanent right  of  residence  [39].   Accordingly  the
    judge's acceptance of the submission recorded at paragraph 10 that  the
    five year residence period began in 2010 was wrong in law.

18. The grounds deal with this at paragraph 5 which contends that,  despite
    noting that there was no dispute on this issue between the  parties  at
    the hearing at paragraph 22,  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  apply
    Regulation 8(5). Whilst  the  grounds  do  not  specifically  refer  to
    paragraph 10 and the submission made there, in our  view  it  is  clear
    that the judge took an erroneous approach to  the  submissions  by  the
    parties and the attempt to  narrow  the  issues  as  contended  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  This led the judge to concentrate on the  issue  of
    the Appellant's marriage and divorce in Pakistan and the apparent issue
    as to whether he was free to enter  into  a  relationship  in  the  UK.
    Instead,  the  judge  should  have  considered  whether  the  Appellant
    established that he was a family member of  an  EEA  national  who  had
    resided in the  UK  with  the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five   years   (regulation
    15(1)(b)).

19. The starting date for the assessment  of  this  five  year  period,  as
    confirmed in Kunwar, is the date on which the Appellant was issued with
    a residence card.  It is not in dispute that the Appellant's  residence
    card was granted on 6 December 2012 and  was  valid  until  6  December
    2017.   Accordingly  the  period  of  residence  for  the  purposes  of
    Regulation 15 began to run on 6 December 2012.  This was accepted by Mr
    Rees at the hearing.  However Mr Rees submitted that  the  relationship
    ended in April 2018 and that the Appellant  had  therefore  established
    five years residence in accordance with the Regulations.  If  this  was
    established then any error at paragraph 10 would not be material.

20. It is contended in the grounds of appeal that the judge  erred  in  his
    approach  to  the  decision  of  Immigration  Judge   Callender   Smith
    promulgated on 11th March 2015 in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  son.
    That application was based on the claim that the  Appellant's  son  had
    been supported financially by his father in  Pakistan  and  that  after
    arriving in the UK in June 2012 he resided with the Appellant  and  his
    partner.  At that hearing Judge Callender  Smith  heard  oral  evidence
    from the Appellant's son, the EEA Sponsor and the Appellant.   We  note
    that at paragraph 27  Judge  Callender  Smith  accepted  that  the  EEA
    national demonstrated that she was working on a self-employed basis and
    that the  Appellant  was  working.   It  was  also  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's son was a named tenant on the  tenancy  agreement  and  the
    judge found that the oral and documentary  evidence  presented  in  the
    appeal was both cogent and credible and found that the Appellant's  son
    had been living as a dependant with the EEA Sponsor and  the  Appellant
    in this case since shortly after he arrived in the UK in June 2012  and
    allowed the appeal under Regulation  7.   We  take  into  account  this
    decision in accordance with Devaseelan, we accept that it  is  implicit
    that Judge Callender Smith  accepted  that  the  EEA  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant were in a relationship at that time.  However the judge  made
    no specific findings on that issue.  In any  event  that  decision  was
    made in March 2015 and may stand as an assessment of the  situation  at
    that time.  However in this appeal it is necessary to take into account
    all of the evidence relating to the  entire  five  year  period.   That
    decision is not determinative of the  issues  to  be  decided  in  this
    appeal accordingly Judge Aujla made no material error in  his  approach
    to the decision.

21. We have considered the record of the Appellant's interview at  Heathrow
    Airport.  Whilst it is stated in the reasons for  refusal  letter  that
    this took place on the Appellant's return from Islamabad to Heathrow on
    27th September 2017 we note the document at page 71 of the Respondent's
    bundle is dated 1st July  2018.   In  any  event  it  states  that  the
    Appellant left the UK on 14th August 2017, went to visit his  wife  and
    children, he said that he got married in Pakistan in 1987 and  he  came
    to the UK on a visit visa but  that  he  was  living  with  his  Polish
    partner since 2007 at 196 [~].  The report states that the  passenger's
    partner was contacted and confirmed that she was a Polish national  and
    that the passenger was her partner and that she met him seven years ago
    at 196 [~].  There is some conflict between this document and  evidence
    elsewhere.  There is no evidence that, prior  to  this,  the  Appellant
    informed the Home Office that he was married in  Pakistan.  It  is  not
    mentioned in his application for a permanent residence  card.  Further,
    he told the Immigration Officer  that  he  had  been  living  with  his
    partner since 2007.   However  it  does  appear  that  the  Appellant's
    account was accepted at that stage and he was granted leave  to  enter.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  that   this   issue   was
    significant in the determination of the issues in this appeal. This was
    clearly an erroneous approach. As set out above, the issue is  whether,
    to  meet  the  requirements  of  regulation  15,  the   Appellant   had
    demonstrated that he had resided with the  EEA  Sponsor  in  accordance
    with the 2016 for a continuous period of five years from  the  date  on
    which he was granted a residence card under regulation 8.

22. We have considered the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
    the Appellant's residence with the  EEA  Sponsor  during  the  relevant
    period.

23. We note the four tenancy agreements provided in the Appellant's bundle.
     The first is for a period of twelve months from  December  2012.   The
    second is for a period of twelve months at  a  different  address  from
    10th December 2013.  The third is in respect of the same address for  a
    period of twelve months from December 2014.  The fourth is  in  respect
    of the same address for a period of twelve months  from  10th  December
    2015.  The Respondent's bundle contains a further tenancy agreement for
    a period of twelve months from 10th December 2016 in the  name  of  the
    Appellant and his son.  The first agreement  was  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant and the EEA Sponsor, the other agreements were in the name of
    the Appellant, the EEA Sponsor and his son but the agreement dated 10th
    December  2016  named  the  tenants  as  the  Appellant  and  his  son.
    Accordingly the tenancy agreements do not  provide  evidence  that  the
    Appellant and the EEA Sponsor resided together beyond 2015/2016.

24. We also take into account further documents in the  Appellant's  bundle
    including council tax bills in the name of the Appellant  and  the  EEA
    national from 2010/12 until 2017/18 in relation  to  first  and  second
    floors 196 [~], London.  We take into account HMRC payment  records  in
    relation to the EEA national but note  that  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter does not dispute that the EEA national was  a  qualified  person
    throughout the relevant period.  However we acknowledge that the  self-
    assessment statements produced give her address as 196 [~]. The  latest
    HMRC document before us is a self-assessment calculation  for  2015/16.
    We note also that the national  insurance  contribution  records  dated
    March and October 2013 give her address  as  196  [~].   We  take  into
    account HSBC bank statements in the name of the  EEA  national.   These
    cover the period from 27th January 2014 to 26th December 2016.

25. Accordingly  the  only  documentary  evidence  of  the  EEA  national's
    residence at the same address of  the  Appellant  beyond  2016  is  the
    council tax bills issued on 11th March 2016 and 10th March 2017 in both
    names.  We have taken account of  the  documents  in  the  Respondent's
    bundle showing the Appellant's residence  including  a  bank  statement
    from March to June 2017 from NatWest, and Thames Water bills naming the
    Appellant and the EEA national.  In our  view,  whilst  there  is  some
    documentary evidence  covering  some  of  the  time  during  which  the
    Appellant has claimed  to  reside  with  the  EEA  national,  there  is
    insufficient documentary evidence of  their  residence  together  after
    2016.

26. In his witness statement dated 18 March 2019 the Appellant said that he
    met his partner in 2006 and they lived  together  until  November  2017
    when she moved out of the address  (paragraph  4).   He  said  that  he
    attempted to  reconcile  after  she  moved  out  but  the  relationship
    permanently broke down in the summer of 2018 when  she  confirmed  that
    she no longer wanted to be in a relationship with  him  (paragraph  4).
    The Appellant says that he was stopped by an Immigration  Officer  when
    he returned from Pakistan on 27 September 2017.  He said that  he  went
    to visit his daughters and that he saw his children's mother  while  he
    was there.  He denied that he had referred to her as his wife.  He said
    that after this incident his relationship with his EEA partner got into
    difficulty because of his visits to Pakistan and the fact that  he  was
    supporting his daughters.  He said that his partner left the  house  in
    November 2017 and that he did not at that point have any  contact  with
    his partner and could not provide  her  ID  card  or  other  supporting
    documents (paragraph 10).  He went on to say that he bumped into her in
    a chance encounter in March 2018 in his local high street and she  gave
    him her new telephone number and told him where she had moved to,  they
    remained in contact after this and he attempted to reconcile  with  her
    but  it  was  clear  that  she  did  not  want  to  continue  with  the
    relationship some time in April 2018.  He said that in  July  2018  the
    Home Office requested further documents relating to his ex-partner, she
    provided him with her original ID card but said that she would not give
    any further documents including  anything  in  relation  to  her  self-
    employment in the UK and that he has  not  spoken  to  her  since  then
    (paragraph 11).

27. The Appellant's son submitted a witness statement in which he too  said
    that his father's partner left the family home  in  November  2017  two
    months after his father had returned from Pakistan and  that  prior  to
    this they had lived together as a couple.

28. It is clear from both of these witness statements that the EEA national
    left the couple's home in November 2017. We reject  the  evidence  that
    the relationship continued beyond that. This assertion is  based  on  a
    chance encounter in March 2018 and the  fact  that,  according  to  the
    Appellant's witness statement, they "remained  in  some  contact  after
    this" and that he attempted to reconcile with her but that she made  it
    clear that she did not want to continue in the  relationship  in  April
    2018.  In our view this sporadic or infrequent contact cannot amount to
    a continuation of a durable relationship beyond November 2017 when  the
    couple were no longer cohabiting and at a stage when the Appellant  did
    not have contact with her.

29. Accordingly, in our view, having considered all of  the  evidence,  the
    judge made a material error at paragraph 10 in accepting the submission
    that the Appellant had completed five years  residence  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the Regulations before the durable relationship  ended.
    The judge made a material error in going on to focus on  the  issue  of
    the Appellant's marriage in Pakistan and failing to  determine  all  of
    the  matters  in  issue  under  the   2016   Regulations.    In   these
    circumstances we set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.

30.  Having  considered  all  of  this  evidence  we  find  that  there  is
    insufficient evidence to  demonstrate  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
    durable relationship with the EEA national for a continuous  period  of
    five years from the granting of the  residence  card  on  6th  December
    2012.  There is inadequate documentary evidence of the couple  residing
    together throughout the period and in particular after  2016.   In  any
    event it is the evidence of the Appellant and  his  son  that  the  EEA
    national left their residence  in  November  2017  after  a  period  of
    discord.  We  do  not  accept  on  the  evidence  before  us  that  the
    relationship remained durable after November 2017.  The  Appellant  has
    not demonstrated that he meets the requirements of  regulation  15  (1)
    (a). We remake the decision by dismissing the  appeal  under  the  2016
    Regulations.

Notice of Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.

32. We set it aside. We remake it by dismissing the appeal under  the  2016
    Regulations.

33. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 24th June 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 24th June 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
