
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/05926/2016
     IA/33864/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st September 2017                        |On 27th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                             Stella Iyabo Thomas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs G Fama of Counsel instructed by Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge I Ross of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 30th December 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female Nigerian citizen born 7th February 1962.   On
    10th February 2015 the Appellant applied for a residence  card  on  the
    basis of a retained right of residence, having been  divorced  from  an
    EEA citizen.  That application was refused on 26th October  2015.   The
    Appellant lodged an appeal against that  decision.   On  24th  November
    2015 while the first appeal was outstanding, the Appellant applied  for
    a  permanent  residence  card  on  the  same  basis  as  her   previous
    application.  That application was refused on 5th May 2016.

 3. The reasons for refusal issued by the  Respondent  are  the  same,  and
    contend the marriage entered into  by  the  Appellant  was  solely  for
    immigration purposes.

 4. The appeals were linked together and heard by the FTT on  6th  December
    2016.  Both appeals were dismissed.  The FTT heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and her cousin and did not find that evidence credible.   The
    FTT noted the Respondent's contention that the  Appellant  had  been  a
    party to a marriage of convenience, on the basis that her former spouse
    had sponsored three different applicants all claiming to be his spouse,
    when he was supposed to be in a genuine and  subsisting  marriage  with
    the Appellant.

 5. The FTT found that the Appellant had ignored this assertion made by the
    Respondent and found that the Appellant had failed  to  deal  with  the
    serious credibility issues raised in the refusal letters, and therefore
    dismissed the appeals, as the Appellant had not proved on a balance  of
    probabilities that she satisfied  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) regulations 2006.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that  the  FTT  had  erred  by  failing  to
    recognise that the legal burden of proof was on the Respondent, when it
    was  alleged  that  an  Appellant  had  entered  into  a  marriage   of
    convenience.  It was pointed out that the Appellant in her  appeal  had
    denied being a party to a marriage of convenience.   It  was  contended
    that the FTT had erred by making a mistake of fact, in finding that the
    Appellant entered  the  UK  in  2009  rather  than  2007,  and  adverse
    credibility findings had been affected by the mistake of fact.  It  was
    contended that the second application made by the Appellant  was  based
    on domestic violence and the FTT had  erred  by  failing  to  make  any
    findings on this issue.

 7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  Farrelly  who  found  it
    arguable that the FTT had erred by failing to recognise that the burden
    of proof was on the Respondent in relation to  a  claimed  marriage  of
    convenience, and noted that the FTT had not  considered  the  claim  of
    domestic violence.

 8. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending in summary that the central issue in both appeals  was
    the contention that the  Appellant  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience, and the FTT had not erred on this issue.

 9. The Appellant submitted a written response dated  7th  September  2017,
    relying upon Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54, and Rosa [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1198,
    which confirmed the legal burden of proof is on the Respondent when  it
    is alleged that an individual is a party to a marriage of convenience.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Tarlow did not rely upon the rule 24 response but conceded that  the
    FTT had  materially  erred  in  law  as  contended  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, and had not applied the correct burden  of  proof.   It  was
    accepted that the FTT decision was  flawed  and  could  not  stand  and
    should be set aside.  Mrs Fama added that a further material error  was
    the FTT's failure to address at all, the issue of domestic violence.

12. Both representatives  submitted  that  it  was  appropriate  for  these
    appeals to be remitted back to the FTT  to  be  heard  afresh  with  no
    findings preserved.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. I announced at the hearing that the decision of the FTT was set  aside.
    In my view the concession by Mr Tarlow was rightly made.  The Court  of
    Appeal in Rosa confirmed that the legal burden of proof,  when  it  was
    alleged that a marriage was one of convenience lay with the Respondent,
    but if the Respondent adduced  evidence  capable  of  pointing  to  the
    conclusion that the marriage is  one  of  convenience,  the  evidential
    burden shifts to the Appellant.

14. In this case the Respondent produced no evidence capable of pointing to
    the conclusion that the marriage was one of convenience.  An  assertion
    was made  to  this  effect  in  the  refusal  letter  but  no  evidence
    submitted.  Therefore as accepted by Mr Tarlow, the  evidential  burden
    did not shift to the Appellant, and the legal burden remained with  the
    Respondent.

15. This was not the approach adopted by the FTT and  this  amounts  to  an
    error of law.  In addition, I find that it was an error of law  not  to
    consider at all the issue of domestic violence, which was raised by the
    Appellant in her second application.

16. In deciding that it is appropriate to remit these appeals to the FTT, I
    have taken  into  account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements.   Credibility  is  in  issue  and  the  extent  of
    judicial fact-finding which will be required, makes it more appropriate
    for this to be dealt with by the FTT.

17. No findings of fact are preserved.  There will  be  a  further  hearing
    before the FTT, and the appeals will be heard by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Ross.  The parties will be advised of the time and  date  of  the
    hearing in due course.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeals are allowed to the extent that they are  remitted
to the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.
Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.






Signed                              Date 21st September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FTT.






Signed                              Date 21st September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
