
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05843/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: UT(IAC) Liverpool           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 3 October 2018                    |On: 10 October 2018                  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                          kingsley nnaemeka EMENAHA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bello, instructed by Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This case involves a cross-appeal, with both parties  appealing  the  First-
tier  Tribunal's  decision  of  1  September  2017.  Following  a  grant  of
permission to appeal against the decision, it was found, at an error of  law
hearing on 15 February 2018, that the First-tier Tribunal  had  made  errors
of law in its decision. The decision was accordingly set aside.

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 14 July 1986. On  25  February
2014 he married a Dutch national, [AH] and on 28 April 2015  he  was  issued
with a residence card under the under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006 as the family member of an  EEA  national.  Following
subsequent  checks  with  HMRC,  the  respondent  discovered  that  the  EEA
national sponsor had not been exercising treaty rights in the UK since  2015
and concluded that the  appellant  had  provided  insufficient  evidence  to
demonstrate that his EEA family member was a qualified person in the  UK  as
a worker. The respondent therefore revoked the  appellant's  residence  card
on 29 April 2016, pursuant to regulation 20(2) of the EEA Regulations.

The appellant appealed against that decision, asserting in  his  grounds  of
appeal that his spouse had been exercising treaty  rights  at  all  relevant
times and the only times when she was  not  working  was  when  she  was  on
maternity leave. The appellant also asserted in his grounds that  he  had  a
right of residence by virtue of  his  relationship  with  his  EEA  national
child who had since been born in the UK.  Following  his  divorce  from  his
wife, which became final on 27 July 2016,  the  appellant  sought  leave  to
amend his grounds to add the further ground that he had retained a right  of
residence on divorce under regulation 10 on the  basis  of  having  divorced
his wife, having access to their daughter and being the victim  of  domestic
violence.

The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Goodman on  19
September 2017. The judge had before her a  statement  from  an  officer  at
HMRC together with payslips for the appellant's ex-spouse and  her  hospital
records showing the birth of their child on [ ~ ] 2016, a police  record  of
a report  of  a  domestic  incident  and  the  appellant's  medical  records
referring to domestic violence. The judge was also  provided  with  a  Child
Arrangements Order from the Family Court  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
daughter.  The  appellant  appeared  and  gave  oral  evidence  before   the
Tribunal. The appellant's ex-spouse did not  appear.  The  appellant  relied
upon the decision of Saint Prix (Judgment of  the  Court)  [2014]  EUECJ  C-
507/12 in relation to the  retention  of  status  as  a  worker  of  an  EEA
national temporarily unable to work due to pregnancy and childbirth.

Judge Goodman had regard to the payslips in the appellant's  bundle  showing
that his ex-wife was working and paying deductions of tax in May 2015,  July
2015 and  September  2015  and  a  P45  showing  a  leaving  date  from  her
employment of 21 October 2015. The judge considered that  the  beginning  of
the statutory maternity period would be around 19  December  2015  and  that
that left two months for which there was no evidence of whether or  how  the
appellant's ex-wife was exercising her treaty rights. The judge  had  regard
to the police report of 23 September 2015 which  recorded  that  the  couple
had recently split up as  the  appellant's  ex-wife  believed  he  had  been
cheating on her and that they had had a verbal altercation and she had  made
threats to him whilst holding  a  knife.  In  a  counselling  report  of  22
January 2016 the appellant had said that he had not been in touch  with  his
ex-wife since September 2015.  The  judge  noted  that  the  couple  started
divorce proceedings in June 2016 and the  decree  nisi  was  dated  27  July
2016.

The judge considered that the appellant's ex-wife had been working until  at
least 21 October 2015 and that, since she was  entitled  to  take  6  to  12
months off work as maternity leave, she was exercising treaty rights at  the
date of the divorce, subject  to  the  two  missing  months  of  October  to
December 2015. The judge considered various scenarios for  the  missing  two
months and concluded, taking the evidence in the round, that it  was  likely
that the appellant's ex-wife was exercising treaty  rights  as  of  5  April
2016 and as of the date of the termination of the  marriage  in  July  2016.
Accordingly  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  against  revocation  of   the
residence card. However the judge did not  accept  that  the  appellant  had
retained a right of residence upon divorce. She  did  not  accept  that  the
incidents described by the appellant  amounted  to  domestic  violence.  She
accordingly dismissed the appeal on that basis.

Both parties sought permission to appeal against  the  respective  decisions
of the judge. The respondent asserted that the judge  had  speculated  about
the appellant's ex-wife's status during the missing two  months  of  October
2015 and December 2015, that there was no  information  about  her  work  or
benefits from 1 October 2015 until the  birth  certificate  dated  22  March
2016 and that there was no evidence that she was  on  maternity  leave  from
work. The respondent relied  upon  Weldemichael  and  another  (St  Prix  C-
507/12; effect) [2015] UKUT 540 in asserting that the sponsor could  not  be
treated as a worker as her unemployment was for more than  11  weeks  before
her due date of 11 March 2016. The appellant, for his  part,  asserted  that
the judge did not properly consider his retained  rights  on  the  basis  of
having access to his child, pursuant to regulation 10(5)(d)(iii),  or  as  a
result of domestic violence pursuant to regulation 10(5)(d)(iv).

Permission was granted to both parties. In a decision of 23  February  2018,
following a hearing on 15 February 2018, Upper Tribunal Judge  Hanson  found
there to have been material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision  in
relation to the challenges made by both parties. He found that  in  allowing
the appeal against the revocation of the residence card the judge had  erred
by embarking upon speculation which was not supported by  the  evidence  and
in dismissing the appeal in  relation  to  retained  rights  the  judge  had
failed to undertake a proper assessment.

UTJ Hanson set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  made
directions for further evidence to be provided within relevant time  limits.


Prior  to  the  appeal  being   relisted   for   hearing   the   appellant's
representatives made an application to the Upper Tribunal for a  summons  to
be issued, pursuant to the provisions of Part 1 clause 2 and Part  2  clause
16(1)(a) and (b) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  to
compel the appellant's ex-wife to attend the  hearing  in  order  to  answer
questions as to her activities at the relevant time, namely between  October
2015 and the end of July 2016  when  the  decree  absolute  of  divorce  was
issued, and to produce documentation  confirming  that  she  was  registered
unemployed and/or claiming benefits or working in the relevant period.   The
request was made further to the appellant's  ex-wife's  solicitors  advising
the appellant's solicitors that his ex-wife was not confident providing  her
confidential and personal documents to the appellant but would abide by  any
requirements if a summons were issued by the Tribunal.

A witness summons was issued to  the  appellant's  ex-wife  on  6  September
2018, ordering her to attend at a hearing on 3 October 2018 and:

"To produce the following documents: evidence of the exercise of EU treaty
rights in the United Kingdom as a worker such as contract(s) of employment,
payslips, tax documents, etc, or otherwise, with specific reference to the
time you were married to Mr Emenaha, up to and including the date of the
decree absolute of divorce."

Appeal hearing and submissions

[AH] attended the hearing in response to the witness summons. She  requested
that the summons be  set  aside  on  the  basis  that  she  had  no  further
documents other than those  already  produced  and  she  had  already  given
everything she had to the appellant. I considered there to be no  reason  to
set aside the summons and [AH] indicated that  she  was  willing  to  answer
questions put to her.

When asked by Mr McVeety whether she had given up work to have her baby  and
then returned to work, [AH] said that she had not and that she had given  up
work without going on maternity leave. In response to Mr Bello's  questions,
[AH] said that she had worked on and off,  with  periods  of  six  to  seven
months in between. The employment that she  left  on  21  October  2015,  as
shown in the P45 at page  9a  of  Annex  A  of  the  appeal  bundle,  was  a
temporary job. She was covering for someone who had moved from Liverpool  to
London but then when that person returned and resumed work, she  ([AH])  had
left the job. She was about four or five months pregnant at  the  time.  She
did nothing after that and lived on her credit cards. She did  not  register
as unemployed or claim benefits as she  was  not  entitled  to  do  so.  The
benefits referred to in the HMRC documents were  child  benefit,  child  tax
credit and carers allowance and  disability  allowance  for  her  son.  When
asked why she did not provide documents to the appellant when he  asked  for
them, she said that he had been harassing her and had not explained  why  he
needed the documents  but  just  said  that  his  lawyer  needed  them.  She
received a letter from his solicitors requesting documents but she  did  not
understand why she had to be a part of that as  they  were  divorced.  After
giving birth  she  started  claiming  benefits  in  around  July  2016.  She
believed that she received income support but had not been entitled to  that
between October and December 2015. She returned to work in  about  September
2017.

The appellant then gave his evidence. He adopted his  witness  statement  of
27 March 2018. He said that his ex-wife was  claiming  benefits  between  21
October 2015 and December 2015. He knew that as she had told  him  that  she
was claiming benefits to support herself and  her  children.  The  appellant
said that his ex-wife  stopped  working  in  October  2015  because  of  her
pregnancy. She was registered as unemployed  between  October  and  December
2015. He had made a lot of efforts to  obtain  evidence  from  her  but  she
refused to give him anything and said that she wanted him to have to  return
to Nigeria. When cross-examined by Mr McVeety and asked how he was  able  to
produce his ex-wife's payslips if she refused  to  give  him  anything,  the
appellant said that that was before his solicitor  wrote  to  her.  He  knew
that she was working and claiming benefits as he dropped her to  work.  When
asked how he would be dropping her to work if they were separated,  he  said
that he spoke to her on the telephone and she said that  she  was  going  to
work. When asked why his wife would  have  given  up  work  because  of  her
pregnancy when she was only four or  five  months  pregnant,  the  appellant
said that she had pregnancy issues and had pains in her stomach so  she  had
to give up  work.  With  regard  to  the  issue  of  domestic  violence  the
appellant said that he told the police everything, including  how  his  wife
had thrown his belongings out of the house and insulted him in front of  the
children.  When  re-examined,  the  appellant  said  that  he  obtained  the
payslips from his wife in  2015,  before  he  lodged  his  appeal,  but  she
refused to give him anything else. He had reported the domestic violence  to
the police and went to see his GP because he  was  having  nightmares  after
she tried to kill him with a knife. The GP referred him to a  therapist  and
he went there twice a week.

In response to my enquiry, the appellant said that his ex-wife gave him  her
payslips in 2015 when he asked for them. He told her  that  he  needed  them
for his application to  the  Home  Office.  When  further  examined  by  the
parties the appellant said that his relationship with his ex-wife  was  good
at the time she gave him the payslips and she promised to give  him  further
documents if he needed them. However after the relationship broke  down  she
refused to give him any further documents and  said  that  she  would  never
support him. She did not give him  any  documents  after  2015.  Mr  McVeety
asked the appellant how come, if his ex-wife had only  given  him  documents
when their relationship was good, she had given  him  documents  dated  late
September and October 2015 after the incident with the knife. The  appellant
said that his parents approached her for the  documents  and,  as  she  told
them that she was very sorry for her actions in  relation  to  the  domestic
violence incident, she agreed to provide them.  He  believed  that  she  had
more documents. Mr McVeety referred the appellant to the  maternal  transfer
document at page 11 of section A of the appeal  bundle,  which  referred  to
the birth of their child in [ ~ ] 2016, and the appellant  agreed  that  his
ex-wife had given the document to him, but  said  that  they  were  on  good
terms then. They were off and on.

The parties then made submissions.

Mr McVeety asked me to find that there was no  credible  evidence  that  the
appellant's  ex-wife  was  exercising  treaty  rights  between  October  and
December 2015. Her employment was temporary and there  was  no  evidence  to
suggest that she had given up work due to her pregnancy. The  appellant  had
not provided a credible account and had given  inconsistent  evidence  about
her working. His ex-wife was not a hostile witness but had tried  to  assist
and had provided all the documents she had. There was nothing else  for  her
to produce and she was exasperated because she  was  continually  asked  for
documents she did not have. As for the question of  retained  rights,  there
was no evidence of domestic violence. The Child  Arrangements  Order  showed
that there were no such concerns.  The  police  report  showed  a  one-  off
incident of a fight which had escalated.  The  police  report  recorded  the
appellant as having said that there was no  history  of  domestic  violence.
The police clearly had no concerns. As for retained rights on the  basis  of
access to a child, the Child Arrangements Order simply  confirmed  that  the
child was in the custody of her mother.  The  appellant  did  not  meet  the
requirements of the EEA Regulations. Article 8 was not a matter  before  the
Tribunal.

Mr Bello submitted that there had been a trend of non-  cooperation  by  the
appellant's ex-spouse,  despite  the  appellant's  best  efforts  to  obtain
evidence  from  her.  She  had  not  been  truthful  to  the  Tribunal.  The
appellant's evidence was that she gave up work  due  to  problems  with  her
pregnancy and accordingly she  should  be  treated  as  a  qualified  person
during the period October to December 2015. As for the question of  retained
rights, there was copious evidence which showed that the appellant had  been
a victim of domestic violence. The Home Office guidance recognised the  fact
that  it  was  difficult  to  obtain  evidence  of  domestic  violence.  The
appellant's ex-wife was a qualified person after giving birth and  up  until
the divorce and the appellant therefore met  the  requirements  of  the  EEA
Regulations on the basis of  retained  rights,  on  the  basis  of  domestic
violence and on the basis of having continued access to his child.

Consideration and findings

The question of [AH]'s activities and status under the  EEA  regulations  in
the period October 2015 to December 2015  and  after  giving  birth  is  the
starting point and the pivotal issue  in  re-making  the  decision  in  this
appeal. The appellant and his  ex-spouse  gave  different  accounts  of  her
status, the appellant's account being favourable to his own status  and  his
ex-wife's being detrimental. It must be recognised, in  such  circumstances,
given the state of their relationship, that there could be ulterior  motives
for both parties, in particular [AH], to have given the evidence  they  did.
I therefore take that into account.

However, having heard from both witnesses I  prefer  the  version  given  by
[AH]. Her evidence was straightforward and clear  and  was  consistent  with
the documentary evidence. She said that her last  employment  was  temporary
and that she had left that  employment  at  the  stage  that  she  did,  not
because of her pregnancy, but  because  she  was  temporarily  replacing  an
employee who then returned to her job. She  said  that  she  had  given  the
appellant all the documentary  evidence  that  she  had  and  therefore  any
failure on her part to provide further evidence for his  solicitors  or  for
the Tribunal was due only to the fact that she had nothing else to  produce.
She said that she had not registered as unemployed  and  had  only  received
benefits for her children. That account  is  entirely  consistent  with  the
HMRC records relating to her employment record and her tax credits. I  agree
with Mr McVeety that she was  not  a  hostile  witness  and  was  not  being
uncooperative, but was simply frustrated  at  being  continually  asked  for
documentary evidence that she did not have.

The appellant's account, however, was inconsistent, contradictory and  vague
and he appeared to adjust his evidence to suit the questions put to  him  by
Mr McVeety.   He  claimed  that  his  wife  provided  him  with  documentary
evidence when they were on  good  terms  and  when  he  needed  it  for  his
application to the Home Office, but otherwise refused to give  him  anything
despite his repeated requests and  those  of  his  solicitors.  However  his
residence card was issued on 28 April 2015 and his  application  would  have
been made before that date, yet the evidence  from  [AH]  included  payslips
for June 2015, August 2015, September 2015 and October 2015,  a  P45  issued
on 27 October 2015 and a maternal transfer issued after 2  March  2016,  all
of which post-dated his application and some of which  post-dated  the  time
of their separation and the incident with the knife. When that  was  put  to
him he provided an explanation not previously given, that  his  parents  had
intervened  and  that  his  ex-wife,  feeling  guilty  for  her  actions  in
threatening him with a knife, handed  over  documents.  The  appellant  also
gave an inconsistent account of his wife's employment status, claiming  that
she was working and claiming benefits in  the  period  between  October  and
December 2015 and that he knew about that because  he  would  drive  her  to
work. When asked by Mr McVeety why he would be driving her to work  if  they
were separated, he then said that he had spoken to her on the telephone  and
she had said that she was on her way to work. The appellant's  evidence  was
that his wife had ceased working due  to  her  pregnancy  but  when  it  was
pointed out to him that she was only four to five  months  pregnant  at  the
time, he said that she had problems in her  pregnancy  as  her  stomach  was
hurting, yet he had never suggested that in any of his evidence  previously.
Overall his evidence was lacking in credibility and was clearly  adapted  to
suit his claim and I find that I am unable to give weight to his account  of
his wife's status at the relevant time.

On the basis that there is no credible evidence  that  the  appellant's  ex-
spouse was working or otherwise exercising  treaty  rights  between  October
and December 2015 or after the birth of her child up until the  respondent's
decision on 29 April 2016 or the time of the divorce, and that the  evidence
in fact points to the contrary, I do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  can
succeed in showing that the respondent wrongly revoked  his  residence  card
under the EEA Regulations.

The above conclusion also disposes of  the  matter  of  retained  rights  of
residence. However, even if the appellant was  able  to  satisfy  regulation
10(5)(b), I do not accept that he could  meet  the  criteria  in  regulation
10(5)(d). He clearly could not meet the requirements of 10(5)(d)(i)  as  the
marriage had not lasted three years. That is not a matter  under  challenge.
Neither  is  the  appellant's  inability  to  meet   the   requirements   of
10(5)(d)(ii), as he does not have custody of his daughter.  With  regard  to
10(5)(d)(iii) it is argued by the  appellant  that  he  meets  the  relevant
requirements on the basis of the Family Court Order  which  appears  at  the
beginning of section A of his appeal bundle.  However  that  document  is  a
Child Arrangements Order granting his ex-wife's  application  for  an  order
enabling her to apply for a passport for their daughter. There is  no  order
for the appellant to have access to his daughter  and  for  that  access  to
take place in the UK. The criteria in 10(5)(d)(iii) are therefore not met.

As for the question of domestic violence for the purposes  of  10(5)(d)(iv),
I am in agreement with Mr McVeety that the evidence shows no more than  that
there were disagreements between  the  parties  in  the  marriage  prior  to
separation and that there was a one-off incident which started as  a  verbal
altercation but then escalated to  a  fight  between  the  parties.  I  have
carefully read through all the evidence relied  upon  by  the  appellant  in
this regard. At page 16 of section A of the appeal bundle the police  report
records, as Mr McVeety submitted, that the appellant told  the  police  that
there was no history of domestic violence. At page 18  the  report  confirms
that both parties were uncooperative and at page 18a  that  it  was  unknown
whether the appellant's account of his wife threatening  him  with  a  knife
was true and states that this was  a  verbal  altercation  over  infidelity.
Whilst  the  evidence  at  pages  19  to  24  from  SelfHelp  confirms   the
appellant's account of being referred for counselling by  his  GP,  page  20
makes it clear that they were unable to assist  him  and  that  he  did  not
receive any counselling there. There is reference  to  the  appellant  being
referred on to Community Counselling, but no evidence to  confirm  that  the
referral was pursued. The letter at page 31 from the African  and  Caribbean
Mental Health Services simply refers to an appointment with  no  details  of
whether there was any attendance or follow-up and in fact the  GP's  medical
notes at page 28 confirm that he was discharged from their services the  day
after  the  appointment.  There  is  clearly  no  evidence  to  support  the
appellant's claim to have been receiving therapy twice a  week.  Furthermore
the evidence in regard to counselling and therapy includes no suggestion  of
a history of domestic violence or that the appellant's claim to suffer  from
depression was related to domestic violence. The medical notes at  pages  26
to 30 and the summary of call to  national  domestic  violence  helpline  at
page 32 take matters  no  further  than  the  police  report.  The  evidence
therefore falls well short of demonstrating that the appellant was a  victim
of domestic violence during the marriage and the  appellant  plainly  cannot
meet the criteria in regulation 10(5)(d)(iv).

Accordingly there is no basis for the appellant's claim to be entitled to  a
retained right of residence upon divorce or otherwise  and  the  appellant's
appeal cannot succeed under  the  EEA  Regulations  in  that  or  any  other
respect.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appellant's   appeal   under   the   EEA
Regulations.












Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 4 October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
