
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/05686/2016
     OA/04556/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13th December 2018                    |On 15th January 2019               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                     IB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UK VISA SECTION
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P A Thornhill of Thornhills Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan, female and was born on 1st
January 1945.  She appealed against the respondent's decision, the
respondent being the Entry Clearance Officer, dated 24th March 2016, to
refuse a family permit under Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the Regulations").

2.   The appellant had previously had an earlier application dismissed and
in her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, heard by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Ransley in Manchester on 3rd October 2017, the judge based her
credibility findings on the fact that the appellant had not during this
appeal provided further evidence to satisfy a point which was questioned in
her 2014 appeal.  Mr Thornhill told me that this was not something which
he, when appearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, was put on notice
would be raised by the Presenting Officer.

3.   The appellant challenged the determination on the basis that the
appellant's representatives were not given prior notice of the issue
raised, namely the appellant's sponsor's ability to financially support
her, which had been an issue raised in the earlier appeal.  Mr McVeety told
me that if I felt this raised a question of fairness then he agreed that it
would amount to a material error of law.  Given the Tribunal's
determination in RM (Kwok On Tong) India [2016] UKAIT 38, I concluded that
the judge had unwittingly failed to act fairly and in the circumstances,
the appellant has not had a fair hearing.

4.   The making of the determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley
did involve the making of an error of law.  I set that determination aside
in its entirety and remit the appeal for hearing before the First-tier
Tribunal before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley

A Judge of the Upper Tribunal           dated 30th December 2018

