
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/05863/2016
     IA/24777/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23 June 2017                       |On 18 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between


|                |Haseed Ur Rahman Mohammed                 |First Appellant |
|                |Vinicha Lacmidas                          |Second Appellant|


                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION note made)

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr V Makoi, Counsel instructed by Maalik & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants are married to each other.  They appeal with  the  permission
of the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing their different but linked appeals  against  a  decision  of  the
Secretary of State that theirs was a marriage of convenience.

In the case of the  first  appellant  the  decision  was  to  refuse  him  a
residence card to which he would have been  entitled  if  the  Secretary  of
State was satisfied that his was a genuine marriage.  In  the  case  of  the
second appellant the appeal was against the decision to remove  her  because
the Secretary of State was satisfied that the second  appellant  had  abused
her rights as an EEA national exercising treaty rights because, contrary  to
the requirements of 21B(c), she had  assisted  another  person  to  enter  a
marriage of convenience.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge, with respect, clearly misdirected himself  at
paragraph 4 of the decision when he used  what  appears  to  be  a  standard
paragraph usually appropriate in appeals  before  the  Tribunal  saying  the
burden of proof is on the appellant.  This is clearly  not  the  case  where
the Secretary of State is alleging that  the  marriage  was  a  marriage  of
convenience.  The First-tier Tribunal was clearly familiar with the case  of
Papajorgji v Entry Clearance Officer,  Nicosia  [2012]  UKUT  38  where  the
Tribunal ruled that the correct direction was whether "in the light  of  the
totality of the information before  me,  including  the  assessment  of  the
claimant's answers and any information provided, am I satisfied that  it  is
more probable than not that this is a marriage of convenience?"

This direction was expressly approved by the Supreme Court in  the  case  of
Sadovska and Another v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54.  The  judgment  in  that  appeal
was given after I heard this case but I decided  it  was  not  necessary  to
reconvene the hearing as, with respect, the decision of  the  Supreme  Court
is clear and it emphasised rather than changed the law.

However as well as approving the decision in Papajorgji Lady Hale, who  gave
the leading judgment, said at paragraph 28:

  "One of the most basic rules of litigation is that he  who  asserts  must
  prove.  It was not for [the appellant] to establish that the relationship
  was a genuine and lasting one.  It was for the  respondent  to  establish
  that it was indeed a marriage of convenience."

Notwithstanding the clear error on the face  of  the  Decision  it  must  be
acknowledged that  in  the  case  of  the  first  appellant  the  First-tier
Tribunal identified  the  necessary  test  from  Papajorgji  and  Mr  Clarke
argued, persuasively, that the apparent error should be disregarded  because
in fact the correct test was followed.  Whilst I see some inherent merit  in
that argument as far as the case of the  first  appellant  is  concerned  it
does not transfer to the second  appellant.   In  the  case  of  the  second
appellant the judge said at paragraph 31:

  "On the law quoted above I am satisfied that the Secretary of  State  was
  entitled to come to the conclusion that this appellant should be  removed
  on the grounds of abuse of rights."

That does not suggest to me that the First-tier Tribunal was  asking  itself
if the Secretary of State had proved to its satisfaction that  the  marriage
was a  marriage  of  convenience  but  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was,
wrongly, reviewing the decision.  I should not have to  try  and  engage  in
intellectual gymnastics to reconcile the  required  and  declared  position.
The burden of proof and the independence of the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision
are essential to the proper discharge of its duties and I am  not  satisfied
that these duties were discharged in the case of the second appellant.

It has always been the  position  that  the  appeals  should  be  determined
together and  this  reason  alone  causes  me  to  be  satisfied  that  both
decisions should be set aside.

I also note for the benefit of anyone who may be hearing this  appeal  again
that the decision in the  case  of  the  second  appellant  required  proper
analysis of whether removal was proportionate once the abuse of  rights  had
been established and although this was recognised by the judge  it  was  not
explained  beyond  stating  that  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  it   was
proportionate.

However there is an additional argument in the case of the  first  appellant
and that is that the First-tier Tribunal in reaching its conclusion did  not
show  a  proper  appreciation  of  the  contrary  arguments  supporting  the
contention that theirs was a genuine  marriage.   After  some  reflection  I
have decided that this too is made out.  There were inconsistencies  in  the
account that were seized upon by the Secretary of State and accepted by  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge who found no  satisfactory  explanation.   However
it is  necessary  to  set  inconsistencies  or  other  deficiencies  in  the
evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole and although  the  First-
tier Tribunal may well have paid lip service to this requirement I  am  just
satisfied that it was really necessary to show a proper appreciation of  the
case and a proper analysis to have set  out  more  clearly  the  matters  in
which people were in agreement and why, if this be the case, the  judge  was
not satisfied on an overall assessment that  the  helpful  answers  did  not
outweigh the unhelpful answers.

I have taken heed of Mr Clarke's submissions and I do agree that I  have  to
be concerned with what the judge did rather than what  he  said.   If  there
was only one appellant here it may be that I would have reached a  different
conclusion but the fact is there are two appellants whose cases  were  heard
together and I am satisfied that it is not at all  clear  that  the  correct
burden of proof was applied in the case of the second appellant.

Putting all these things together I set  aside  both  decisions  and  direct
that they be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 18 August 2017                 |




