
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/05752/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th August 2019                      |On 6th September 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              ms Florence Fosu
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, of Afrifa and Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Ghana  who  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 30th June 2010 with an EEA family permit to join her husband
    Aaron Ark.  After arrival  she  applied  for  and  was  issued  with  a
    residence card which was valid from 17th April 2012  until  17th  April
    2017.  She and her husband divorced on 17th May 2016.

2.   On 20th April 2018 she made an application for  a  permanent  residence
    card as evidence she had retained  the  right  of  residence  following
    divorce.  This was considered  by  the  respondent  and  refused  in  a
    decision dated 27th June 2018.

3.   Such refusal was on the basis that:-

         "You have not provided a valid national identity card  or  passport
         in the name of your EEA national sponsor".

    The decision went on to say:-


         "No further consideration has been given to the other evidence that
         you have supplied in support of your application.  If you are  able
         to supply evidence that proves that you are the relative of the EEA
         national you may submit a further application."

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson on 12th March 2019.

5.   Reliance was placed by the respondent and indeed by the Judge upon  the
    EEA Regulations 2016.  Regulation 21(5) provides that:-

         "Where an application for documentation under this Part is made  by
         a person who is not an EEA national on the basis that the person is
         or was the family member of an  EEA  national  or  extended  family
         member of an EEA national, the application must be  accompanied  or
         joined by a valid national identity card or passport in the name of
         that EEA national."

6.   It was essentially on that basis that the appeal was dismissed.

7.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  that  decision  was
    granted having regard to the case of Rehman  (EEA  Regulations  2016  -
    specified evidence) [2019] UKUT 000195 (IAC).  That case considered the
    applicability  of  Regulation  21(5)  and  Regulation  42  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016.

8.   In that case the respondent accepted that the appellant was married  to
    an EEA national when he issued the previous residence  card.   As  such
    the appellant had already provided the necessary proof to establish his
    right of  residence.   In  the  circumstances  the  appellant  was  not
    required to produce those documents again unless the genuineness of the
    marriage was in issue.

9.   It was argued in the present appeal that there was no requirement  upon
    the appellant to produce the identity documents, given  that  they  had
    been previously presented and accepted by reason of the grant to her of
    the residence card in 2012.  Such would seem to reflect the decision in
    Rehman.

10.  Mr Kandola, on behalf  of  the  respondent,  indicated  that  in  those
    circumstances the strict insistence  upon  the  fresh  presentation  of
    identity and/or  passport  for  the  EEA  national  was  not  a  strict
    requirement of the Regulations and accordingly the reasons for  refusal
    letter was in error in making it so.  He indicated that the substantive
    consideration of the other documentation produced was not  carried  out
    because of that error.  He accepted  therefore  that  the  decision  as
    issued was not a lawful one in the light of the  decision  of  Asad  Ur
    Rehman.  Thus the interpretation of Regulation 21(5) by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 8 and onwards in the determination was  also  in  error.   He
    indicated that the Secretary  of  State  would  need  to  look  at  the
    application and documentation again and make a lawful decision.

11.  In all the circumstances, therefore, the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside.  To that extent  the  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is allowed.



No anonymity direction is made.








Signed        [pic]                          Date  29 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
