
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/05949/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th July 2019                |On 17th July 2019               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA



                                   Between

                               Wasif Daud Khan

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person

For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant seeks, with permission, to challenge the determination of
    the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  promulgated  on  10th  April  2019,  which
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  a  permanent
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016.

 2. The grounds of challenge to the First-tier Tribunal asserted  that  the
    Tribunal erred in law in failing to adjourn the hearing given that  the
    appellant had supplied a pre-dated sick  note.   The  appellant  stated
    that he had fallen down the stairs and was taken to hospital.  The sick
    note showed that the appellant had been signed off work for 8 days from
    18th March 2019 owing to low back pain and an injury at  work.  He  had
    very limited funds and could not afford to pay for  the  solicitors  to
    attend court on his behalf.

 3. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford because it was
    arguable that the Tribunal should have concluded that he was unable  to
    attend and that it would be unjust and/or  unfair  to  proceed  in  his
    absence.

 4. At the hearing before us the appellant, who attended in person,  relied
    on his written grounds and stated that he had not had a fair hearing.

 5. Ms Everett submitted that the Judge had not erred  in  determining  the
    matter but there was no strong view on the procedural issue.

    Analysis

 6. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was  listed  for  hearing  on
    21st March 2019.  MA Solicitors, then acting, made an  application  for
    an adjournment on 20th March 2019 and confirmed that the appellant  was
    unable to travel. The appellant produced a sick note  (Med  3)  to  the
    Tribunal  signed  by  a  GP  which  was  dated  18th  March  2019.  The
    representatives stated that  the  appellant  had  hoped  he  would  get
    better, but he was not  and  requested  the  matter  be  adjourned.   A
    further date in June/July was requested in order to give  him  time  to
    recover.

 7. The Med 3 note read

         'low back pain

         Injury at work'




    and confirmed that the appellant was not fit for work for 8  days  from
    18th March 2019 to 25th March 2019 inclusive.

 8. The adjournment request and Med 3 were stamped as received by the First-
    tier Tribunal on 20th March 2019

 9. The application was refused by a Caseworker on the same day because the
    GP had not indicated that the appellant would be unable to  attend  the
    hearing.

10. A further letter from MA Solicitors also dated  20th  March  2019  (but
    presumably opened by the Tribunal on 21st March  2019)  explained  that
    they were not 'dealing with this matter anymore as  the  appellant  has
    withdrawn his instructions today late hours and has specifically  asked
    not to attend the hearing tomorrow' (sic).

11. There was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  no
    representation by the Secretary of State.  The matter was  recorded  in
    the  determination,  however,  as  being  'heard'  on  1st  April  2019
    (promulgated on 10th April 2019) outside the period given for the  sick
    leave.    The  Tribunal  further  considered  whether  to  adjourn  the
    hearing.

12.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  stated  at  paragraph   5   of   the
    determination

         'Having reviewed the matter, I might have been minded to grant  the
         application and have the matter relisted for oral hearing. However,
         the appellant's solicitors submitted a further letter by fax  which
         stated that they were no longer acting for the appellant as he  had
         withdrawn his instructions and 'has specifically asked [us] not  to
         attend the  hearing  tomorrow'.   In  these  circumstances  and  in
         particular what seems to me to be a clear  statement  of  intention
         from the appellant that he will not attend an oral  hearing,  I  am
         satisfied having considered that as a matter of fairness and having
         in  mind  the  overriding  objective,  that  the  appeal  must   be
         determined on the available evidence'.


13. This struck  us  as  having  omitted  the  word  'us',  which  we  have
    identified/inserted in square brackets, rather than an indication  that
    the appellant had deliberately not chosen to attend.

14. Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) explains that

         'If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.


15. Specifically, the GP had stated that the appellant was unfit  for  work
    and the adjournment request indicated that the appellant was unfit  for
    travel. Essentially the appellant had produced a Med 3, he  was  unable
    to attend, he is not obliged to instruct representatives, and,  in  the
    event, none were present on his behalf and his presence may, we  stress
    may, have made a difference to the outcome.  As the appellant stated he
    could do no more.  Questions may have been put to him at  the  hearing,
    had  he  been  able  to  attend,  particularly  in   the   absence   of
    documentation.  As the appellant pointed out in his grounds  of  appeal
    the matter could not be determined justly without him.  We consider the
    refusal to adjourn to allow the appellant to be present was a  material
    error of law.

16. We add these observations.  The appellant had appealed the  refusal  of
    the application for the permanent  residence  card.  That  refusal  was
    predicated on the basis that he had not provided a passport or identity
    card of the EEA national (his spouse) further to  Regulation  21(5)  of
    the EEA Regulations 2016 and that he had provided only one letter  from
    HMRC.  The Secretary of State, also, did not accept that as evidence of
    the sponsor exercising treaty rights.  We highlight two points.  Rehman
    (EEA Regulations 2016 - specified evidence) [2019] UKUT 000195 (IAC) is
    now relevant to the findings of the judge at paragraph  12  (production
    of ID for the EEA national) and at no point was there any consideration
    of a possible direction under Amos v Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ
    552.

17. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. We set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.




    Direction to First-tier Tribunal on remittal

    In view of our observations  at  paragraph  16  the  matter  is  to  be
    considered for directions by a  Designated  Immigration  Judge  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal 6 weeks PRIOR to any oral hearing.


    Signed Date 5th July 2109

    Helen Rimington

    Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

