
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
ea/05159/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 April 2019                              |On 8 May 2019                 |
|Extempore                                     |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               Mr Farhan ASLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, instructed by Vision Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 14 November 2018.  The appellant  in  this
    case is a citizen of Pakistan who was  formerly  married  to  a  French
    national Ms Gomes.  That was a marriage  conducted  by  proxy  and  was
    dissolved in 2017.  There is a long history to this case which  is  set
    out in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and also  in  the  prior
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan. It is  not  in  dispute
    and there is no need to set it out in this decision.

 2. The appellant's case at its core is that he is entitled to a  residence
    card as confirmation of his right of residence as a family  member  who
    has retained  the  right  of  residence  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  In this case the judge  was
    satisfied that the requirements of Regulation 10(5) were  met  in  that
    she was satisfied that there was a valid marriage; that it  had  lasted
    for the requisite time (3 years); and they  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for the requisite time (1 year).  She was satisfied  also  that
    the appellant's former spouse had been exercising treaty rights.  Those
    findings were not the subject of any challenge.

 3. What is challenged here is the judge's  approach  to  Regulation  10(6)
    that is whether the applicant would, other than the fact that he is not
    a citizen of the EEA, be a "worker" as defined in the EEA  Regulations.
    In effect, that question  is:  was  he  working  at  the  date  of  the
    dissolution of the marriage?

 4. The judge noted at paragraph [24] that Judge O'Ryan has  directed  that
    the appellant must provide evidence to show that  he  was  economically
    active to show that he met Regulation 10(6).  The judge found  that  he
    had not been working at the date  of  which  divorce  proceedings  were
    initiated in May 2016 or at the  date  that  the  Decree  Absolute  was
    issued on 15 November 2016.  The judge stated, "there  is  no  evidence
    before me to show the appellant was working as at the date the  divorce
    was initiated or when the Decree  Absolute  was  made  and  indeed  the
    appellant gave evidence that he had not had permission to work at  this
    time."  The judge then went on to dismiss the application.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought on two grounds: first, that  the  judge
    had erred in requiring the appellant to show that he was working as  at
    the date that divorce proceedings were initiated; and, second, that the
    requirement to be exercised in treaty rights is relevant only in  order
    to obtain permanent residence this being the proper meaning of  Article
    13 of Directive 2004/38 (the "Citizenship Directive").

 6. There was extensive argument before me that I should admit at the error
    of law stage further evidence to the effect that the appellant  had  in
    fact been working as at that date.  I do not however need  to  look  at
    that because in my view the judge erred when she said that there was no
    evidence of working.  That is not correct.  It  appears  to  have  been
    overlooked that in the application form which the appellant had  signed
    (and which appends a statement of truth) that he was working for  Ratna
    & Co.  I am just persuaded that the judge erred in stating  that  there
    was no evidence, and accordingly the decision ought to be set aside and
    remade.

 7. I do however wish to record my concern that the documents which are now
    produced could and should have been made available and it is  difficult
    to see how given the ease with which the appellant was able within  ten
    days to obtain these documents from HM  Revenue  &  Customs  that  this
    would satisfy the test in Ladd & Marshall as there appears not to  have
    been due diligence on the  part  of  his  solicitors  or  him.   It  is
    somewhat unusual to seek to obtain documents by  writing  to  the  Home
    Office to get copies of documents sent to them rather  than  to  get  a
    copy from the person that issued them in the first place.

 8. In the circumstances having found that there was an  error  in  law  in
    relation to ground 1 is unnecessary for me to consider ground 2.

 9. It now falls to me to remake the decision.  I am satisfied on the basis
    of the evidence before me which includes the evidence obtained from  HM
    Revenue & Customs and in the absence of  submissions  to  the  contrary
    that the appellant was in fact working both at the date  in  which  the
    divorce proceedings were initiated and at the date on which the divorce
    became Absolute.

10. Accordingly, on that basis he is a person who  retained  the  right  of
    residence as he met the requirements of regulations 10 (6) of  the  EEA
    Regulations and so is entitled to a document confirming that.

11. It is unnecessary for me to make any  findings  regarding  his  current
    situation as the application was not one seeking confirmation  that  he
    was entitled to a permanent right of residence.  That would  require  a
    fresh application supported by detailed extensive evidence regarding to
    his position of being involuntarily  unemployed  and  by  reference  to
    recent case law from the European Court of Justice.

Notice of Decision


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016

Signed                                  Date: 2 May 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul






