
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05204/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2018                         |On 8th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                               Mr John Yeboah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mupara, Counsel, instructed by Quality
Solicitors Orion
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Ghana, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State of 29th  April  2016  to
    refuse his application for a residence card based on a  retained  right
    of  residence  following  his  divorce  from  an  EEA  national.    The
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Abebrese
    in a decision promulgated on  2nd  October  2107.   The  Appellant  now
    appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Boyes on 22nd November 2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    6th October 2008 with leave to enter as a visitor for six  months.   He
    claimed that he met Ms Natacha Borges in January  2009  and  that  they
    married in February 2010 by way of a  proxy  marriage  carried  out  in
    Ghana.  The Appellant applied for and was granted a residence  card  by
    the Secretary of State on 1st November 2010 valid  until  1st  November
    2015.  The Appellant claimed that the couple divorced on 4th  September
    2015.  On  7th  October  2015  he  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his retained right of residence.

 3. Following that application Immigration Officers undertook  a  visit  to
    the address given on his application form on 6th  April  2016.   It  is
    said in an Immigration Officer's report that they spoke to  a  resident
    of that dwelling, who claimed that he had  been  resident  there  since
    August 2002 and when shown photographs of the Appellant and Sponsor  he
    said that he did not know or recognise either of them.   The  Appellant
    was then called for an interview, which he attended on 21st April 2016.
     As a result of alleged inconsistencies in that interview the Secretary
    of State concluded that the Appellant had entered into  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

 4. The Secretary of  State  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  submitted
    evidence that his former spouse was exercising her treaty rights at the
    time of the divorce, that they had resided in the UK for at  least  one
    year and that their claimed relationship had lasted  for  the  required
    three years. However, it was not accepted  that  the  relationship  was
    genuine and  accordingly  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  that  the
    Appellant did not qualify under Regulation  10(5)  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 5. The judge considered the Appellant's appeal and found at  paragraph  17
    that the Appellant had given inconsistent and contradictory answers  to
    questions put to him in his interview and had been  unable  to  provide
    accurate information in relation to the date of  the  marriage  to  his
    former spouse, which also undermined his claim that that  marriage  was
    genuine. The judge concluded that the Appellant  had  not  provided  an
    adequate explanation as to how he came into possession of his  spouse's
    documents issued after the time of the divorce.

 6. The judge said at paragraph 19:

         "I also find it that the evidence from  the  tenant  resided  (sic)
         near the  premises  where  the  Appellant  and  his  former  spouse
         allegedly resided for several years to be credible in that he could
         not  recognise  the  Appellant  or  the  Sponsor  from  photographs
         provided and he had resided on the premises for several  years  and
         could not recall them living on the premises."

    The judge took into account that the Appellant had not provided  direct
    evidence from the former landlord, relying just on a tenancy agreement.
     The judge concluded that the Appellant had not shown that the marriage
    was genuine.

    Error of Law

 7. In his submissions Mr Mupara acknowledged, as identified in  the  grant
    of permission to appeal, that Ground 3 was the main ground on which  he
    pursued his argument that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    tainted by a material error of law.  It was contended  that  the  judge
    attached weight to evidence from a neighbour without any signed witness
    statement or oral evidence and no evidence  as  to  where  this  person
    lived in relation to the Appellant and his wife and the fact  that  the
    photographs said to have been shown to this man were not exhibited.  It
    was  impossible,  in  his  submission,  to  know  whether  these   were
    photographs of the Appellant and his ex-wife at all.

 8. In her submission Ms Brocklesby-Weller considered that  the  matter  of
    the neighbour's evidence was a matter of  weight  and  that  the  judge
    dealt with this issue at paragraph 19.  She submitted that the  judge's
    conclusion was based on the report from  the  Immigration  Officer  who
    called at the address given on the Appellant's application form (at  T1
    in the Respondent's bundle).

 9. I note that the name of the person the Immigration Officer spoke to has
    been redacted from the  report.  The  report  states  that  photocopied
    images of the Appellant and  Sponsor  were  shown  to  the  person  who
    answered the door and that he did not recognise them.  It says that the
    person stated that he had lived at the address since August 2002  in  a
    multi-occupancy dwelling that contained five rooms, that he knew all of
    the current occupants and he did not know  or  recognise  the  name  or
    image of either the Appellant or the Sponsor. The  Immigration  Officer
    concluded  that  the  address  is  not  the  claimed  address  for  the
    Appellant.

10. I agree with the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant that  this
    report does not identify the person who opened the  door  nor  does  it
    identify the photographs shown to this man.  This document is therefore
    of very limited weight, if any, and I accept that the  judge  erred  in
    attaching what appears to be significant weight  to  this  document  at
    paragraph 19.

11. Mr Mupara also relied on the second  Ground  of  Appeal,  in  which  he
    submitted that the relevant interview form identified in  the  case  of
    Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00515
    (IAC) was ICV.4605.  It appears that at the hearing a transcript  of  a
    recording of the interview on ICD.4604 was produced.  The  Respondent's
    bundle contains a copy of ICD.4605 at section Q.  Mr  Mupara  submitted
    that the Appellant had not received this document, that it was  not  in
    the Respondent's bundle sent to the Appellant.  He submitted that  this
    was not an issue at the hearing because the Appellant did not know that
    this document existed. However the index of the PF1 identifies that the
    bundle contains ICD 4605 at section U. Mr Mupara  did  not  submit  any
    evidence to show that  there  had  been  any  request  to  obtain  this
    document. This issue should have been clearly identified at the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

12. In any event, I accept that there are some issues in  relation  to  the
    transcript  of  the  interview  on  the  ICD.4604.  This  is  the  only
    contemporaneous record of the  interview.   I  accept  that  there  are
    elements to the Appellant's responses in the interview that were either
    inaudible or spelt phonetically. In particular I note  the  answers  to
    questions 57 and 94, which relate to the names of the  Appellant's  ex-
    wife's parents.  When considering this evidence it is difficult to  see
    how the judge concluded at paragraph 17 that during the course  of  the
    interview  the  Appellant  provided  inconsistent   and   contradictory
    evidence and "he also did not know the Christian  name  of  his  former
    spouse's parents and I would have expected that a couple in  a  genuine
    for the period of time alleged would have been  able  to  provide  this
    information without much difficulty".  Looking at the transcript it  is
    not at all clear that the Appellant did not know the Christian names of
    his former spouse's parents as  the  answers  to  these  questions  are
    recorded as inaudible. Accordingly it is not  right  to  say  that  the
    Appellant provided contradictory evidence in relation to the  names  of
    his ex-wife's parents as alleged.

13. In my view, these two errors are material  to  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence as a whole and I consider that the  judge's  findings  on  the
    facts are therefore infected by error of law and I set them aside.

    Remaking the decision

14. As Mr Mupara claimed to have not seen the ICD.4605 I gave him  time  to
    consider this document and take instructions from the Appellant.   When
    the hearing resumed later I heard oral evidence from the  Appellant  in
    English and he was cross-examined by  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller.   I  heard
    submissions from Ms Brocklesby-Weller and Mr Mupara.

15. In his evidence-in-chief the Appellant said that he could  not  explain
    why his age was given as 23 at the time of the marriage whereas in fact
    he would have been 24.  He could not explain either why his wife's  age
    was given as 23.  The marriage certificate, which is at pages 6  and  7
    of the Appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle, gives the names  of  two
    witnesses which, the Appellant said, were extended family  members  who
    witnessed the marriage on his behalf.  He said that he and his  ex-wife
    were not in Ghana for the wedding.  He said that  the  person  who  had
    witnessed his ex-wife's signature he did not know who that was.

16. He said in oral evidence that his wife's father had travelled to  Ghana
    on behalf of his ex-wife.  He said that his  name  was  signed  at  the
    bottom  of  the  statutory  declaration  confirming  that  a  customary
    marriage had taken place (page 4 of the Appellant's bundle).   He  said
    that the other signatory was his father.   He  was  asked  why  in  his
    witness statement and interview he said that his ex-wife's mother  went
    to Ghana. He said that his ex-wife told him that  her  mother  went  to
    Ghana and that she did not tell him her father went.

17. In cross-examination the  Appellant  said  that  he  had  received  the
    marriage certificate and other documents in 2010 and he was  asked  why
    he had not asked his ex-wife about why her  father  had  witnessed  the
    documents and he said that she kept on saying that it  was  her  mother
    who had done so.  He was asked when he had found out  that  it  was  in
    fact her father who travelled to Ghana and he said  that  it  was  only
    recently.  Initially he said that it was when he made  the  application
    but then he said that it was after he received the refusal letter.   He
    was asked who had confirmed that it was her  father  who  had  gone  to
    Ghana and he said that he had  asked  one  of  his  ex-wife's  friends,
    called Andrea, what the names of his ex-wife's  parents  were  and  she
    told him the names and he realised that it was her father who had  gone
    to Ghana.

18. The Appellant went on to say that he was going to ask Andrea to provide
    a witness statement as to the genuineness of the marriage but that when
    he tried to phone her again she would not take his calls.   When  asked
    when he had last had contact with his ex-wife the Appellant said it was
    before the divorce.  When asked what year that was  he  was  unable  to
    answer.  The Appellant said that he was  in  a  relationship  with  the
    Sponsor from 2009 until 2014 but he said  that  he  knew  the  parents'
    names but because they were Portuguese names  and  his  ex-wife  always
    called her father Luis and her mother Ana but he  did  not  know  their
    names.  He said that they did not have  a  party  in  the  UK  for  the
    wedding, they intended to go to Ghana but were unable to as  they  were
    subsequently separated.

19. He was asked why there were no photographs of him and his wife  and  he
    said that when she was leaving she took all the  photographs  of  them.
    He was asked how he was able to provide P60s up to the  2015  tax  year
    and he initially said that his ex-wife had not taken them with her  and
    then he said that the P60 came to the address after she had  left.   He
    said that he did not have any contact details to send them on to her.

20. I asked the Appellant a number of questions. I  asked  him  if  he  had
    spoken to his brother, with whom he claimed in the interview  that  the
    Sponsor's wife's mother had stayed with, and he said that he  had  not.
    He said that he had not spoken either to his father about who had  come
    to Ghana to represent the Sponsor at the wedding.   He  said  that  his
    father did not say who had come.  He said that he was unable  to  speak
    to his father as he was so busy working.  The Appellant said  that  his
    ex-wife had left him on 20th May 2014.  He said that he  did  not  know
    whether she was still working, she could have been because that is  why
    the payslips kept coming  to  the  address.   He  knew  she  worked  in
    catering but did not know where.  He said that he left the address they
    had been living at together on 14th February 2015.

21. In submissions Ms Brocklesby-Weller accepted that  the  only  issue  is
    whether this was a sham  marriage,  a  marriage  of  convenience.   She
    submitted that the Appellant was not credible and  that  therefore  the
    relationship was not genuine.  She referred to deficiencies in his oral
    evidence.  She said it was not credible that the  Appellant  had  never
    asked  his  wife  why  her  father  was  in  Ghana  for  the  statutory
    declaration rather than  her  mother,  as  claimed.   This  is  further
    compounded by the fact that he did not speak to his father about  this.
    She submitted that it was inherently not credible  that  the  Appellant
    would not have discussed this with his father.

22. She submitted that  there  were  no  photographs  in  relation  to  the
    marriage and no photographs of the  couple  over  the  years  of  their
    marriage.  Although the Appellant was in contact with a friend  of  his
    ex-wife's for a number of years  it  was  only  when  he  received  the
    reasons for refusal letter that the contact ceased.  She submitted that
    this was not credible.  She also pointed to the fact that the P60  from
    2015 would not have been received until after the end of March 2015 but
    the Appellant said that he left  that  address  in  February  2015  and
    therefore his evidence that the P60 had come to the house and that  was
    how he obtained it was not credible.

23. She submitted that the Appellant's claim that he did not know the names
    of his ex-wife's father and mother was not credible nor did he know the
    date when he last saw her.  In her submission the Appellant had  failed
    to provide cogent answers to the questions  asked.   In  her  view  the
    Appellant had failed to demonstrate that the relationship was  genuine.
    The utility bills were largely in the Sponsor's name.  There was little
    to link him to the address,  for  example  co-bills.   The  names  were
    handwritten on the lodger licence agreement and in her submission  this
    was not sufficient to show that the Appellant was genuinely a  resident
    at that address.  She submitted that the Appellant  therefore  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof upon him.

24. Mr Mupara submitted that the Appellant had answered any inconsistencies
    found in the documents.  In his submission the marriage  was  conducted
    in 2010 and the Secretary of State had issued a residence card  on  1st
    November 2010, having  seen  the  documents.   In  his  submission,  in
    preparing the application based on the retained right of residence, the
    Appellant had reasonably assumed that there would be  no  questions  in
    relation to the validity of the marriage.  That might explain  why  the
    inconsistencies in the documents were never dealt with.

25. In any event,  he  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  explained  the
    discrepancies in relation to his age and that of  the  Sponsor  at  the
    time of the marriage.  He submitted  that  there  was  nothing  unusual
    about the signature appearing on the marriage certificate of the  bride
    and groom on a Ghanaian proxy marriage certificate.  He submitted  that
    there were three different dates in relation to the proxy marriage, the
    date it was conducted, 20th  February  2010,  the  date  the  statutory
    declaration was issued, 25th May  2010,  and  the  date  on  which  the
    statutory declaration was certified, 26th May 2010.  Therefore, in  his
    submission, it could easily be seen how the dates could be confused and
    this does not mean that the marriage is not genuine.

26. He submitted that  the  Appellant  had  explained  that  the  Sponsor's
    father, not the mother, had attended.  He explained that he had not had
    conversations with his father or brother as he was  busy  working.   He
    submitted that it does not matter how the Appellant came about the P60s
    and that he could get mail even though he had moved house, he could  go
    back there to get  mail.   In  his  submission  this  was  a  plausible
    explanation.  In his submission the Appellant had discharged the burden
    of proof, which was to answer the allegations made by  the  Respondent.
    He submitted that if it were found that the  relationship  was  genuine
    all other aspects of the Regulations had been met.

    Remaking the Decision

27. At the hearing before me Mr Mupara did not contend that the  Respondent
    had not discharged the burden of proof  as  set  out  in  the  case  of
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 (IAC).  In my view it is clear from the evidence at T1, U1  to  4
    and in the record of interview  ICD.4604  that  there  were  sufficient
    questions raised about the marriage to support a  conclusion  that  the
    marriage may be one of convenience.  I note in particular  the  answers
    to question 59 where the Appellant said that he had met  the  Sponsor's
    mother "because she was at our marriage in Ghana".  The  fact  that  he
    said  that  his  mother  stayed  for  two  weeks  (question  87),   the
    Appellant's  confusion  in  relation  to  the  dates  of  marriage  and
    statutory  declaration  and  the  registration  of  the  marriage   was
    sufficient evidence to raise a suspicion as regards the marriage.

28. In these circumstances I accept that there is an evidential  burden  on
    the Appellant to address evidence justifying reasonable suspicion  that
    the marriage is entered into for the predominant  purpose  of  securing
    residence rights (Papajorgji).

29. In my view, considering all of the evidence there are serious questions
    about the Appellant's credibility such as to  undermine  his  claim  to
    have entered into a genuine marriage with  Natacha  Borges.   The  most
    significant discrepancy in the Appellant's oral evidence before  me  is
    that the Appellant now says that it was his Sponsor's father  who  went
    to Ghana in May 2010 to make the statutory declaration and  attend  the
    marriage registration.  I do not find it credible  that  he  would  not
    have discussed this matter with the Sponsor or indeed with  his  father
    and  brother  had  anyone  genuinely  travelled  to  Ghana   from   the
    Appellant's Sponsor's family. The Appellant's explanation that  he  was
    too busy working to discuss this with his father is not credible.  This
    is a significant issue which goes to the very core of  the  Appellant's
    case.

30. There are no photographs of the Appellant  and  the  sponsor  over  the
    years together. This too undermines the credibility of the  claim  that
    theirs was a genuine marriage.

31. The Appellant has failed to give a coherent explanation as  to  how  he
    received the sponsor's P60  from  2015,  after  their  separation.  The
    Appellant claims to have left the couple's shared address  in  February
    2015 therefore his evidence that the P60 had come to the house and that
    was how he obtained it was not credible.

32. The appellant's oral evidence as to his ex-wife and when  he  last  saw
    her was vague I note that the utility bills were mainly in the name  of
    the Sponsor and that there  was  little  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    residence at the claimed shared address. There was  a  real  dearth  of
    documentary  evidence  as  to   the   relationship   or   the   claimed
    cohabitation.

33. On the basis of all of the evidence before me I am satisfied  that  the
    Respondent has discharged the burden of proof upon her in  relation  to
    the marriage.  The Appellant's evidence to rebut that evidence  has  in
    itself raised further issues of credibility. In my view  the  Appellant
    has not established that his marriage was genuine from the very outset.



34. In these circumstances I conclude that the  Appellant  entered  into  a
    sham marriage under the provisions of the EEA Regulations.  Accordingly
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    to refuse to issue a residence card on the basis of a retained right of
    residence is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

In remaking the decision I find that the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 6th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and make no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 6th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
