
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05334/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th March 2019                   |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                      SHERIFAT ADEDOYINSOLA MAKANJUOLA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Ariyo, Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and she appeals against the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Woolley promulgated on
      10th October 2018, dismissing her appeal against a decision to refuse
      to issue an EEA family permit in accordance with the Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").
      The appeal was determined by the FtT Judge on the papers, without a
      hearing.


   2. The appellant had claimed a right to reside in the UK as the family
      member of an EEA national. The appellant claims that she is the spouse
      of a Portuguese national, Carlos Mutar Sonco, and that their marriage
      took place by proxy in September 2017. The respondent noted that
      alongside a customary marriage certificate, the appellant provided a
      number of supporting documents, but the respondent concluded that the
      evidence provided, did not confirm the proxy marriage was valid. The
      respondent did not believe that the evidence produced was sufficient
      to establish that the appellant is married according to Nigerian law.
      The respondent was therefore unable to confirm that the appellant is a
      family member of her EEA sponsor.


   3. In support of the appeal, the appellant provided a bundle comprising
      of a number of documents running to some 61 pages.  Included within
      that bundle, were witness statements made by the appellant and her
      partner together with a number of documents to support the claim made
      by the appellant, that she has entered into a valid marriage according
      to the law in Nigeria.


   4. The FtT Judge referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Awuku
      -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178 and noted that in the law of England and
      Wales, the general rule is that the formal validity of a marriage is
      governed by the law of the country where the marriage was celebrated
      ("the lex loci celebrationis").  A marriage by proxy will be treated
      as valid in England, if recognised by the local law, even if one of
      the parties is domiciled and resident in England.


   5. At paragraph [12] of his decision, the FtT Judge states as follows:


         "There is no dispute that the appellant has been married to her
         sponsor in a customary marriage in Nigeria on 14th September 2017.
         The Certificate of Customary marriage has been provided and is not
         challenged by the respondent. There is a letter of attestation from
         the Ikeja Customary Court but this does not take matters much
         further as this merely confirms that a customary marriage took
         place. It is said that the marriage conforms with the native law
         and customs but this does not help as to whether it conformed with
         the national law of Nigeria. While the letter is stamped
         "Registrar" this is clearly the registrar of the Ikeja Customary
         Court and not a Registrar of the Nigerian Civil Court. The father
         of the appellant has issued an affidavit in which he confirms that
         the marriage was celebrated in accordance with Yoruba native law
         and customs, but again this does not help as regard its validity
         under Nigerian national law."


   6. At paragraph [13] of the decision, the FtT Judge noted that it is
      Nigerian law which operates to determine the validity of the marriage.
      The Judge noted that he had not been provided with any expert evidence
      on Nigerian law, but went on to make certain deductions from the
      evidence provided. He stated:


         "... looking at the certificate itself, the marriage appears to
         have been conducted purely according to local rites. There is no
         reference in the certificate to any Nigerian civil law statute or
         ordinance. There is a letter from the Ikeja Customary Court but
         this is simply a letter of attestation and there is no confirmation
         of the validity of the marriage according to Nigerian law. There is
         no letter of confirmation from any Registrar of the Nigerian civil
         courts to say that the customary marriage has been formerly
         registered with the State."


   7. At paragraph [14], the FtT Judge concluded as follows:


         "In the light of this evidence I find that the concerns of the
         respondent were well founded. The lack of any confirmation from any
         government authority is a material factor, as without such
         confirmation it cannot be said that the marriage was valid under
         Nigerian law.  I find that the appellant has not shown that she is
         validly married to the EEA sponsor, and therefore she has not shown
         that she is a family member under the terms of Regulation 6 of the
         2016 Regulation. The appeal must be dismissed on this basis."


The appeal before me


   8. The appellant advances a number of grounds of appeal but they can be
      distilled into two grounds.  First, the FtT Judge refers to the appeal
      as being an appeal against a decision to refuse to issue an EEA family
      permit in accordance with Regulation 12 of the 2016 Regulations.
      However, the appellant had applied for a Residence Card under
      Regulation 18(1) of the 2016 Regulations, and the respondent's
      decision was a decision to refuse the application for a Residence
      Card.  Second, in reaching the decision that he could not be satisfied
      that the marriage was valid under Nigerian law, the FtT Judge failed
      to make any findings or consider the letter dated 24th July 2018
      issued by the Registrar of the Customary Court where the marriage had
      been registered, and failed to adequately engage with the material
      provided by the appellant, including a letter from the Ikeja Customary
      Court,  to support the claim that the marriage was valid under
      Nigerian law.  It is said that the Judge erroneously failed to
      appreciate the parallel existence of two systems of law, customary
      law, and civil law, that operate in Nigeria.  It is said that the
      Judge appears to accept that the marriage may have been conducted
      according to local rites, but then expected the marriage certificate
      relied upon, to refer to some Civil Law or ordinance.


   9. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Gibb on 2nd November
      2018.   In doing so the Judge noted that "... The grounds are overly
      long and repetitive, but they do point to legal matters that require
      consideration. It is arguable that the Judge erred in treating the
      appeal as relating to Reg 12 of the 2016 Regulations, since it related
      to Reg 18. The consideration of the validity issue at [12-14] shows
      that the judge was concerned with the absence of a document showing
      confirmation from a government authority, and if the ground is correct
      that there was such document before the Judge, then it is arguable
      that the Judge erred in not considering it."  The matter comes before
      me to consider whether or not the decision of FtT Judge Woolley
      involved the making of a material error of law, and if the decision is
      set aside, to re-make the decision.


  10. The focus of the submissions before me, was upon the Judge's
      conclusion as to whether there was a valid marriage.  On behalf of the
      appellant, Mr Ariyo submits that the Judge found that the appellant
      has not shown that the marriage was valid under Nigerian law.
      However, there was before the FtT Judge, at page 29 of the appellant's
      bundle, a 'Letter of Attestation' issued by the Ikeja Customary Court,
      dated 24th July 2018. In that letter it is confirmed that the author,
      in line with the authority bestowed upon him, registered the customary
      marriage that was celebrated by proxy between the appellant and her
      sponsor. That letter is referred to at paragraph 11 of the appellant's
      witness statement, as a letter obtained from the Registrar to rebut
      the assertion made by the respondent as to the validity of the
      marriage.  He submits that in reaching the decision, the FtT Judge
      failed to have any regard to that letter, that clearly establishes
      that the marriage was registered in accordance with the law of
      Nigeria. The letter attests to the validity of the marriage and notes
      that further confirmation of the author having duly registered the
      marriage of the parties, and as to the validity of their marriage
      certificate, can be obtained from "Local Government" by making
      enquiries with a reference number that is quoted.


  11. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Mcveety submits that the 'Letter of
      Attestation' issued by the Ikeja Customary Court, dated 24th July
      2018, that was relied upon by the appellant does not answer the
      concern, because that letter fails to demonstrate that the customary
      marriage was properly registered as a valid marriage under Nigerian
      law. There has been a customary marriage, and it appears that the
      marriage may have been registered, but it does not follow that it is a
      lawful and valid marriage in Nigerian law. He submits it was open to
      the Judge, on the evidence that was before the FtT, to conclude that
      the appellant has not shown that she is validly married to the EEA
      sponsor, and that she has therefore not shown that she is a family
      member as required under the 2016 Regulations.


Discussion


  12. Within the bundle of documents relied upon by the appellant that was
      before the FtT Judge, there is a witness statement from the appellant
      dated 11th September 2018.  The appellant sets out the background to
      her relationship with Mr Sonco and she states that she married her
      husband, by proxy, on 14th September 2017.  She gives no information
      as to the celebration of that marriage but states that ".. The
      marriage was then duly registered at Ikeja Customary Court in Lagos,
      Nigeria, on 26 September 2017.  All documents concerning the marriage
      were attested, stamped and signed by the Registrar of the Court.".
      The appellant provided, at page 23 of the appellant's bundle, a
      "Certificate of Customary Marriage" dated 26th September 2017, that
      has endorsed upon it, two stamps.  One by the "Registrar, Ikeja
      Customary Court, Lagos State" and the other, by the "President, Ikeja
      Customary Court, Lagos State".  There appears to be a signature with
      each of those stamps, but the identity of the 'Registrar' or the
      'President' cannot be made out.  The 'letter of Attestation' dated
      26th September 2017 that was at page 24 of the appellant's bundle also
      bears the stamp of the 'Registrar' and has a signature endorsed upon
      it.  Although the author certifies and attests to the marriage between
      the EEA national and the appellant celebrated on 14th of September
      2017, and to the registration of that marriage with the information
      listed, the identity of the 'Registrar' cannot be made out.  In
      addition to that document, the appellant also relied upon a further
      document dated 26th September 2017 that was at page 24 of the
      appellant's bundle.  That appears to be in a similar format to the
      'Letter of Attestation', but is addressed "To Whom it May Concern" and
      is said to be "Confirmation of Traditional Marriage Under Native, Law
      and Customs".  The document reads


         "Now,


         We, hereby confirmed the above mentioned persons married under the
         Native Law and Custom on the 14th September 2017 at No. 12 Iwaloju
         Close, Baruwa, Ipaja, Lagos State, Nigeria.


         The Bride's father, ... moved an oral motion in the court on the
         21st September 2017 to this effect suitably supported by a 12
         paragraph affidavit to the court by himself.


         The traditional marriage conformed with the native law and customs
         of the land given today, the 26th September 2017."


  13. Although that document has the 'Registrar' stamp endorsed on it, and a
      signature, the identity of the 'Registrar' cannot be made out.  The 12
      paragraph affidavit that is referred to, is to be found at page 27 of
      the appellant's bundle.  That is an affidavit by the appellant's
      father that confirms his support to the marriage of his daughter to
      the EEA national.  The affidavit confirms, at paragraph 7, that "...
      the marriage was conducted in absentia ..." for the benefit of his
      daughter and "... in accordance with Nigerian (Yoruba) Native Law and
      Custom.".  The affidavit confirms that both parties and their parents
      gave their consent to the marriage.  I note that there appears to have
      been no Affidavit or statement from the parents of the EEA Sponsor,
      confirming their consent to the marriage.  If the consent of both the
      appellant's parents and the EEA national's parents was necessary, it
      remains unclear how that requirement was satisfied and evidenced.


  14. The appellant also relied upon a further document dated 26th September
      2017 that was at page 26 of the appellant's bundle.  That again
      appears to be in a similar format to the 'Letter of Attestation', but
      is headed "Marriage By Proxy".  The document states:


         "This is to confirm the existence of the Traditional Marriage under
         Native Law and Custom between [the EEA national] and [the
         appellant].


         Both parties were absent and represented by the Bride's
         parents/family and got married by proxy on 14th September 2017. To
         this effect declaration was made before the Commissioner of Oath
         with names, addresses and duly stamped on the Sworn Affidavit.


         The marriage was celebrated here in Nigeria in the presence of
         relatives and family members.


         Finally, the confirmation of marriage with registration number
         [number] and dated 26th September 2017 was issued in recognition of
         this traditional marriage."


      Again, that document has the 'Registrar" stamp endorsed on it.


  15. In her witness statement, the appellant states that having received
      the respondent's decision of 18th July 2018 refusing her application
      for a residence card, she contacted her father who obtained a
      'confirmatory letter" from the Ikeja Customary Court where the
      marriage was registered which, she claims, confirms the validity of
      the marriage and its proper registration in accordance with the law.
      That letter relied upon by the appellant was at page 29 of the
      appellant's bundle.  The author of that letter writes in his or her
      capacity as "Court Registrar of Marriages celebrated under Native Law
      and Custom and registered at Ikeja Local Government Area of Lagos
      State, Nigeria".  The letter states:


         ".. I hereby confirm that the marriage certificate issued in
         respect of their marriage was issued by the competent authority
         upon a proper and valid registration of their marriage validity
         under Nigerian Native Law and Custom as applicable to the Yoruba
         recognized as legal spouses.


         Further confirmation of my having duly registered the marriage of
         the parties and as to the validity of their marriage certificate
         can be obtained from Local Government by making enquiries with the
         reference number quoted above."


      Again, although that document has the 'Registrar" stamp endorsed on
      it, and a signature, as with all of the other documents provided by
      the appellant, the identity of the 'Registrar' cannot be made out.


  16. Mr Ariyo submits that those documents that were before the FtT Judge
      confirm that that neither the appellant nor the EEA national attended
      the celebrations, but the marriage ceremony took place in the
      appellant's father's home in Ipaja, Lagos State, Nigeria by proxy. Mr
      Ariyo submits that the marriage was conducted in accordance with
      customary law and was subsequently registered by the local customary
      court, which issued a marriage certificate and that in support of the
      appeal, the appellant had provided the FtT with the marriage
      certificate, a letter of attestation, an affidavit from her father,
      and further documents from the court confirming the marriage conformed
      to the law and customs in Nigeria.


  17. The Judge noted that the documents relied upon by the appellant
      confirm that the marriage conforms with the native law and customs,
      but they do not help as to whether the marriage by proxy conformed
      with the national law of Nigeria.  It is right, as the appellant
      claims, that the FtT Judge does not expressly refer to the letter
      dated 24th July 2018 from the Ikeja Customary Court, in the decision.
      That omission is in my judgment, immaterial.  As the Judge noted at
      [13]:


         ".. it is Nigerian law which operates to determine the validity of
         this marriage. I have been provided with no expert evidence on
         Nigerian law in this appeal, but certain deductions can be made
         from the evidence produced. Looking at the certificate itself, the
         marriage appears to have been conducted purely according to local
         rights. There is no reference in the certificate to any Nigerian
         civil law statute or ordinance. There is a letter from the Ikeja
         Customary Court but this is simply a letter of attestation and
         there is no confirmation of the validity of the marriage according
         to Nigerian law. There is no confirmation from any registrar of the
         Nigerian civil courts to say that the customary marriage has been
         formally registered with the State."


  18. There was no evidence before the FtT Judge as to the requirements of a
      marriage under Nigerian native law and custom, as applicable to the
      Yoruba, and no evidence of the steps that must be taken to ensure that
      the marriage is one that is valid according to Nigerian law.  There
      was no evidence as to whether a "Certificate of Customary Marriage"
      issued by the Ikeja Customary Court, Lagos State, is evidence of a
      valid marriage according to Nigerian law, and no evidence as to the
      legal basis for such a conclusion.  Furthermore, I note that the
      documents relied upon by the appellant from the Ikeja Customary Court
      have the stamp of a 'Registrar' but the identity of the Registrar is
      not apparent from the documents, and so there was no evidence that the
      individual who signed the document, was in fact, a registrar that is
      authorised under Nigerian law to sign the document.


  19. The letter of 24th July 2018 confirms that the marriage certificate
      issued in respect of the marriage, was issued by a competent authority
      upon a proper and valid registration of the marriage under Nigerian
      native law and custom, as applicable to the Yoruba, but there was no
      evidence before the FtT Judge regarding the different legal systems
      relating to marriage in Nigeria.  There was no evidence that the Ikeja
      Customary Court is a competent authority, or the basis upon which that
      Court, if it was a competent authority in Nigerian law, was satisfied
      that there was a customary marriage by proxy sufficient to conclude
      the registration of the marriage as a valid marriage according to
      Nigerian law. The requirements for a marriage to be accepted as having
      been contracted by custom and native law, varies within Nigeria.  The
      letter of 24th July 2018 does state that "Further confirmation of my
      having duly registered the marriage of the parties and as to the
      validity of the marriage certificate can be obtained from local
      government by making enquiries with the reference number quoted
      above.".  No further evidence from the "Local Government" was provided
      by the appellant. Although customary law may well be respected under
      the Nigerian Constitution, there was no evidence before the FtT Judge
      regarding the laws that relate to marriage in Nigeria, so that the FtT
      Judge could be satisfied that an actual marriage, recognised as a
      valid marriage in Nigeria, has taken place.  If the appellant's case
      is that the Ikeja Customary Court is a competent authority, there was
      no evidence before the FtT Judge that the appellant has produced a
      marriage certificate issued according to the registration laws of
      Nigeria.  It was for the appellant to establish that the marriage
      certificate has been issued by an authority with legal power to create
      or confirm the facts it attests.


  20. Where there is doubt that a marriage certificate has been issued by a
      competent authority, then the marital relationship may be proved by
      other evidence but there was simply insufficient evidence before the
      Judge to determine whether a marriage was contracted according to
      Nigerian law.


  21. It is the paucity of evidence confirming there to be a valid marriage
      under Nigerian law, that in the end, caused at the appeal to be
      dismissed by the FtT Judge.  It was in my judgement open to the FtT
      Judge to conclude that the appellant has not shown that her marriage
      would be treated as a valid marriage in Nigeria.


  22. The fact that the FtT Judge refers to the application having been for
      a 'family permit' and Regulation 12 of the 2016 Regulations, rather
      than an application for a residence card under Regulation 18 of the
      2016 Regulations is also in my judgment, immaterial.   Insofar as is
      relevant, both Regulation 12 and Regulation 18 require the applicant
      to establish that they are a 'family member' of an EEA national.  It
      is clear from a proper reading of the decision as a whole that the
      focus of the FtT Judge and his consideration of the evidence, was
      whether the appellant is a 'family member' as set out in the 2016
      Regulations.  The focus of the decision was upon whether the appellant
      is the spouse of a qualified person.


  23. Having carefully considered the decision of the FtT Judge, and the
      evidence that was before the FtT, in my judgement, it was open to the
      Judge to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given, and the decision of
      the FtT is not infected by a material error of law capable of
      affecting the outcome.


  24. I am fortified that that is correct because under cover of a fax
      received by the Tribunal on 8th March 2019, the appellant sought to
      provide the Tribunal with further evidence, including, inter alia, a
      further letter from the Ikeja Customary Court, addressed to the
      Tribunal, and dated 8th March 2019.  That letter states that "The
      marriage of the parties has been registered in accordance with the
      dictates of the Birth, Deaths etc (Compulsory Registration) Decree No.
      69 1992 Act Cap B9 Law of the Federation of Nigeria 2004 upon my being
      satisfied that the information and procedure prescribed by law has
      been complied with".  Although the letter now appears to contain more
      information as to the legal basis for the registration of the
      marriage, there is still no evidence regarding the application of the
      law in Nigeria, and the "information and procedure prescribed by law"
      that the Court considered so that the Court was satisfied that the
      marriage is valid under Nigerian law.  As I have found there to be no
      error of law in the decision of the FtT Judge, the question of re-
      making the decision does not arise, and I did not hear from the
      parties as to the terms and effect of that letter.


Decision:


  25. The appeal is dismissed.


  26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material
      error of law and the decision of FtT Judge Woolley shall stand.


  27. No aanonymity direction was made by the FtT.


Signed                                  Date          9th May 2019

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date          9th May 2019

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
