
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/05031/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 15 May 2019                                |On 16 May 2019               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                        MUKESHBHAI RAMESHBHAI TANDEL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr L. Lourdes, counsel instructed by Direct
Access
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer 44


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  05  July  2018
    to notify him of his liability to removal as a  person  who  ceased  to
    have a right to reside in the  UK  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national with reference  to  regulations  23(6)(a)  and  32(2)  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the   EEA
    Regulations 2016").

2.    The respondent gave the following reasons for finding that  he  ceased
    to have a right to reside in the UK.

            "You are specifically considered a person who has ceased to have
           a right to reside in the United Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
           (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.


             You  were  previously  granted  an  EEA   Residence   Card   as
           confirmation of your right to reside as a  family  member  of  a
           'Qualified Person' however you do not have/have ceased  to  have
           this right because. ...


               . You have failed to evidence that your EEA family member  is
                 a 'Qualified Person' as defined by regulation 6(1)  of  the
                 Regulations or you have not been able to produce sufficient
                 evidence that they are still a qualified person.

           This is because you have failed to provide evidence of your wife
           exercising her treaty rights in the UK.  You  have  also  stated
           that you have had no contact with your wife since February/March
           2017 and have been separated since that date, and that she  told
           you she wanted a divorce before you came to the UK."

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 15 February 2019. The judge  noted  that  the
    appellant was unrepresented and said that he afforded him a "degree  of
    flexibility"  as  a  result.  After  having  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant he concluded that the appellant could  not  raise  Article  8
    issues in an appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  2016  [9].  He  also
    concluded that the appellant could not argue that he retained  a  right
    of residence under the EEA Regulations 2016, which  would  have  to  be
    done by way of a paid application to the Home Office [9].  He  did  not
    find the appellant to be a credible witness and was not satisfied  that
    the marriage was genuine [11]. He found that there was no  evidence  to
    show that the appellant had ever lived with his wife, or even  to  show
    that they had ever been in a relationship. There  was  no  evidence  to
    show that she exercised rights of free movement  in  the  UK  [10(iv)].
    Although the respondent's decision was made under  regulation  23(6)(a)
    on the ground that the appellant ceased to have a right  to  reside  in
    the UK, the judge made no clear  finding  on  the  issue.  Instead,  he
    decided that the residence card could  be  revoked  on  the  ground  of
    misuse of rights under regulation 24 [12].

4.    The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher in the following terms:

                 ".....
                     2.      The grounds seeking permission assert that  the
                 Judge erred in terms of the burden of proof,  stating  that
                 it was upon the Appellant, that he misdirected  himself  as
                 to the precise nature of the Respondent's  assertions,  and
                 that he erred in finding that the Appellant could not  rely
                 on Article 8 rights in his appeal.

                     3.      Some of the issues raised in the  grounds  have
                 no  merit.  For  example,  there  was  no   allegation   of
                 dishonesty as the grounds suggest. Furthermore, given  that
                 the Appellant admitted that his relationship with his  wife
                 had broken down by March 2017, it is difficult to  see  how
                 the allegation under Regulation 26 was not made  out,  even
                 if the  Judge,  arguably,  misdirected  himself  in  simply
                 stating that the marriage  was  not  genuine.  The  grounds
                 complain that the Appellant was  denied  representation  by
                 Counsel, and I have seen the letter from his  barrister  in
                 support. However, when direct access Counsel was  not  even
                 on record as acting, and the Appellant had told  the  Judge
                 that he was not represented, I see no arguable error of law
                 on the grounds of procedural unfairness.

                      4.     However, the judge  refused  to  entertain  any
                 argument on Article 8 grounds and, whilst that may  be  the
                 correct approach in cases where no s.120 notice or  removal
                 directions had been issued, there were  removal  directions
                 in this case. Consequently, it is arguable that  the  Judge
                 erred in law by failing to consider Article 8 of the  ECHR.
                 The Appellant may have difficulty in  establishing  such  a
                 case in the circumstances, but the fact remains that he was
                 not permitted to raise the issue.  I  grant  permission  to
                 appeal, but limit it to the issue of the appropriate burden
                 of proof and Article 8."

Decision and reasons

5.    The appellant married a Portuguese citizen, Manisha  Budia,  in  India
    on 08 March 2015. He was issued with a six-month EEA family permit.  He
    entered the UK on 14 January 2016. On 21 December  2016  the  appellant
    was issued with a residence  card  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national, which was valid until 21 December 2021. The judge  said  that
    immigration officers visited the appellant's home on 21 July  2017  and
    that the appellant was interviewed on  24  July  2017.  The  respondent
    subsequently issued the decision dated  05  July  2018  to  notify  the
    appellant of his liability to removal because he ceased to have a right
    to reside under European law.

Error of law

6.    I indicated to Mr Tufan at the beginning of the  hearing  that  I  was
    minded to expand the grant of permission to other grounds  relating  to
    the determination of the appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016  because
    I was satisfied that there were sufficiently obvious errors of law that
    could not be ignored. He had no objection to this course of action  and
    did not seek to make any further submissions in relation to  errors  of
    law. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the
    making of errors on the following points of law.

       i) The judge failed to consider the relevant point of law, which was
          whether the appellant ceased to  have  a  right  to  reside  with
          reference to regulation 23(6)(a).


      ii) The judge wrongly considered the appeal with reference to  misuse
          of rights of residence under regulation 24 without notice to  the
          appellant and in circumstances where the issue was not raised  by
          the respondent as a reason for revoking his residence card.


     iii) The judge failed to consider whether, as  part  of  the  relevant
          assessment under regulation 23(6)(a), the appellant continued  to
          meet the requirements for residence as a family member given that
          the evidence was that the appellant was still married to the  EEA
          sponsor albeit he admitted that they were now  estranged.  It  is
          not a requirement  of  EU  law  for  a  married  couple  to  live
          together.

      iv) In refusing to consider any other aspect of the  EEA  regulations
          that might have been relevant  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
          account the broad nature of the ground of appeal i.e. whether the
          decision breached the appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in
          respect of entry into or residence in the United Kingdom.

       v) In refusing to consider human rights issues the judge  failed  in
          his duty to assist an unrepresented appellant to explore  whether
          he was issued with a section 120 notice and  therefore  may  have
          been able to raise human rights issues: see TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD
          [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

      vi) In refusing to consider human rights issues the judge  failed  to
          consider whether there was jurisdiction to do so given  that  the
          decision that was  the  subject  of  the  appeal  was  a  removal
          decision: see Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human  rights)
          [2015] UKUT 00466.

     vii) In the alternative, the judge failed to consider  the  fact  that
          the appellant raised human rights issues as a 'new matter' in the
          appeal form. It appears  that  he  failed  to  explore  with  the
          respondent's representative whether consent was given  for  human
          rights to be considered as a new matter in the appeal.

7.    The First-tier Tribunal decision is set aside.

Remaking

8.     The  appellant  entered  the  UK  with  a  family  permit   and   was
    subsequently issued a residence card as the family  member  of  an  EEA
    national. At the time, the respondent was satisfied that the  appellant
    was the family member of an EEA  national  who  was  exercising  rights
    under the EU Treaties. The appellant admits that he and  his  wife  are
    estranged.  However, that does not necessarily  end  his  status  as  a
    'family member' under EU law. Under EU law the appellant does not  have
    to live with his spouse to remain a family  member.  His  status  might
    only change with the initiation of divorce proceedings.  The  appellant
    confirmed that neither party to  the  marriage  has  initiated  divorce
    proceedings.

9.    The only reason given by the respondent  for  revoking  the  residence
    card was the appellant's inability to show that his wife  continued  to
    exercise her rights under the EU Treaties. The  appellant  produced  no
    further evidence to show that his wife continues to live  and  work  in
    the UK or meets any of the other requirements as a  'qualified  person'
    with reference to regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations 2016.

10.   However, Mr Tufan confirmed that the Home  Office  records  show  that
    the appellant's wife was  issued  a  permanent  residence  card  on  03
    January  2019.  In  doing  so  the  respondent  recognised   that   the
    appellant's wife had been exercising rights under the EU Treaties for a
    continuous period of five years and that she had acquired  a  right  of
    permanent residence by 30 January 2018. The consequence is that, at the
    date when the respondent made the decision to  revoke  the  appellant's
    residence card in July 2018, and at  the  date  of  this  hearing,  the
    respondent had to accept  that  the  appellant's  wife  was  exercising
    rights under the EU Treaties.

11.   Although  Mr  Tufan  expressed  concerns  arising  from  some  of  the
    evidence elicited from the appellant when he  was  interviewed  by  the
    respondent, he accepted that the decision to revoke the residence  card
    was made under regulation 23(6)(a) and that the  decision  had  not  be
    based on an allegation that the marriage was one of convenience or that
    there was a misuse  of  rights.  The  interview  record  had  not  been
    produced as evidence.

12.   Even on  the  appellant's  own  account  of  events  the  relationship
    between him and his wife has never subsisted since he  arrived  in  the
    UK. No doubt this is what caused the First-tier Tribunal judge to  have
    doubts as to whether the original  application  was  genuine.  However,
    none of those issues were formally alleged by the respondent.  Nor  did
    such concerns form the basis for the decision that is  the  subject  of
    this appeal. It is a matter for the respondent to decide what course of
    action to take in response to those concerns bearing in  mind  that  no
    such allegations were made following the interview in July 2017.

13.   The only decision that I am asked to consider is  the  decision  dated
    05 July 2018 to notify the appellant of his liability to  removal  with
    reference to regulation 23(6)(a) on the  ground  that  the  appellant's
    right to reside as a family member had ceased because he was unable  to
    show that his wife was still exercising rights under the  EU  Treaties.
    In light of the concession made at the hearing, I  find  that  the  two
    elements of regulation  7  continue  to  be  made  out.  The  appellant
    continues to be a 'family member' of an  EEA  national  because  he  is
    still married to his wife albeit they are estranged  and  do  not  live
    together. The respondent now accepts that there  is  evidence  to  show
    that the appellant's wife acquired a right of permanent residence  from
    30 January 2018. It  was  not  necessary  for  her  to  show  that  she
    continued to exercise her rights under the EU treaties  thereafter.  In
    any event, the respondent clearly was satisfied that she was.

14.   It is not necessary to determine the issue of  whether  the  appellant
    should be able to argue human  rights  issues  in  this  appeal  if  he
    succeeds under the EEA Regulations 2016.  In  any  event,  counsel  who
    attended the hearing was  under  a  duty  to  the  court  not  to  make
    arguments that are wholly without merit. Given that the  appellant  has
    only lived in the UK for just over three years any human  rights  claim
    would be bound to fail. The appellant falls far short  of  any  of  the
    private or family life requirements of the immigration  rules  and  has
    identified no compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  that  might
    justify granting leave to remain outside the rules.

15.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  decision  to  notify
    the appellant of his liability to removal on the ground that he  ceased
    to have a right to reside under EU law breaches his rights under the EU
    Treaties in respect of entry into or residence in the United Kingdom.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is ALLOWED on EU law grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date  15 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








