
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/05259/2018
                                                               EA/10994/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 September 2019                  |On 12 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                 laelson [a]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel, instructed by Mentor Legal
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     CONSENT ORDER PURSUANT TO RULE 39 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. The Appellant challenged the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Freer, promulgated on 12 March 2019, who dismissed his  linked  appeals
    against the Respondent's decisions of 16 July 2018, refusing  to  issue
    him with  a  permanent  residence  card  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016,  and  1  September  2016,
    refusing to issue him with a residence card under  the  Regulations  on
    the basis of a retained right of residence.

 2. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Bramble accepted that, for the reasons
    set out in the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  judge's  decision  contained
    material errors of law and that the appeals should be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a  complete  rehearing.  Mr  Plowright  was  in
    agreement with this course of action.

 3. The Appellant's appeals to the Upper Tribunal are therefore allowed and
    the decision of Judge Freer is set aside for error of law.

 4. The appeals are remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
    rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

    1. The appeals shall remain linked and are remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Taylor House hearing centre) for a complete rehearing, with
       no preserved findings of fact;

    2. The remitted hearing shall not be conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Freer;

    3. The First-tier Tribunal will need to consider whether  the  Appellant
       has acquired a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom, or
       whether, in the alternative, he has a retained right of residence.

    4. Polish and Portuguese interpreters  are  required  for  the  remitted
       hearing;

    5. There is a 4 hour time estimate for the remitted hearing.



Directions to the parties

    1. The Appellant shall file with the First-tier Tribunal  and  serve  on
       the  Respondent  an  indexed  and  paginated   consolidated   bundle,
       including any new evidence, no later than 21 days from the date  this
       Consent Order is sent out;

    2. The Respondent shall file with the First-tier Tribunal and  serve  on
       the Appellant any further evidence relied upon, no later than 28 days
       from the date this Consent Order is sent out.

Signed      [pic]            Date:  3 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

