
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05158/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2018                           |On 15 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                           Arslan akhtar muhammad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 28 August 2018 of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge D S Borsada  which  refused  the  appellant's
    appeal under the EEA Regulations on the basis that he  had  not  met  a
    mandatory requirement of the Procedure  Rules  to  provide  grounds  of
    appeal and  had  not  shown  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  a
    residence permit to be unlawful.

 2. The Tribunal file and the materials provided in the appellant's 50 page
    bundle confirm to my satisfaction that the appellant faxed  a  copy  of
    his grounds of appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal on 21  July  2018.  At
    page 30 of the appellant's bundle there is a fax  cover  sheet  showing
    confirmation that 22 pages were sent to the correct fax number for  the
    Tribunal. This corresponds with the 22 page bundle of appeal forms  and
    grounds and the respondent's decision which the  appellant  has  always
    maintained he sent by fax and post on 21 July 2018.

 3. Also, notwithstanding his having sent the correct documents on 21  July
    2018, on 10 August 2018 the First-Tier Tribunal informed the  appellant
    that no grounds had  been  provided.  In  that  regard,  he  relies  on
    documents showing that he then re-sent the whole application, including
    the grounds, by special delivery reference BH829350659GB.  He  has  the
    purchase documents for that special delivery dated 16 August  2018  and
    the tracking documents showing that it was signed for by  the  Tribunal
    on 17 August 2018. I am satisfied that the large letter  sent  on  that
    date by special delivery contained full appeal documents including  the
    grounds of appeal. The covering letter to the bundle  dated  16  August
    2018 states that to be so and refers specifically and  consistently  to
    all of the matters set out in paragraph 2 above and to a  further  copy
    of the 22 page bundle being sent with specific reference being made  to
    those materials including the grounds of appeal.

 4. As a result, I am satisfied that the appellant  provided  the  Tribunal
    with the grounds and requisite documents for  a  valid  appeal  on  two
    occasions and that the First-Tier Tribunal made a procedural  error  in
    finding otherwise. Where that is so, the  decision  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal must be set aside to be re-made de novo. Where  there  are  no
    extant findings of fact and the appeal is to be re-made afresh,  it  is
    appropriate  for  that  re-making  to  take  place  in  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade de novo by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed: [pic]                           Date: 14 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
