
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/05767/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 19th November 2019               |On: 22nd November 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                             Rizwana Abdul Qadir
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Raza, Counsel instructed by FMB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 26th July 1972. She
    asserts a Surinder Singh right of residence under Regulation 9  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  as  the  family
    member of her British husband.

 2. The facts were  never  in  issue.  It  is  expressly  accepted  by  the
    Respondent that between August  2016  and  February  2018  the  Sponsor
    husband resided in the Republic of Ireland.  The  Appellant  was  given
    leave to enter EIRE as the family member of an EEA national  exercising
    treaty rights in February 2017.  The couple lived there  together  and,
    it is accepted, the Sponsor exercised treaty rights: that he did so  is
    evidenced by his bank statements showing deposit of income, his company
    registration (he is a  self  employed  joiner  and  plumber),  his  tax
    registration details and numerous receipts he has produced showing  his
    purchase  of  materials  used  for  his  work.  Evidence  of  residence
    including medical records, their tenancy agreement  and  utility  bills
    were produced.   The Respondent accepted all of  that  but  refused  to
    grant the Appellant a residence card on the  basis  that  the  couple's
    residence in EIRE had not been "genuine".

 3. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Foudy) dismissed the Appellant's  appeal
    on the basis  of  its  own  finding  that  it  had  been  the  couple's
    intention, in moving to EIRE, to circumvent the  immigration  rules  of
    the United Kingdom. Although the Tribunal accepted that the couple  had
    physically resided in Ireland, it held that their motivation for  doing
    so was in order to take advantage of the Surinder Singh route.

 4. By her decision of the 15th August 2019 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer
    set the decision of Judge Foudy aside for material misdirection in law:

         "The  First-tier  Tribunal  appears  to   have   been   under   the
         misapprehension that at all material times the sponsor was required
         to have an intention to permanently relocate and did not apply  the
         correct test as set out in O & B (C-456/12)"

    (full citation O and B v The Netherlands C456/12)

 5. The matter has now come before me in order that  the  decision  in  the
    appeal be remade. Mr Raza does no  more  than  point  to  the  accepted
    evidence of residence in EIRE, and rely on the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in  ZA (Reg 9 EEA Regs, abuse of  rights)  Afghanistan  [2019]
    UKUT  281  (IAC),  published  shortly  after  Judge  Plimmer  made  her
    decision. The headnote reads:

         (i)   The requirement to have transferred the centre of one's life
         to the host member state is not a requirement of EU law, nor is  it
         endorsed by the CJEU.

         (ii)    Where an EU national of one state ("the home member state")
         has exercised the right of freedom of movement to take up  work  or
         self-employment in another EU state ("the host state"), his or  her
         family members have a derivative right to enter the member state if
         the exercise of Treaty rights in the host state  was  "genuine"  in
         the sense that it was real, substantive, or effective. It is for an
         appellant to show that there had been a genuine exercise of  Treaty
         rights.

         (iii)  The question of whether family life was established  and/or
         strengthened, and whether there has  been  a  genuine  exercise  of
         Treaty rights requires a qualitative assessment which will be fact-
         specific and will need to bear in mind the following:

           (1)   Any work or self-employment must have been  "genuine  and
           effective" and not marginal or ancillary;

           (2)  The assessment of whether a stay in  the  host  state  was
           genuine does not involve an assessment of the intentions of  the
           parties over and above a  consideration  of  whether  what  they
           intended to do was in fact to exercise Treaty rights;

           (3)  There is no requirement for the EU national or his  family
           to have integrated into the host member state, nor for the  sole
           place of residence  to  be  in  the  host  state;  there  is  no
           requirement to have severed ties with  the  home  member  state;
           albeit that these factors may, to a limited degree, be  relevant
           to the qualitative assessment of whether the exercise of  Treaty
           rights was genuine.

         (iv)  If it is alleged that the stay in the host member state  was
         such that reg. 9 (4) applies, the burden is  on  the  Secretary  of
         State to show that there was an abuse of rights.

 6. Applying that guidance I find as follows. The residence of  the  couple
    in Ireland was genuine in the sense that it was real,  substantive  and
    effective. They had a home there, they worked there, they lived  there.
    Their family life together developed during the time in Ireland, indeed
    that was their first marital home together after their 2016 marriage in
    Pakistan.  The work that the  sponsor  undertook  in  Ireland  was  not
    marginal or ancillary.  I not be concerned with the extent to which the
    couple 'integrated' into Irish society, or with their intentions beyond
    that they decided to live and work in Ireland.  The Respondent has  not
    demonstrated that the period that they spent in the other member  state
    was an abuse. It follows that the appeal must be allowed.




    Decisions

 7. The appeal is allowed under Regulation 9 of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 8. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                              [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   19th
                                November 2019








