
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05448/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                       MR ANUOLUWAPO SODIQ SHANGOBIYI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For Mr Shangobiyi:     Mr M Gaffar, Londonium Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by  Mr  Shangobiyi  (the  'appellant'),  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  ('FTT')  promulgated  on  7  March
    2019, in which the FTT dismissed his appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his  application  for  a  derivative  residence  card  under
    regulations 16(2) and (5) of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016
    (the 'regulations').

 2. In essence,  the  core  points  taken  against  the  appellant  by  the
    Secretary of State (the 'respondent') focussed  on  two  relationships;
    the appellant's relationship  with  his  mother;  and  the  appellant's
    relationship with his half-brother.  The respondent disputed  that  the
    appellant's mother, who is visually impaired, was unable  to  care  for
    herself; or that the appellant was her primary carer; or  that  if  she
    did need care, that third parties such as the local authority would not
    provide care. In respect of the half-brother, the  respondent  disputed
    that the appellant was related to the half-brother as claimed; or  that
    the appellant was the half-brother's primary carer; or that other third
    parties could not care for the half-brother.

 3. The appellant asserted that  his  mother  and  half-brother  were  both
    British citizens. The respondent's decision was silent as to the  half-
    brother's nationality but proceeded on the assumption that  the  mother
    was British.

FTT's decision

 4. The FTT found that the appellant's asserted half-brother was under  the
    custody, care, and control of his mother ([6] and [17]) and that whilst
    the appellant may help around the house  with  shopping,  cooking,  and
    other day-to-day activities; and from time to time help with  the  care
    of the claimed half-brother, he was  not  the  primary  carer  of  that
    brother. The FTT also concluded that the half-brother did not reside in
    the United Kingdom ('UK') as a self-sufficient person, for the purposes
    of regulation 16(2)(b)(ii).

 5. In relation to the appellant's mother, the FTT assessed the appellant's
    evidence as inconsistent in relation to whether his mother could bathe,
    dress, and use the toilet independently and generally  look  after  her
    personal care ([9]). Whilst the  FTT  noted  the  appellant's  mother's
    evidence that the appellant acted as her full-time carer, it noted that
    the mother had made no application for assistance from social services,
    which contradicted the appellant's evidence that there had been such an
    application, which had been declined ([11]). The FTT noted  an  absence
    of up-to-date medical evidence for  the  appellant's  mother.  The  FTT
    concluded that the appellant's mother's eye condition could be improved
    with recommended cataract surgery. The FTT noted at [16]  that  it  had
    not even been suggested that the appellant's mother would be unable  to
    reside in the UK, or in another EEA state, were the appellant to  leave
    the UK indefinitely.

 6. For the above reasons, the FTT rejected the appellant's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds were set out at paragraphs [4] to [9]; and  [11]  to  [13].
    While not numbered as  we  have  done  so  below,  they  appear  to  be
    fourfold:

          . ground (1) - the FTT had ignored directly relevant  evidence  in
            respect of the appellant's mother,  specifically:  a  Department
            for Work and Pensions ('DWP') document which indicated that  the
            mother qualified for the enhanced rate of personal  independence
            payment in respect of daily living,  and  had  limited  mobility
            without the assistance of another person; written evidence  from
            the hospital treating the appellant's mother of 5 February 2019,
             which had referred  to  the  appellant  as  his  mother's  main
            caregiver; and medical records in the appellant's  bundle  which
            referred  clearly  to  his  mother  having  undergone   cataract
            removal surgery on 31 January 2019, followed up by a  number  of
            appointments;

          . ground (2) - the FTT similarly ignored documentary evidence from
            the appellant's half-brother's school,  mentioning  him  as  the
            carer of his minor brother;

          . ground (3) - the FTT had failed to assess the  evidence  of  the
            appellant and his mother  about  why  the  local  council/social
            services had declined to provide help to the appellant's mother,
            namely that the appellant had been found to be his mother's full-
            time carer.  As a consequence, the FTT then  failed  to  analyse
            adequately whether his mother would be forced to leave  the  UK,
            unless the  appellant  could  reside  in  the  UK.  His  adverse
            conclusion in this regard was not sufficiently reasoned;

          . ground (4)  -  the  FTT  took  into  account  irrelevant  facts,
            specifically  the  appellant's  immigration  history   and   the
            competence of the respondent in failing to remove the  appellant
            previously.

 8. Grounds (1) and (3) focussed on the appellant's relationship  with  his
    mother; ground (2) on the appellant's half-brother. Ground (4) focussed
    more generally on consideration of irrelevant evidence.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission on 3 May 2019.

The relevant law

10. The  following  parts  of  regulations  2;  16(2);  and  16(5)  of  the
    regulations are relevant:

    "2.  General interpretation

    (1) In these Regulations-

    "EEA national" means a national of an EEA  State  who  is  not  also  a
    British citizen [our emphasis];

    Derivative right to reside

    16.-(1) A person has a derivative right to reside during any period  in
    which the person-

    ..... (b)satisfies each of the criteria in one or  more  of  paragraphs
    (2) to (6).

    (2) The criteria in this paragraph are that-

    (a)the person is the primary carer of an EEA national  [our  emphasis];
    and

    (b)the EEA national-

    (i)is under the age of 18;

    (ii)resides in the United Kingdom as a self-sufficient person; and

    (iii)would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if the person left
    the United Kingdom for an indefinite period....

    (5) The criteria in this paragraph are that-

    (a)the person is the primary carer of a British citizen ("BC");

    (b)BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and

    (c)BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or in another EEA
    State if the person left the United Kingdom for an indefinite period."

The hearing before us

11. Mr Gaffar relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal,  and  despite  specific
    questions from us, struggled to elaborate in his submissions  beyond  a
    few basic points. On questioning about the basis of  the  appeal  under
    regulation 16(2), he confirmed that the appellant's half-brother was  a
    British citizen. When asked how a derivative right  could  arise  under
    regulation 16(2), when it referred to 'EEA nationals',  the  definition
    for which in regulation 2  expressly  excluded  British  citizens,  and
    whether he could refer us to any authority on the issue, Mr Gaffar  was
    unable  to  do  so.   We  considered  whether  the  requirement   under
    regulation 2 that the step-brother 'not  also  be  a  British  citizen'
    might impinge on his rights under the Treaty on the Functioning of  the
    EU ('TFEU) and associated EU Directives, noting the  case  of  Zhu  and
    Chen v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Article  18  EC  -
    Directive 90/364/EEC) Case C-200/02, which  related  to  free  movement
    rights. We could not see how such  a  requirement  under  regulation  2
    could impinge on the half-brother's  rights,  as  he  had  recourse  to
    protection under regulation 16(5). Ultimately, it was  unnecessary  for
    us to resolve this question, as we concluded that the FTT was  entitled
    to find that the appellant was not  the  primary  carer  of  his  half-
    brother and so did not meet the requirements of either regulation 16(2)
    or 16(5).

The appellant's mother

12. We directed the representatives to the appellant's bundle ('AB') before
    the FTT, which included correspondence from  St  Thomas's  Hospital  at
    [37] to [45] AB. Mr Gaffar also reiterated the correspondence from  the
    DWP dated 17 August 2017 at [62] AB, which referred to the  appellant's
    mother being assessed at an enhanced rate for a  personal  independence
    payment because of her limitations in  her  independence,  as  well  as
    scoring '12' in the assessment, because she could not follow the  route
    of a familiar journey.

13. Mr Gaffar then sought to adduce evidence  which  post-dated  the  FTT's
    decision, claiming that the appellant had applied to the local  council
    to be his mother's registered carer. When asked to  explain  the  legal
    basis of his application to admit post-decision evidence, he was unable
    to do so.  In the absence of  any  submissions  on  why  such  evidence
    should be admitted, we declined to admit the evidence.

14. When asked how the evidence in  relation  to  the  appellant's  mother,
    which was said to have been ignored by  the  FTT,  would  have  made  a
    difference to the FTT's decision, Mr  Gaffar  asserted  that  the  only
    issue in dispute was whether the appellant  was  his  mother's  primary
    carer, and the ignored evidence proved  that  he  was.  When  we  asked
    whether that was the only disputed issue, and we referred Mr Gaffar  to
    regulation 16(5)(c), which also includes the criterion that the  mother
    would be unable to reside in the UK or in  another  EEA  state  if  the
    appellant left the UK for an indefinite period, and whether  Mr  Gaffar
    had any submissions in relation to [16] of the  FTT  decision  on  that
    point, he  referred  to  paragraph  [4]  of  the  appellant's  mother's
    statement at [7] AB, in which she asserted that the local council could
    not afford to provide a full-time sole carer for her, and that  it  was
    complicated to arrange such care; there was also  the  significance  of
    emotional support and there was no  way  she  could  afford  a  private
    carer. She would also not be able to return to Nigeria, because of  her
    poor health and  for  financial  reasons.   There  was  not  meaningful
    attempt by Mr Gaffar to explain how this answered the question  of  why
    the appellant's mother would be  unable  to  live  in  the  UK  if  the
    appellant left.

The appellant's half-brother

15.  Mr Gaffar was unable to comment beyond paragraph [9] of the grounds of
    appeal, in which it was asserted that correspondence  from  the  school
    mentioned the appellant's role as carer for his half-brother.

16. At the conclusion of  Mr  Gaffar's  submissions,  we  indicated  to  Ms
    Everett that we did not need any submissions from her and would reserve
    our decision.

Decision on error of law

Grounds (1) and (3)

17. We conclude that  while  there  were  errors  in  the  FTT's  decision,
    specifically that it failed to take into account relevant evidence from
    St Thomas's Hospital in relation to the appellant's  mother's  cataract
    surgery and from the DWP in relation to her physical limitations, these
    were not material errors of law.  We conclude  that  had  the  evidence
    been properly considered, the FTT would  have  inevitably  reached  the
    same conclusion that the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    regulations 16(2) and (5), so that  the  error  was  not  material.  We
    reached that conclusion for the reasons set out below.

18. As we have already identified, there was evidence before the FTT of the
    appellant's mother having had a cataract operation on 31 January  2019,
    as confirmed correspondence at [37] AB.  The question however was  what
    difference  this  would  make  to  the  eventual  decision.   The   DWP
    correspondence relating to an assessment of  her  needs  was  dated  17
    August 2017, prior to the surgical procedure. More recent evidence  was
    correspondence from St Thomas's Hospital dated 5 February 2019, at [38]
    AB, which referred to the appellant as the 'main caregiver and in  view
    of the recent surgery and poor vision in both her  eyes,  he  needs  to
    bring her for her hospital visits and help with eye drop application at
    home.'

19. Assuming, as a result of the above evidence, that the appellant is  his
    mother's primary carer for the purpose of regulation 16(5)(a),  we  did
    not accept Mr Gaffar's submission that  this  was  the  sole  issue  in
    dispute, which was plainly not correct. The FTT had identified at  [16]
    that it needed to consider whether  the  appellant's  mother  would  be
    unable to live in the UK if the appellant left the UK for an indefinite
    period. The FTT noted that it  was  not  even  submitted  that  in  the
    appellant's absence, his mother would be unable so to reside.  The  FTT
    expressly referred to the witness statements of both the appellant  and
    his mother.  At [11] of the decision, the FTT noted that the mother had
    given evidence that she had made no  application  for  assistance  from
    social services, in direct contradiction to  the  appellant's  evidence
    that an application had been made but declined. In the appeal  to  this
    Tribunal, it was said that the appellant's mother's explanation for why
    no other carer was possible had been  ignored.   The  mother's  witness
    statement evidence, paragraph [4], was the only evidence identified  by
    Mr Gaffar on the issue, the gist of which was that  the  council  could
    not afford such care, which was too complicated to  arrange.   However,
    the FTT expressly  considered  the  witness  statement,  and  also  the
    inconsistency of the mother's oral evidence  that  no  application  for
    assistance had been made,  whereas  the  appellant  claimed  that  such
    assistance had been sought.

20. The FTT was  entitled  to  consider  the  witnesses'  inconsistency  in
    concluding that the appellant's mother would not 'be unable  to  reside
    in the UK' without the appellant and so the appellant did not meet  the
    criteria of regulation 16(5). Considering all of  the  requirements  of
    regulation 16(5), even if we take at its highest,  in  support  of  the
    appellant's case, his assertion that he was the primary  carer  of  his
    mother, the FTT did not err in law in concluding that the  requirements
    of regulation 16(5) were not met - the role of  primary  carer  is  not
    sufficient to succeed under the regulations, as the appellant's  mother
    would be able to reside in the UK in the event  that  he  leaves.   The
    error of failing to consider evidence about  the  appellant's  mother's
    medical treatment and vulnerability  was  not,  in  the  circumstances,
    material.  There was therefore an error of law on ground  (1),  but  it
    was not material. There was no error of law on ground (3).

Ground (2)

21. In relation to the  appellant's  half-brother,  the  FTT  concluded  at
    [15(ii)] of the decision that the brother was in the custody, care  and
    control of the mother. We were  referred  to  correspondence  dated  24
    April 2017 from the brother's school, at [69] AB, which stated that the
    appellant brought his brother to and from  school.  The  correspondence
    makes no other reference, nor provides any  further  detail  about  the
    appellant's claim to be the 'primary carer' of his half-brother. Whilst
    the FTT made  no  express  reference  to  this  correspondence  in  the
    decision, it did refer to the appellant assisting 'with such care as  a
    12-year old half-brother might require' ([17]  of  the  decision).  The
    letter from the school was consistent with that finding  and  does  not
    suggest that the FTT ignored the letter. The letter is also  consistent
    with the FTT's finding that the half-brother nevertheless  remained  in
    the control of his mother. Referring  more  explicitly  to  regulations
    16(2) and (5), on no legitimate view can it be said that the letter was
    sufficient to show that the appellant was the 'primary carer'  for  his
    half-brother. All that the correspondence stated was that the appellant
    took his half-brother to and from school. In the  circumstances,  there
    was no error of law in the FTT's conclusions.  Even if we  accept  that
    the appellant could seek a derivative right to reside based on his role
    as carer for a minor British citizen under regulation 16(2), (which  is
    by no means clear), the appellant was simply unable to demonstrate that
    he was his sibling's primary carer.

Ground (4)

22. Whilst the FTT referred in critical terms to  the  appellant  'flouting
    and abusing' the UK's immigration laws ([4] of the decision),  and  the
    FTT was critical of what it regarded as the respondent's ineptitude  in
    failing to remove the appellant  ([19]),  the  FTT's  analysis  of  the
    appellant's role as a carer for his mother and  his  half-brother;  and
    the question of whether the  appellant's  mother  would  be  unable  to
    reside in the UK in the absence of the appellant; were resolved without
    reference to the discrete comments about  the  appellant's  immigration
    history and the respondent's enforcement actions.   In  summary,  these
    comments were unnecessary because they did not play  any  part  in  the
    FTT's  analysis  of  the  evidence   or   its   conclusions.   In   the
    circumstances, it would have been helpful for these extraneous comments
    not to have been made in the decision, but  they  do  not  disclose  an
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  of  law,
such that the decision must be set  aside  and  the  appellant's  appeal  is
dismissed.

Signed   J Keith  Date:  5 June 2019

J Keith

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
