


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/05236/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th March 2018                         |On 20th March 2018               |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                               Muhammad Naseer
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Rutherford of Counsel, instructed by Maliks
                  and Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Pacey promulgated on 20 June 2017,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse to issue him with an EEA Residence  Card
    dated 21 April 2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 21 November 1981,  who
    first arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  18  July  2007  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor for a period of six months.  The Appellant  made
    applications for an EEA Residence Card  on  15  November  2003  and  21
    February 2014, both of which were refused by  the  Respondent  and  the
    Appellant's appeal against the second decision was dismissed  by  Judge
    Obhi on 14 April 2016.  The Respondent and then the First-tier Tribunal
    found that the Appellant had entered in to a marriage  of  convenience.
    The Appellant made a further application for an EEA Residence  Card  on
    11 November 2015.

 3. The Respondent refused the latest application on 21 April 2016  on  the
    basis that the Appellant had entered in to a marriage  of  convenience.
    The reasons given were that the Appellant and his  wife  had  failed  a
    language test and it was not accepted that they could communicate  with
    each other and further, adverse inferences were drawn from the  failure
    to attend a marriage interview on two separate occasions.

 4. Judge Pacey dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  20  June
    2017 on the basis that  there  was  no  genuine  marriage  between  the
    Appellant  and  his  wife  because  they  had  no  common  language  to
    communicate with each other and they had failed to attend an  interview
    when requested to do so by the Respondent.   In  essence,  Judge  Pacey
    found that there was a marriage of convenience and that there had  been
    no new substantive evidence on the issue since Judge Obhi made the same
    findings in April 2016.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on two grounds.  First, that Judge Pacey recorded
    in the decision that the Appellant had  used  an  interpreter  for  the
    hearing when he did not and that she stated that no adverse  inferences
    would be drawn from the use of an  interpreter  but  in  the  following
    paragraph in the decision did just that.  Secondly,  that  Judge  Pacey
    had before her written and oral evidence from a number of witnesses and
    evidence of continuing cohabitation of the Appellant and his wife, none
    of which was referred to in her findings and no reasons were given  for
    the rejection of such evidence.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pedro on 29 December 2017  on
    all grounds.

 7. At the hearing, Counsel for the Appellant  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal (no further development  of  those  grounds  was  required)  and
    confirmed that the Appellant  had  accepted  that  the  Respondent  had
    sufficient evidence to raise a suspicion as to whether his marriage was
    one of convenience but that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    properly consider the Appellant's evidence in response to that.

 8. The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  the  issue  in  this
    case was not whether there was a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    but whether the Appellant had entered into a marriage of convenience in
    2014; the test for which was set out by the Court of Appeal in  Rosa  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ]2016] EWCA Civ 14.

 9. In relation to the decision of Judge Pacey, it was  submitted  that  he
    rightly took into account the  earlier  decision  of  Judge  Obhi,  the
    language concerns and the Appellant's  failure  to  attend  a  marriage
    interview.  The Judge indicated that he had taken into account  all  of
    the evidence before him, including the witness evidence and  there  was
    no need for him to refer to it  specifically  again  in  his  findings.
    Finally, it was submitted that there was no adverse inference taken  in
    paragraph 22 of the decision about the request for  an  interpreter  as
    this was a request rather than use of an interpreter and in  any  event
    dealt with the substantive issue of language ability.

Findings and reasons

 1. In paragraph 2 of her decision, Judge Pacey records that the Appellant,
    his sponsor, her daughter, Ms Mrukowicz, Mrs Munshi, Mr Mehmood and  Mr
    Saeed gave evidence at the hearing which is set out in  the  record  of
    proceedings and in paragraph 11  that  there  were  supportive  witness
    statements from the same persons.  The  witness  evidence  covered  the
    start of the Appellant's relationship and marriage  as  well  as  their
    current relationship and included matters in the Appellant's favour  to
    show that he had not entered into a marriage of convenience.   However,
    in her findings, Judge Pacey does not  refer  to  any  of  the  witness
    evidence and instead in paragraph 22 and 23 simply states that none  of
    the evidence before her disturbs the previous findings of Judge Obhi in
    particular in  relation  to  language.   By  implication,  the  witness
    evidence and potentially the  evidence  of  cohabitation  (albeit  this
    related primarily to after the date of  marriage)  in  the  Appellant's
    favour was rejected but no reasons were given for this.   That  was  an
    error of law.  Although it is not necessary for a Judge to a  refer  to
    each and every  piece  of  evidence  before  them  to  reach  a  lawful
    conclusion with adequate reasons being given, the failure to  give  any
    reasons at all for rejecting almost the  entirety  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence  does  not  give  adequate  reasons  for  the  decision.   The
    statement in paragraph 12 of the decision that all of the evidence  has
    been taken into account is not sufficient in this case.

 2. I also find that it is an error of law to rely in paragraph 22  of  the
    decision on the Appellant's request for an interpreter  as  an  adverse
    reason in  support  of  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    satisfactorily addressed the language issue since the  previous  First-
    tier Tribunal decision.  Judge Pacey correctly set out the position  in
    21 that no adverse inferences should  be  drawn  from  the  use  of  an
    interpreter and the reasons  why  but  failed  to  apply  this  in  the
    following paragraph.  I do not accept that the statement at the end  of
    paragraph 22 was based on substantive language ability nor  that  there
    was somehow a qualitative difference between a request for and using an
    interpreter, particularly where in this appeal the  Appellant  did  not
    actually use  an  interpreter  during  the  hearing  (although  he  had
    requested one.

 3. At the hearing I indicated to the parties that I  was  minded  to  find
    errors of law on both grounds of appeal.  The parties  agreed  that  in
    the  absence  of  any  lawful  findings  on  the  witness  evidence  in
    particular, that the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the  appeal
for a de novo hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Birmingham)  to  be
heard by any Judge except Judge Pacey.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         12th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

