
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05447/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 15 April 2021                   |On : 27 April 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                valter shpani
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by Rashid & Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of Albania born on 12 March  1985,  appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his
appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2016 ("the EEA Regulations"), as  the  family  member  (spouse)  of  an  EEA
national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

The appellant entered the UK in 2007 using a false  Italian  identity  card.
Following his conviction for various  offences  in  2009  and  2010  he  was
deported from the UK, but he re-entered the UK in breach of the  deportation
order and was encountered and detained on 26 June 2012. He made a claim  for
asylum which was refused and he then left the UK  on  10  August  2012.  The
appellant returned to the UK, on a flight from Stockholm, in  November  2012
in a false identity and using a Polish identity card.  He  was  returned  to
Stockholm the following day, but he came back to the UK  and  next  came  to
the attention of the UK authorities on 21 January 2014 when he  applied  for
an EEA residence card as the unmarried partner  of  a  Lithuanian  national,
Jurate Muraskiene.

The appellant's application for an EEA  residence  card  was  refused  on  6
August 2014 on the basis that the requirements of Regulation 8(5)  were  not
met as his relationship was  not  considered  by  the  respondent  to  be  a
durable one. The application was also refused under Regulation  17(4)(b)  on
the basis that the respondent considered the appellant's continued  presence
in the UK posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
fundamental  interests  of  society.  Following  an  appeal   against   that
decision, by which time the appellant  had  married  Ms  Muraskiene,  on  25
October 2014, the First-tier Tribunal concluded, in a  decision  promulgated
on 12 March 2015,  that  the  appellant  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of
convenience and that the requirements of the EEA Regulations were  therefore
not met. The appeal was dismissed on that basis.

The appellant submitted a further residence card application on 22 May  2015
which was refused on 18 March 2016 and re-considered and refused again on  8
November 2016. An appeal against that decision was dismissed on 16  December
2016 on the grounds that there was no  valid  appeal.  A  further  residence
card  application,  made  on  7  March  2018,  was  rejected,  and   another
application made on 3 July 2018 was refused without a right of appeal on  12
February 2019.

The appellant then made another application for an EEA residence card on  30
April 2019, again on the  basis  of  his  marriage  to  Ms  Muraskiene.  The
respondent maintained the decision that the marriage was one of  convenience
and that there was no genuine and durable  relationship.  In  so  doing  the
respondent relied upon statements from immigration  officers  who  had  been
present during  a  visit  from  the  Financial  Investigation  Unit  to  the
appellant's home on 22 August 2017 in relation to a matter unrelated to  his
marriage and accorded little weight  to  a  supporting  statement  from  the
appellant's former solicitor. The respondent considered that  the  appellant
was not a "family member" of an EEA national, owing to  his  marriage  being
one of convenience, and as such he did not  qualify  to  have  his  criminal
conduct considered under the protection of public policy in  Regulations  24
and 27.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Louveaux on 5 December 2019. The appellant and his wife  gave
oral evidence at the hearing, as did his wife's sister, brother and 15-year-
old son. The sponsor's brother was  also  in  attendance,  having  travelled
from Lithuania, but he was unable to give evidence owing to the lack  of  an
interpreter. Judge Louveaux found that the previous Tribunal was  justified,
in its decision of  12  March  2015,  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's
marriage was one of convenience, in light  of  the  inconsistencies  in  the
evidence at the time which had still not been adequately  explained  by  the
appellant, and therefore saw no reason to depart from the findings  of  that
Tribunal. Judge Louveaux  found,  however,  that  the  evidence  before  him
strongly suggested that the appellant and the sponsor were  currently  in  a
durable relationship. Nevertheless, following the findings of the  Court  of
Appeal in Rosa v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ
14, that the focus was on the intention of the parties at the  time  of  the
marriage, the judge considered that he was unable to go behind the  findings
of the previous Tribunal and therefore dismissed the appeal on  that  basis.


Judge Louveaux's decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  in  a
decision made without a hearing, under Rule 34 of the  Procedure  Rules,  on
the basis that he had misdirected himself in relation  to  the  findings  in
Rosa and in relation to the Devaseelan principles. The judge had  failed  to
take into account his own positive assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
witnesses before him in deciding whether or not to depart from the  previous
Tribunal's finding that the marriage was a marriage of  convenience  at  the
time it was entered into  and  had  misdirected  himself  in  thinking  that
Devaseelan precluded him from departing from the findings  of  the  previous
Tribunal. UTJ Gill considered that she was unable to  preserve  any  of  the
findings made by Judge Louveaux and she concluded that  the  decision  ought
to be re-made in its entirety, albeit in the Upper Tribunal and not  by  way
of a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

The matter then came before me, for a face-to-face hearing. There  were  two
further significant developments since the  previous  hearing.  Firstly,  Mr
Tufan was in possession of two emails from Ms Muraskiene, sent to  the  Home
Office, in which she stated on 17 February 2021 that she and  the  appellant
were no longer together, that he had left  the  country  and  that  she  was
looking to proceed with a divorce as soon as possible, and  a  second  email
dated 15 March 2021 in which she stated that they  remained  together,  that
she had just been angry at the time following an argument and that she  very
much wanted  to  continue  their  life  together  as  a  family.   Secondly,
evidence was produced to show  that  the  appellant  had  left  the  UK  and
travelled to Turkey and had then returned to the UK via Dublin  after  being
refused re-entry to the UK.

Mr Tufan asked  the  appellant  and  his  wife  questions  to  clarify  both
matters. The appellant explained that his father had  been  very  ill,  with
coronavirus, and had been taken to Turkey for emergency  medical  treatment.
The appellant said that he had managed to obtain  a  new  Albanian  passport
from the embassy in the UK and had  used  that  to  travel  to  Albania  and
Turkey, leaving the UK on 22 November  2020  and  returning  to  the  UK  by
travelling to Kosovo and taking a flight to Istanbul and then  a  flight  to
Dublin and entering the UK on 6 April 2021 after being issued with  a  three
month visa in Dublin to join his EU wife.  The  appellant's  wife  explained
that she had sent the first email when she  was  very  distressed  after  an
argument and that she had just broken down as a result of the stress of  the
whole situation, with his father being ill and her  mother  being  ill,  and
coronavirus making travelling difficult, but she had calmed down  after  her
son had talked to her.

The appellant's sister and sister-in-law gave evidence after  the  appellant
and his wife. His wife's brother was available  to  give  evidence  remotely
from Lithuania but in the event it  was  not  necessary  to  hear  from  him
because Mr Tufan, whilst noting the inconsistencies in the  evidence  before
the previous Tribunal, was nevertheless satisfied that the relationship  was
genuine and subsisting and that the marriage was not one of convenience.

Mr Tufan made submissions, however, on Regulation  24(7),  Regulation  25(b)
and (c) and Regulation 27(8) and Schedule 1, in relation  to  public  policy
grounds  and  the  fundamental  interests  of  society,  in  light  of   the
appellant's  adverse  immigration  history  and   complete   disregard   for
immigration control. He submitted  that  the  appellant  fell  within  those
provisions as a result of his personal conduct.  He referred  in  particular
to the appellant's recent conduct in leaving the UK and then  returning  via
Ireland in order to circumvent the requirements of the immigration rules.

In response, Mr Eaton submitted that the references to public  policy  under
those Regulations in the refusal decision were only  on  the  basis  of  the
marriage being considered as one of convenience. The matters  raised  by  Mr
Tufan were completely new points.  In  any  event  the  appellant  had  only
recently left the UK and returned on one occasion, because of  his  father's
ill-health. It could not be said that he was acting unlawfully when  he  did
that because he had always been entitled to a residence  card  in  light  of
his genuine relationship with his EEA national wife. A  residence  card  was
only declaratory and he had not needed one in order to come and go.

Consideration and findings

As UTJ Gill stated in her decision of 15 July 2020 at [42], there  was  only
one factual issue in the appeal, namely whether the appellant's marriage  to
the sponsor was  a  marriage  of  convenience.  Having  considered  all  the
evidence and heard from the witnesses, Mr Tufan conceded that  the  marriage
was not, and had never been, one of convenience  and  that  the  appellant's
relationship with the sponsor was genuine and subsisting. I am  entirely  in
agreement  with  that  concession.  There   clearly   were   some   relevant
credibility concerns in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  in  March
2015 and the judge was entitled to conclude on  the  evidence  available  at
that time that the marriage was one of convenience. However,  in  the  light
of the evidence produced before Judge Louveaux and his positive  credibility
findings, and given the evidence before me, all of which strongly  suggested
that the marriage had been entered into  for  genuine  reasons,  Mr  Tufan's
concession was properly made.

With regard to Mr Tufan's submissions in relation to public policy  matters,
I cannot agree that the references in the refusal  decision  to  Regulations
24 and 27 were such that a decision had been made  in  that  regard  on  the
basis of the appellant's adverse immigration history. The decision was  made
entirely on the basis of the marriage  being  one  of  convenience  and  the
references to Regulations 24 and 27 were made in that  context  and  not  on
the basis of a conclusion in the alternative. I accept that  the  matter  of
the appellant's departure from the UK and his  return  through  Dublin  were
recent events of which Mr Tufan only became fully aware at the hearing,  but
I find merit in Mr  Eaton's  submission  that  the  appellant  was  in  fact
entitled to travel in and out of the UK on the basis  of  his  now  accepted
genuine marriage to his EEA national wife. The absence of a  residence  card
was not relevant since a residence card  was  only  of  declaratory  effect.
Whether or not the respondent now issues a residence card to  the  appellant
is a matter for her. For the purposes of the appeal before  me,  however,  I
find  that  the  appellant  has  satisfied  the  requirements  of  the   EEA
Regulations as to his entitlement to residence on the  basis  of  being  the
family member of an EEA national.

The appeal is therefore allowed on that basis.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of  law  and  has  been  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by allowing the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016.



Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  15 April 2021





