
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05623/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 3rd April 2018                         |On the 6th April 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     JK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M. Atcha, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. I make  a  direction  regarding
    anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal
    Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise the Appellant is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or members of his
    family.  This direction applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ripley), who in a determination  promulgated
    on the 9th August 2017 dismissed his appeal against the decision of the
    Respondent to refuse his application for an  EEA  family  permit  under
    Regulations 12 and 16  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (" the EEA Regulations").

 3. Permission to appeal is listed before the  Upper  Tribunal,  permission
    having been granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Haria  on  the  31st
    January 2018.

 4. The factual backgrounds is set out in the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at paragraphs 1-5.

 5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with a spouse Visa in April
    2004 which was valid until April 2005. He was married in the  UK  to  a
    British national in 2001. They lived together for 4  years  and  during
    that time two children were born, H born in 2003 and J  born  in  2005.
    The appellant overstayed his leave and applied for indefinite leave  to
    remain in April 2006. The application was  refused  in  July  2009.  He
    exercised his right to appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State but his appeal was dismissed in a decision dated 7 October 2009.

 6. There is a copy of that determination in the Tribunal papers. The judge
    heard the appellant and his wife give evidence in September 2009. It is
    plain from the judgement that it was not accepted  that  he  was  in  a
    subsisting relationship/marriage with his wife. The judge had heard the
    evidence of both parties and considered their respective accounts  that
    they were in a subsisting relationship in the light of the  documentary
    evidence which demonstrated the use of different addresses and the lack
    of consistent evidence as to their home life. His relationship with two
    children was also considered to be "remote".  The judge  recorded  that
    despite his account that he lived with his wife and  children,  he  was
    unable to provide the correct colour of the children's uniform or  give
    consistent evidence as to birthday  presents  (see  paragraph  11).  In
    summary the judge found that the parties had not demonstrated that they
    were in a subsisting  marriage  and  that  his  relationship  with  the
    children  was  "so  remote  that  it  was  not  a   relationship   that
    necessitates living in the UK but one that could be  maintained  at  an
    equivalent level by visits, telephone calls and letters" (see paragraph
    14).

 7. He was removed to Pakistan August 2010.

 8. On 25 February 2016 the appellant applied  for  family  permit  on  the
    basis that he was entitled to a derivative  right  of  residence  as  a
    primary carer of two British children. In application he stated that "I
    have been married to my wife some time. I  have  two  children  of  our
    marriage. Both children are British and settled. As I am their father I
    have share responsibility in my children upbringing and wish  to  carry
    them out "(see Q103).

 9. On 5 April 2016 the Secretary of State refused his application. It  was
    noted that the appellant's two children were residing in  the  care  of
    their mother in the UK. The Secretary of State was not satisfied  that,
    if the appellant's application  was  refused,  the  children  would  be
    unable to reside in the UK or in  another  EEA  state,  as  they  could
    remain with their mother. The respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant  was  the  primary  carer  of  the  children.  The  appellant
    therefore failed to meet the requirements  of  regulation  15(4A).  The
    respondent considered that the appellant was therefore not entitled  to
    a right of admission to the UK under the EEA regulations.

10. The appellant filed grounds of appeal out of  time.  However  time  was
    extended on 12 August 2016. In the  grounds  of  appeal  the  appellant
    stated that the respondent had failed to consider he  should  have  had
    regard to his children's welfare and their best interests.  He  claimed
    to  be  playing  an  active  role  in  their  lives  and   had   shared
    responsibility for their upbringing with his wife. The appellant relied
    on the case of Ruiz Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09.

11. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) review took place. It was  noted  that
    the appellant had not submitted any evidence to demonstrate that he  is
    the primary care of the children and  that  they  would  be  unable  to
    continue to reside in the UK in his absence. The  children  resided  in
    the UK with their mother who was a British citizen and as the appellant
    was no longer in a relationship with the mother the children, the entry
    clearance manager  was  satisfied  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    application was correct. The ECM review also considered the  Article  8
    rights but found the decision to refuse entry was proportionate.

12. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 25th  July  2017.
    The judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  wife  and  a  family
    relative. Their evidence was set out at  paragraphs  10  -  15  of  the
    determination. The judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 17-24  of
    the determination. The judge considered the relevant regulations in the
    light of the evidence. It had not been in dispute that the children had
    lived with their mother since their  birth  and  without  any  physical
    contact with the appellant since he was removed  in  2010,  some  seven
    years earlier. Prior to that the children had lived with her after  the
    couple separated in approximately 2005. The judge found that he did not
    provide for the family financially nor did he arrange them to visit him
    in Pakistan, with or without their  mother.  The  judge  found  on  the
    evidence that the removal of the applicant in 2010 did  not  cause  the
    children to leave the EU nor that there was  any  evidence  to  suggest
    that the family were now considering sending them to  live  with  their
    father as they were unable to continue living in the  EU  without  him.
    The judge took into account the decision of Chavez-Vilchez C-133/15 and
    cited the relevant part of that judgement  when  considering  the  best
    interests of the relevant children. At paragraph [23] the  judge  found
    that there was a "striking lack of evidence to show that  it  would  be
    contrary to the children's best interests if the application was to  be
    refused". Whilst the judge accepted that they spoke their father on the
    telephone at weekends when at the grandparents, there was  no  evidence
    from the children themselves as to contact over the last  seven  years,
    the extent of the children's relationship with their  father  consisted
    of calls, cards and occasional gifts. The judge found that  "there  was
    no evidence to show that the children suffered as a consequence of  his
    absence or that (as stated  in  Chavez-Vilchez)  that  their  emotional
    development had been adversely affected or that their equilibrium would
    be disturbed if the appeal was rejected".

13. The judge concluded that she was not satisfied that the  appellant  was
    the children's primary carer or that they would be unable to reside  in
    the UK if the appellant was refused the family permit and that  he  did
    not meet the  regulations.  The  judge  made  reference  again  to  the
    children's best interests which had been considered in the  context  of
    the regulations as set out in Chavez-Vilchez. The judge also cited  the
    decision of Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human  rights)  [2015]
    UKUT 466(IAC), and that consequently Article  8  rights  had  not  been
    considered independently of the EEA issues raised. The Judge  dismissed
    the appeal under the EEA regulations.

14. The appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision.  The  grounds
    state that the appellant disagreed with the decision and "believes that
    he is a primary carer of his British children and ought to  be  granted
    LTE under the EEA regulations and under his human rights  (private  and
    family life).

15. The grounds also assert that the decision was flawed as  it  failed  to
    consider the human rights of appellant and his  children  and  that  he
    shared parental responsibility of his British children with  his  wife.
    It was stated that he was separated from his wife but not divorced  and
    that they were "ready  and  willing  to  give  another  chance  to  the
    relationship the sake of their  children".  It  was  claimed  that  the
    appellant was actively involved in their lives and that they were of an
    age where they needed supervision and guidance. Their mother was unable
    to keep up with their needs and demands and that his wife and  children
    could not visit and live with him in Pakistan  due  "to  their  serious
    commitments and specific circumstances".

16. Permission to appeal was granted by FTTJ Haria in the following terms:

         "... the grounds assert that the judge erred in failing to consider
         the human rights of the appellant and his children.

         The appellant is a Pakistani national.  On  25  February  2016  the
         appellant applied for family  permit  on  the  basis  that  he  was
         entitled to a derivative right of residence as a primary  carer  of
         two British citizen  children.  On  1  April  2016  the  respondent
         refused the application and its refusal decision was  confirmed  by
         the ECM....

         The appellant is entitled to appeal the decision  under  regulation
         26 of the immigration (EEA) regulations 2006 on the ground that the
         decision breaches the appellant's rights under the EU  treaties  in
         relation to entry to, or  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
         appellant is out of country and has the right to appeal the refusal
         on human rights grounds.

         There is an arguable material error of law."

17. Thus the appeal  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Miss  Atcha,  who
    appeared before the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeared  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  She  confirmed  that  the  grounds  of   appeal   had   been
    drafted/submitted by the appellant. However she confirmed that she  was
    now re-instructed on behalf of the appellant.

18. She submitted that the judge was required to take into account the best
    interests of the children  and  that  the  relevant  decision  (Chavez-
    Vilchez) made reference to looking at  the  overall  picture  including
    their age, physical needs  and  their  emotional  needs  and  also  the
    overall picture of both parties. She submitted that the judge  had  not
    done that when reaching  a  decision.  She  referred  the  Tribunal  to
    paragraph 23 of the determination in which it was said that  the  judge
    accepted the father's evidence that he spoke to  his  children  on  the
    telephone weekends. In addition at paragraph 10 judge set out the  oral
    evidence  of  the  appellant's  wife  who  stated  that  the   children
    maintained  contact  via  telephone  calls  when  they  were  at  their
    grandmother's home which lasted for a period of 25 minutes. She further
    submitted  that  if  entry  was  permitted   he   would   have   shared
    responsibility for the  children  and  that  would  be  in  their  best
    interests. The evidence given by his wife was they had  been  separated
    but not divorced.

19. She further submitted that the judge had not taken into account all  of
    the  children's  needs  when  reaching  a  conclusion  on  their   best
    interests. The judge did not say whether she assessed the grandfather's
    evidence as credible. The judge did accept the contact was taking place
    but the father had lived with the children only for a short while.

20. Miss Atcha was asked to confirm the basis upon which  it  was  advanced
    that the judge had erred in law in the light of the  grounds  that  had
    been submitted and her earlier  submissions.  She  submitted  that  the
    human rights aspect of the appeal should be considered in the light  of
    the decision of  Chavez-Vilchez  and  this  included  the  four  people
    involved (both adults and two children). She  then  made  reference  to
    Article 8 on the basis that he had a family life with the children  the
    children needed him in the United Kingdom. She submitted  that  it  was
    difficult for him to obtain an order for contact in the UK. When  asked
    to set out the jurisdiction to  support  her  submissions,  Miss  Atcha
    stated that she could not provide any further submissions.

21. Mr Jarvis on behalf of the respondent made reference to  the  grant  of
    permission.  He  submitted  that   there   had   been   a   fundamental
    misunderstanding set out in paragraph 5 and  that  the  judge  granting
    permission had failed to set out what the  error  of  law  was  in  the
    decision or  why  any  such  error  was  arguable.  He  submitted  that
    paragraph 5 was wholly unclear and that if the judge was  stating  that
    regulation 26 is an automatic key to  obtaining  permission  to  appeal
    that was a complete misunderstanding.

22. He submitted that if paragraph 5 was referring to Article 8, there  had
    been not  been  a  refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim  and  that  the
    application made by the appellant was under the EEA regulations  for  a
    family permit on the basis of a  derivative  right  of  residence.  The
    entry clearance officer who was  the  decision  maker  considered  that
    application under the relevant EEA regulations and not under Article 8.
    Whilst the ECM made reference to this, it is the decision  of  the  ECO
    that is relevant. There had been no section 120 notice filed and  there
    for was no jurisdiction to consider human rights as the FTTJ stated  at
    paragraph 24.

23. As to the decision made under the EEA regulations, he submitted that it
    was plain at paragraph [21] that the judge had applied the decision  in
    Chavez-Vilchez and that the decision did not  change  the  argument  in
    Zambrano and whether the EU child was compelled to  leave  the  UK.  He
    submitted that the decision in Chavez-Vilchez added to  that  test  and
    that an enquiry must be made by looking at the substance of the  caring
    arrangements for the relevant children and also considering their  best
    interests. At paragraph [21] the judge considered  the  nature  of  the
    relationship between the third country national (the appellant) and the
    relevant children and whether it led to any compulsion and therefore if
    there was no other choice for the child to leave the UK in reality.  It
    was plain from reading the determination of paragraphs 21-24  that  the
    judge did acknowledge that test and applied it  on  the  factual  basis
    that she had found.

24.  In the light of the evidence, he submitted, it was  difficult  to  see
    how the judge could have reached any other conclusion. The  judge  made
    reference to the  earlier  findings  of  the  FTTJ  in  2009  and  also
    considered the mothers evidence, which was new evidence,  at  paragraph
    12. That made it  clear  that  she  was  the  primary  carer;  she  was
    responsible for their day-to-day care and made the decisions concerning
    the children including that relating to their education.  She  did  not
    want the appellant to live with them if he was granted a family  permit
    stating that they would have to build up any relationship and  see  how
    it went. The judge found  at  [20]  that  the  appellant's  removal  to
    Pakistan did not cause children to have to leave the EU and that  there
    had been "no evidence to suggest that the family  are  now  considering
    sending them to live with their father as they are unable  to  continue
    living in the EU without him." At [19] the judge  had  found  that  the
    children live with  their  mother  since  birth  without  any  physical
    contact with the appellant since his  removal  in  2010  and  that  his
    relationship in 2009 was described as "remote" and one  that  could  be
    maintained at an  equivalent  level  by  visits,  telephone  calls  and
    letters" which had been the position since 2010. He  had  not  provided
    the family financially and had  not  arranged  them  to  visit  him  in
    Pakistan with or without their mother. He had not visited the UK.

25. Mr Jarvis submitted that those findings were open to the judge to  make
    and were inevitable on the evidence that was provided.  She  did  apply
    the decision in Chavez-Vilchez and  made  an  assessment  of  the  best
    interests. The judge made reference to the "striking lack of evidence";
    that there was no evidence from the children themselves aged 14 and 12,
    and the contact consisted of calls,  cards  and  gifts.  There  was  no
    evidence that the children had suffered as a consequence of his absence
    but their emotional development had been adversely affected.

26. In conclusion he submitted the grounds amount to  a  disagreement  with
    the findings of fact made by the judge. It is not said that  the  judge
    misunderstood any of the evidence that in essence  disagreed  with  the
    conclusions. He further submitted that the case now put by  Miss  Atcha
    on behalf of the appellant was that the judge had not  applied  Chavez-
    Vilchez but that was not reflected in the determination.

Discussion:

27. The issue that the judge  was  required  to  resolve  was  whether  the
    appellant was the primary carer of the two children  and  whether  they
    would have to leave the UK if the appellant's application for a  family
    permit under the regulations was unsuccessful. The judge noted that  it
    was clear that the appellant had  made  an  application  for  a  family
    permit relying on EEA rights and  his  relationship  with  his  British
    children.

28. The judge reminded herself of the 2006 regulations which  set  out  the
    relevant criteria to be satisfied as confirmed in the case of Zambrano.
    The judge also found the children's mother was an "exempt" person under
    regulation 16 (7) and thus the appellant  could  not  succeed  with  an
    argument under the regulations that he shared  parental  responsibility
    with the mother of the children. He must show that he  is  the  primary
    carer. Further on in the determination the judge made reference to  the
    decision of Chavez-Vilchez (as cited) at paragraphs 21 onwards, and the
    necessary assessment of whether there was a relationship of  dependency
    between the third country national parent and the relevant child and so
    taking into account the best interests of the child concerned including
    the age, the children's physical and emotional development, the  extent
    of their emotional ties to the EU parent and a third  country  national
    parent and the risks which separation from the latter might entail  for
    the child's equilibrium.

29. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant the judge failed to make  an
    assessment of the best interests of the children  and  the  parents  as
    referred to in the decision of Chavez-Vilchez. Miss Atcha did not refer
    the Tribunal to the decision itself or any part of  that  judgment  but
    relied upon the generalised submissions in relation to the decision.

30.  To consider those submissions it is necessary to set out the  findings
    of fact made by the judge and the  nature  of  the  evidence  that  was
    before her.

31. The findings of fact can be summarised as follows:

          1. It was undisputed that  the  children  had  lived  with  their
             mother since their birth and without any physical contact with
             the appellant since his removal in 2010 nearly 7 years ago.

          2. The parties separated in 2005 and  the  children  stayed  with
             their mother.

          3. In a decision dismissing the appellant's  previous  appeal  in
             2009 his relationship with the children was described  as  "so
             remote that it is not a  relationship  that  necessitates  his
             living in the UK but is one that could  be  maintained  at  an
             equivalent level by visits, telephone calls and letters."

          4. The appellant does not provide for the family financially.

          5. The appellant has not arranged for the children to  visit  him
             in Pakistan, with or without their mother.

          6. It had not been argued that he had unsuccessfully applied  for
             entry clearance to visit them in the UK.

          7. It is clear that the children's mother is their primary carer.

          8. When the appellant was removed in 2010 it did  not  cause  the
             children to leave the EU.

          9. There is no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  family  are  now
             considering sending them to live with their father as they are
             unable to continue living in the EU without him.

         10. It had been argued in the appeal  that  it  would  be  in  the
             children's best interests they were looked after by both their
             parents.

         11. Applying the decision in Chavez-Vilchez  C-133/15,  the  judge
             considered the best interests test, the burden  being  on  the
             appellant to provide evidence. The judge found that there  was
             a "striking lack of evidence in this appeal to  show  that  it
             would be contrary to the children's  best  interests  for  the
             application to be refused. Although there was  no  documentary
             evidence of  contact,  save  the  witness  statements,  it  is
             accepted that they talked their father  on  the  telephone  at
             weekends at their grandparents. There was no evidence from the
             children themselves regarding their  relationship  with  their
             father despite them now being age 14 and 12."

         12. The judge found that for the last seven years, the  extent  of
             the children's relationship with the  father  has  consist  of
             calls, cards and occasional gifts.

         13. The appellant had not  provided  evidence  to  show  that  the
             children had suffered as a consequence of his absence  or,  as
             referred to in Chavez-Vilchez that their emotional development
             had been adversely  affected  or  their  equilibrium  will  be
             disturbed if the appeal was rejected.

         14. The judge noted that if he were granted a  family  permit,  he
             would not reside with the children and there is no  indication
             that he would become their primary carer  in  place  of  their
             mother.

         15. In conclusion, the judge was not satisfied that the  appellant
             was the children's primary carer or that they would be  unable
             to reside in the UK if the  appellant  was  refused  a  family
             permit and that he did not meet the criteria of regulation  16
             (4A).

         16. The judge found that the children's best  interests,  applying
             section 55 of the 2007 Act, had  been  considered  within  the
             context of regulation 16 are set out in the decision of Chavez-
             Vilchez.

         17. The judge noted that the  appellant  could  apply  for  family
             permit seeking recognition of his EEA rights and thus  in  the
             light of the decision of Amirteymour and others (EEA  appeals;
             human rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC) article 8 rights  had  not
             been considered independently of the EA issues raised.

32. In the decision of Chavez-Vilchez and others v Raad van Bestuur van  de
    Sociale verzekeringsbank and  others  (case  C-133/15)  the  CJEU  were
    considering the circumstances in which a Dutch national child would, in
    practice be forced to leave the Netherlands and hence the  EU,  if  the
    right of residence was refused to their third country national mothers.
    The CJEU held that it was important to determine which parent  was  the
    primary carer of the child and whether there was in fact a relationship
    of dependency between the child  and  that  parent.  As  part  of  that
    assessment the authorities would take into account the right to respect
    family life as per Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be
    read in conjunction with the obligation to take into consideration  the
    best interests of the child. That the other parent,  a  union  citizen,
    was actually able and willing to take responsibility for the child  was
    a relevant factor, but it was not a sufficient ground for a  conclusion
    that there was not, as between the child and the  third-party  national
    parent, such a relationship of dependency the  child  would  indeed  be
    compelled to leave the EU if the third-party national were refused  the
    right of residence. Such an assessment must take into account the  best
    interests of  the  child  concerned,  all  the  specific  circumstances
    including the age of the child,  the  child's  physical  and  emotional
    development, the extent of his emotional ties to both parents  and  the
    risks which separation from the third country parent might  entail  for
    the child equilibrium. Although the burden of proof was  on  the  third
    country national to prove that a refusal of the right of residence  and
    oblige the child  to  leave  the  EU,  it  is  the  competent  national
    authorities to undertake on the basis of the evidence provided  by  the
    third country national the  necessary  enquiries  in  order  to  be  to
    assess, in light of all the circumstances, whether  the  refusal  would
    oblige the child to leave the EU.

33. In my judgment it is plain that the FTTJ properly applied the test  set
    out in the decision of Chavez-Vilchez which she set  out  at  paragraph
    [21] of the determination. On the findings of fact made which  were  in
    accordance with the evidence, she found there to be no evidence of  any
    relationship of dependency between the third  country  national  parent
    (the appellant) and the relevant children. The earlier findings of fact
    set out in the decision of the  judge  in  2009  demonstrate  that  the
    parties had separated in or about  2005  (when  the  eldest  child  was
    approximately two and the other child had recently been born in  2005).
    At the time of the hearing in 2009 the  judge  found  the  relationship
    between the children and the appellant to be  "remote".  Following  his
    removal in 2010, the children of  had  no  physical  contact  with  the
    appellant and the evidence before the judge demonstrated that the  only
    contact that there  had  been  was  by  way  of  telephone  calls  (see
    paragraph [23]).  The  judge  accepted  that  he  has  sent  cards  and
    occasional gifts although no evidence had been presented of this during
    the appeal (see paragraph [10]). The appellant did not provide for  the
    family financially and they had not visited him  in  Pakistan  with  or
    without their mother. Nor had the appellant visited  them  in  the  UK.
    There was no evidence of any financial or emotional dependency upon the
    appellant by the appellant's former partner or  any  of  the  children.
    Importantly, there was also no evidence that the appellant  shared  the
    care of the children as was asserted during the hearing.  The  evidence
    before the Tribunal was that the mother of the children  was  not  only
    responsible for their day-to-day care but also decision-making relating
    to their upbringing (see paragraph [12]).

34. Contrary to the submission made by Miss Atcha the  judge  did  consider
    the best interests of the children as set out in the  determination  of
    paragraphs [22-24] and made express reference to S55 of the  2007  Act.
    The judge  had  been  provided  with  little  evidence  concerning  the
    children themselves and as she  observed  at  [23]  there  had  been  a
    striking lack of evidence in the  appeal  to  show  that  it  would  be
    contrary to the children's best interests for  the  application  to  be
    refused. There had been no documentary evidence to support the level of
    contact  provided  by  the  appellant's  ex-partner  (see   [23])   and
    importantly despite the children's  ages  there  was  no  evidence  the
    children. The judge took into account whether  their  mother  may  have
    wished to shield them from any disappointment but  considered  that  it
    could have been properly addressed by her. There is no evidence to show
    that the children had suffered as a consequence of the absence of their
    father or that their emotional development had been adversely  affected
    or the equilibrium would be disturbed if the appeal was refused.  There
    was no extraneous evidence of any kind, not even school reports.

35. Against that evidential background I am satisfied that  the  judge  did
    properly consider the children's best interests and  the  circumstances
    of the respective adults concerned in line with the decision of Chavez-
    Vilchez. As the decision in Patel v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2028 sets out,
    the decision  in  Chavez-Vilchez  represented  no  departure  from  the
    principles of EU law laid down in Zambrano. As  Miss  Atcha  submitted,
    the decision referred to the right to respect for  private  and  family
    life laid down in Article 7 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and
    also the  obligation  to  take  into  consideration  the  child's  best
    interests which is recognising Article 24 (2)  the  Charter.  When  the
    determination is read as a whole, I am satisfied the judge properly had
    regard to those matters when reaching her overall decision.  I  am  not
    satisfied that the submissions made demonstrate any error of law in the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

36. The generalised grounds submitted by the appellant are,  as  Mr  Jarvis
    submits, are no more than a disagreement with the decision. They do not
    assert that the judge misunderstood the evidence but  simply  offers  a
    different view. The grounds  claim  that  the  appellant  was  actively
    involved in their lives and that they were of an age where they  needed
    supervision and guidance. Their mother was unable to keep up with their
    "needs and demands" and that his wife and children could not visit  and
    live with him  in  Pakistan  due  "to  their  serious  commitments  and
    specific circumstances". None of those assertions were the  subject  of
    any evidence before the FTT and on the findings of fact, there had been
    no evidence to show  they  required  the  appellant's  "supervision  or
    guidance" indeed to the contrary, the evidence of their mother was that
    she not only carried out their day  to  day  care  but  also  took  the
    decisions relating to their upbringing. Consequently the grounds do not
    demonstrate any error of law in the decision.

37. Miss Atcha did not advance any submissions relating to Article  8  save
    for those raised in relation to the decision of Chavez-Vilchez  as  set
    out above. However for the reasons set out by Mr Jarvis, it was open to
    the judge to reach the decision that the human rights  aspects  of  the
    decision could be considered within the context of the EEA  regulations
    (see paragraph [24] applying the decision of Amirteymour v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353).



Decision:

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The appeal is dismissed  and  the  decision
    shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 4/4/2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

