
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05083/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice, London  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                            Alla Nikclaieva Finn
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bonavera, instructed by Gross & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Alla Nikclaieva Finn, was born on 15 October 1973 and is
    a female citizen of Ukraine.  She appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Chana) against the decision of the respondent dated 11 May  2017
    to refuse to issue her with a residence card as the spouse of a British
    citizen (Regulation 9, Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006).  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on  11  July
    2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's  spouse,  Mr  Frederick  William  Finn,  is  a  British
    citizen.  There was no dispute that the appellant and her  husband  are
    in a genuine and subsisting marital relationship.  Judge Chana at [25],
    summarised the other agreed facts as follows:

         "There was no dispute that the appellant's British  citizen  spouse
         worked in Germany for three  months.   He  worked  as  a  freelance
         consultant for Quicket Travel Services.  They both lived in Ukraine
         for ten years prior to driving by  road  from  Ukraine  to  Berlin.
         There was no dispute that they rented accommodation in Berlin  from
         14 June until 13 September 2016.  The tenancy agreement states that
         they can extend their tenancy for another month until 13  September
         2016.  There was no dispute the appellant retained his residence in
         Surrey, rented property, in the United Kingdom during their stay in
         Germany.   There  was  no  dispute  the  appellant  was  granted  a
         residence card by the German authorities based on her  relationship
         with her British  citizen  husband.   There  was  no  dispute  they
         returned to the United Kingdom six weeks after it had  been  issued
         and three months after they went to Germany.  They then returned to
         the appellant's sponsor's rent address in Surrey which was where he
         lived before he went to Germany."

 3. The relevant part of the EEA Regulations is paragraph 9:

         'Family members of British citizens

         9.-(1) If the conditions in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,  these
         Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F")  of  a
         British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national.

         (2) The conditions are that-

         (a) BC-

         (i) is residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-employed  person,
         self-sufficient person or a  student,  or  so  resided  immediately
         before returning to the United Kingdom; or

         (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence in an EEA State;

         (b) F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

         (c) F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.

         (3) Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA  State  is  or
         was genuine include-

         (a) whether the centre of BC's life transferred to the EEA State;

         (b) the length of F and BC's joint residence in the EEA State;

         (c) the nature and quality of the F and BC's accommodation  in  the
         EEA State, and whether it is or was BC's principal residence;

         (d) the degree of F and BC's integration in the EEA State;

         (e) whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with BC was in the
         EEA State.

         (4) This regulation does not apply-

         (a) where the purpose of the residence in the EEA State  was  as  a
         means for circumventing any immigration laws  applying  to  non-EEA
         nationals to which F  would  otherwise  be  subject  (such  as  any
         applicable requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom); or

         (b) to a person who is only eligible to  be  treated  as  a  family
         member as a result of  regulation  7(3)  (extended  family  members
         treated as family members).

         (5) Where these Regulations apply to F, BC  is  to  be  treated  as
         holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for the purposes of
         the application of these Regulations to F.

         (6) In paragraph (2)(a)(ii), BC is only to  be  treated  as  having
         acquired the right of permanent residence in the EEA State if  such
         residence would have led to the acquisition  of  that  right  under
         regulation 15, had it taken place in the United Kingdom.

         (7) For the purposes of determining whether, when treating  the  BC
         as an EEA national  under  these  Regulations  in  accordance  with
         paragraph (1), BC would be a qualified person-

         (a) any requirement to have comprehensive sickness insurance  cover
         in the United Kingdom still applies, save that it does not  require
         the cover to extend to BC;

         (b) in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated as a  worker
         under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC  is  not  required  to  satisfy
         condition A;

         (c) in assessing whether BC  can  be  treated  as  a  jobseeker  as
         defined  in  regulation  6(1),  BC  is  not  required  to   satisfy
         conditions A and, where it would otherwise be  relevant,  condition
         C.'

 4. At [29], Judge Chana wrote:

         "I find that Regulation 9 is to prevent the mischief of  applicants
         from the countries outside the European  Union  from  entering  the
         United Kingdom via other EEA states and therefore being exempt from
         meeting the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  they
         otherwise would have to meet.  The question I have to determine  in
         this appeal is whether the appellant and her sponsor are  one  such
         couple who have contrived to  frustrate  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules."

 5. At [43], Judge Chana concluded that the appellant and her  husband  had
    contrived to frustrate the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   She
    drew attention to the fact that the couple have not spent a very  "long
    time in Germany".  She did not accept as credible  the  fact  that  the
    couple had  kept  a  rental  property  in  the  United  Kingdom  "as  a
    contingency plan in case [Mr Finn's] health took a turn for the worst".
     The judge noted that there was "no background  evidence  that  Germany
    does not have good medical  facilities".   The  judge  appeared  to  be
    unsatisfied [35] that the couple  could  maintain  properties  in  both
    Germany and the United Kingdom  simultaneously.   At  [42],  the  judge
    found that "the appellant and the sponsor  are  only  entitled  to  the
    benefits of EU law as married partners if the move to Germany  has  not
    been done to circumvent the requirements of the Immigration Rules."

 6. The judge has referred to the judgment of the CJEU in  Akrich  C-109/01
    at [61]:

         "In light of all the foregoing considerations,  the  reply  to  the
         questions raised should be that: -

         In order to be able to benefit in a situation such as that at issue
         in the main proceedings from the rights provided for in Article  10
         of Regulation No 1612/68, a national of a non-Member State  married
         to a citizen of the Union must be lawfully  resident  in  a  Member
         State when he moves to another Member State to which the citizen of
         the Union is migrating or has migrated. -

         Article 10 of Regulation No 1612/68 is  not  applicable  where  the
         national of a Member State and the national of a  non-Member  State
         have entered into a marriage of convenience in order to  circumvent
         the provisions relating to entry and residence of nationals of non-
         Member States. I - 9689 JUDGMENT OF 23. 9. 2003 - CASE C-109/01 -

         Where the marriage between a national  of  a  Member  State  and  a
         national of a non-Member  State  is  genuine,  the  fact  that  the
         spouses installed themselves in another Member State in  order,  on
         their return to the Member State of which the former is a national,
         to obtain the benefit of rights conferred by Community law  is  not
         relevant to an assessment of their legal situation by the competent
         authorities of the latter State. -

         Where a national of a Member State married to a national of a  non-
         Member State with whom  she  is  living  in  another  Member  State
         returns to the Member State of which she is a national in order  to
         work there as an employed person and, at the time  of  her  return,
         her spouse does not enjoy the rights provided for in Article 10  of
         Regulation No 1612/68 because he has not resided  lawfully  on  the
         territory of a Member State, the competent authorities of the first-
         mentioned Member State, in assessing the application by the  spouse
         to enter and remain in that Member State, must none the  less  have
         regard to the right to respect for family life under Article  8  of
         the Convention, provided that the marriage is genuine."

    Mr Bonavera, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that Judge Chana
    had completely ignored the authority of  Akrich  which  indicated  that
    motivation was irrelevant to application for a residence card  made  on
    Surinder Singh principles.  Mr Wilding, for  the  Secretary  of  State,
    relied on the decision of the CJEU in O and B C-456/12 (12 March 2014).
     In particular at [58]:

         "It should be added that the scope of Union law cannot be  extended
         to cover abuses (see, to that effect, Case C-110/99  Emsland-St�rke
         [2000] ECR I-11569, paragraph 51, and Case C-303/08 Bozkurt  [2010]
         ECR I-13445, paragraph 47). Proof of such an abuse requires, first,
         a combination of objective circumstances in which,  despite  formal
         observance of the conditions laid down by the European Union rules,
         the purpose of those rules has not been achieved, and, secondly,  a
         subjective  element  consisting  in  the  intention  to  obtain  an
         advantage from the European Union rules  by  artificially  creating
         the conditions laid down for obtaining it (Case C-364/10 Hungary  v
         Slovakia [2012] ECR, paragraph 58)."

    On the face of it, there appears to be a tension between  the  judgment
    in O and B  and            Akrich.   However,  as  the  Court  in  both
    judgments  noted,  that  these  cases  are  very  fact-sensitive.   The
    underlying law is contained in Directive 2004/38:

         'Article 1 of Directive 2004/38 provides:

         This Directive lays down:

         (a)      the conditions governing the exercise of the right of free
         movement and residence within the territory of the Member States by
         Union citizens and their family members;

         ...'

         4        Under  the  heading  'Definitions',  Article  2  of  that
         directive provides:

         'For the purposes of this Directive:

         1.      "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of
         a Member State;

         2.      "family member" means:

         (a)      the spouse;

         ...

         3.      "host Member State" means the Member State to which a Union
         citizen moves in order to exercise his/her right of  free  movement
         and residence.'

         5        Article  3  of  that  directive,   which   is   entitled
         'Beneficiaries', provides in paragraph 1 thereof:

         'This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to  or
         reside in a Member State other  than  that  of  which  they  are  a
         national, and to their family members as defined in [Article  2(2)]
         who accompany or join them.'

         6        Article 6 of Directive 2004/38 states:

         '1.      Union citizens shall have the right of residence  on  the
         territory of another Member State for  a  period  of  up  to  three
         months ...

         2.      The provisions of paragraph 1 shall also apply  to  family
         members in possession of a valid passport who are not nationals  of
         a Member State, accompanying or joining the Union citizen.'

         7        Article 7(1) and (2)  of  that  directive  is  worded  as
         follows:

         '1.      All Union citizens shall have the right of  residence  on
         the territory of another Member State for a period of  longer  than
         three months if they:

         (a)      are workers or self-employed persons in the  host  Member
         State; or

         (b)      have sufficient resources for themselves and their family
         members not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of
         the host Member State during their period  of  residence  and  have
         comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member State; or

         (c)      -      are enrolled at a private or public establishment,
         accredited or financed by the host Member State on the basis of its
         legislation or administrative practice, for the  principal  purpose
         of following a course of study, including vocational training; and

         -      have comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  in  the  host
         Member State and assure the relevant national authority,  by  means
         of a declaration or by such equivalent means as  they  may  choose,
         that they have sufficient resources for themselves and their family
         members not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of
         the host Member State during their period of residence; or

         (d)      are family members accompanying or joining a Union citizen
         who satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b) or (c).

         2.      The right of residence provided for in paragraph  1  shall
         extend to family members who are not nationals of a  Member  State,
         accompanying or joining the Union citizen in the host Member State,
         provided that such Union citizen satisfies the conditions  referred
         to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c).'

         8        Article 10(1) of that directive provides:

         'The right of residence of family members of a  Union  citizen  who
         are not nationals of a Member  State  shall  be  evidenced  by  the
         issuing of a document called "Residence card of a family member  of
         a Union citizen" no later than six months from the  date  on  which
         they submit the application. A certificate of application  for  the
         residence card shall be issued immediately.'

         9        Under Article 16(1), first sentence, of Directive 2004/38,
         'Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period of
         five years in the  host  Member  State  shall  have  the  right  of
         permanent   residence   there'.   Article   16(2)   provides   that
         '[p]aragraph 1 shall apply also  to  family  members  who  are  not
         nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with the Union
         citizen in the host Member State for a continuous  period  of  five
         years'.'

    It is important also to examine the questions which the Court was asked
    to resolve in O and B:

         In those circumstances the Raad  van  State  decided  to  stay  the
         proceedings and to refer the following questions to  the  Court  of
         Justice for a preliminary ruling, the  first  three  of  which  are
         formulated in the same terms in the cases of Mr O. and Mr B.,  with
         only the fourth question specific to the case of Mr B.:

         '(1)      Should Directive 2004/38 ..., as regards  the  conditions
         governing the right of residence of members  of  the  family  of  a
         Union citizen who have third-country  nationality,  be  applied  by
         analogy, as in the  judgments  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
         European Communities in [Singh and in Eind], where a Union  citizen
         returns to the Member State of which he is a national after  having
         resided in another Member State in the  context  of  Article  21(1)
         [TFEU], and as the recipient of  services  within  the  meaning  of
         Article 56 [TFEU]?

         (2)      [If the first question is answered in the affirmative], is
         there a requirement that the residence  of  the  Union  citizen  in
         another Member State must have been of a certain  minimum  duration
         if, after the return of the Union citizen to the  Member  State  of
         which he is a national, the member of his family who  is  a  third-
         country national wishes to gain a right of residence in that Member
         State?

         (3)      [If the second question is answered in  the  affirmative],
         can that requirement then also be met if there was no  question  of
         continuous  residence,  but  rather  of  a  certain  frequency   of
         residence, such as during weekly residence at  weekends  or  during
         regular visits?

         (4)      As a result of the time which elapsed between  the  return
         of the Union citizen to the Member State of which he is a  national
         and the arrival of the family member from a third country  in  that
         Member State, in circumstances  such  as  those  of  the  ...  case
         [concerning Mr B.], has there been a lapse of possible  entitlement
         of the family member with third-country nationality to a  right  of
         residence derived from Union law?'

 7. Question (3) refers to the requirement for residence in the Host Member
    State and queries whether an abuse of the law may occur if there is "no
    question of continuous residence but rather  ...  weekly  residence  at
    weekends or during regular visits".  In my opinion, the context of this
    question is important in understanding the Court's  comments  at  [58].
    In that paragraph, the Court speaks of "the  purpose  of  those  Rules"
    having not been "achieved".  Given the factual matrix in O  and  B  and
    the questions before the Court, the purpose in question  was  the  free
    movement of members within the EU, together with their family  members,
    and the acknowledgement of their rights of residence by the issue of  a
    residence card after a period of three months.  In O and B,  the  facts
    were that the individuals concerned were visiting a  residence  in  the
    Host Member State and thereby potentially  "artificially  creating  the
    conditions laid down for obtaining"  an  advantage  from  the  European
    Union Rules.  In the instant appeal, I agree with Mr Bonavera that  the
    factual matrix is quite different.  The appellant and her husband  have
    lived for the required period in Germany and her husband has worked  in
    the country during that time.  Residence cards have been issued by  the
    German authorities so, to that extent, "the purpose of those Rules has"
    been achieved.  The appellant and her  husband  did  not  "artificially
    create" the conditions for obtaining an advantage  under  the  European
    Union Rules; they fulfilled those conditions by residing and working in
    Germany.  I agree with Mr Bonavera's submission that the focus  of  the
    Tribunal in cases such as these should be upon what actually occurs  in
    the  Host  Member  State.   If  what  occurs  is  plainly  some  device
    (maintaining an address and only visiting and then  infrequently)  then
    the abuse identified by the Court in O and B at [58]  may  be  evident.
    That was not the case in the instant  appeal.   What  the  judgment  in
    Akrich shows is that the motivation of the individuals concerned is not
    relevant.  In other words, if the primary motivation of  the  appellant
    and her husband in moving to Germany and the husband working there  for
    a period of time was that the couple would then be able to relocate  to
    the United Kingdom then  that  is  not  a  factor  in  determining  the
    "genuineness" of their conduct.

 8. I find that Judge Chana has erred in law  by  failing  to  engage  with
    these issues and to resolve them.  The "question" which the  judge  had
    to determine in the appeal was not "whether the appellant  and  sponsor
    are one such couple who have contrived to frustrate the requirements of
    the  Immigration  Rules",  but,  rather,   whether,   irrespective   of
    motivation, the couple were in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship,
    had resided in the Host Member State for the requisite period whilst Mr
    Finn was exercising Treaty Rights as a  worker.   On  the  judge's  own
    findings of fact,  those  requirements  were  fulfilled.   The  judge's
    assessment of the couple's  "legal  situation"  (see  Akrich)  did  not
    require her to seek out "mischief" as it appears she believed to be the
    case.

 9. Although I reserved my decision, I briefly discussed with the advocates
    the matter of disposal in the event that I found  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law such that her decision fell to be set aside.  In the light
    of the judge's findings at [25] (see above) both representatives agreed
    that the decision could be remade allowing the appeal.  I agree.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  11
    July 2018 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.   The  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's decision dated 11 May 2017 is  allowed.



11. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 12 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

