
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05215/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd August 2019                  |On 2nd September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                         MR OLUBUNMI OLAWUNMI SHITTU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cuna, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He appeals against the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Taylor promulgated on
      26th March 2019, dismissing his appeal against a decision to refuse to
      issue an EEA Residence Card as the family member of an EEA national
      exercising treaty rights in the UK in accordance with Regulation 7 of
      the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016
      Regulations").


   2. The appellant had claimed a right to reside in the UK as the family
      member of an EEA national. The appellant claims that he is the spouse
      of an Italian national, [NW], and that their marriage took place by
      proxy in Nigeria on 16th February 2017.  In refusing the application
      made by the appellant the respondent, in a decision dated 19th July
      2018, referred to the marriage certificate and sworn affidavit of the
      appellant's mother, but concluded that the evidence provided does not
      confirm that the appellant's proxy marriage was performed and
      registered legally in Nigeria.  The respondent did not believe that
      the evidence produced was sufficient to establish that the appellant
      is married according to Nigerian law.  The respondent was therefore
      unable to confirm that the appellant is a family member of her EEA
      sponsor.


The decision of the FtT


   3. The appellant gave evidence before the FtT as set out at paragraphs
      [9] to [10] of the decision. The appellant maintained that he had
      married his sponsor on 16th February 2017 in accordance with Ogun
      State laws and customs, and the marriage was registered on 5th June
      2017. He claimed that the marriage was registered in Ijebu North Local
      Government Council as stated on the 'Certificate of Registration of
      Traditional Marriage', in accordance with marriage laws, and by a
      competent officer. The appellant accepted that neither he nor his
      sponsor were present at the marriage, but his evidence was that the
      parents of both parties were present, and that the marriage
      certificate was issued by the local government area where his parents
      were from.


   4. The FtT judge referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Awuku
      -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178 and noted that in the law of England and
      Wales, the general rule is that the formal validity of a marriage is
      governed by the law of the country where the marriage was celebrated
      ("the lex loci celebrationis").  A marriage by proxy will be treated
      as valid in England, if recognised by the local law, even if one of
      the parties is domiciled and resident in England.


   5. At paragraph [14] of his decision, the FtT judge states as follows:


           "... It is for the appellant to demonstrate that the marriage
           certificate was issued by a proper competent authority, and
           reliable independent evidence was required to show that the
           marriage could be recognised in the country in which it took
           place. Kareem advised that mere assertions as to the legal
           position would carry very little weight."


   6. At paragraph [15] of the decision, the FtT judge referred to the
      Certificate of Registration of Traditional Marriage that was relied
      upon by the appellant.  The judge stated:


           "... In this appeal the appellant has submitted a certificate of
           registration of a traditional marriage but has submitted no
           evidence that this marriage would be recognised in Nigeria in
           the same way as a civil marriage. The appellant has stated that
           neither of the parties were present at the marriage but has
           submitted no evidence that such a proxy marriage would be
           recognised. At the hearing, the appellant's representative
           submitted a constitution document showing that a local
           government may register marriages, but the document is silent on
           the matter of proxy marriages. It was submitted that the Home
           Office guidance advised that proxy marriages were accepted as
           valid in the UK, but this was on the proviso that there (sic)
           were recognised in the country which they took place. It was
           submitted that the COIS report on Nigeria advised that proxy
           marriages were recognised, but the COIS report was not in the
           appellant's bundle, there are several COIS reports on Nigeria
           and the representative did not specify which COIS report
           applied. Some countries allow proxies with one party present,
           some with non-present, and some have residence requirements on
           the party who is present. The appellant has submitted no
           documentary evidence showing that a marriage with no party
           present is recognised in Nigeria, and in the absence of any
           evidence in support of his assertion that the marriage is valid,
           I cannot be satisfied that the marriage would (sic) recognised
           in Nigeria. If the marriage is not recognised in Nigeria, it
           would not be recognised in the UK for the purposes of EEA
           Regulations"


The appeal before the Upper Tribunal


   7. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First, in reaching the
      decision that he could not be satisfied that the marriage was valid
      under Nigerian law, the FtT judge failed to consider the registration
      documents that the appellant had provided as evidence of the validity
      of his marriage, and failed to consider the COI report dated 14th June
      2013 that was expressly referred to in paragraph [4] of the written
      skeleton argument.  That report confirms that proxy marriages are
      valid in Nigeria. Second, the FtT judge erred in proceeding upon the
      premise that there was no right of appeal against a decision under
      Regulation 8 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
      2016.


   8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith on 19th
      July 2019.   The matter comes before us to consider whether or not the
      decision of FtT Judge Taylor involved the making of a material error
      of law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


Discussion


   9. We deal first with the second ground of appeal relating to the right
      of appeal for 'Extended Family Members' of EEA nationals.  At the
      hearing before us, Mr Nwaekwu did not pursue that second ground.  He
      was right not to do so. As FtT Judge Taylor sets out at paragraphs [7]
      and [8] of his decision, the 2016 Regulations in their original form
      had removed the right of appeal for extended family members, and
      although the respondent had indicated that legislation was to be
      introduced to reinstate the right of appeal for extended family
      members, a right of appeal did not exist as at the date of the hearing
      before the FtT. The representatives had agreed that there was no right
      of appeal for extended family members and the judge proceeded on that
      basis.  Regulation 36(1) of the 2016 Regulations provides that "The
      subject of an EEA decision may appeal against that decision under
      these Regulations".  An "EEA decision" was defined in Regulation 2 of
      the 2016 Regulations as in force as at the date of the hearing of the
      appeal, and the date upon which the decision was promulgated, as
      follows:


           "EEA decision" means a decision under these Regulations that
           concerns-


           (a)    a person's entitlement to be admitted to the United
           Kingdom;


           (b)    a person's entitlement to be issued with or have renewed,
           or not to have revoked, a  registration  certificate,  residence
           card, derivative residence card, document  certifying  permanent
           residence or permanent residence card (but does  not  include  a
           decision that an application  for  the  above  documentation  is
           invalid);


           (c)    a person's removal from the United Kingdom; or


           (d)    the cancellation, under  regulation  25,  of  a  person's
           right to reside in the United Kingdom,


           but does not include a decision to refuse to  issue  a  document
           under regulation 12(4) (issue of an  EEA  family  permit  to  an
           extended  family  member),  17(5)  (issue  of   a   registration
           certificate to an extended family member) or 18(4) (issue  of  a
           residence card to an extended  family  member),  a  decision  to
           reject an application under regulation 26(4) (misuse of a  right
           to reside: material change of circumstances), or  any  decisions
           under regulation 33 (human  rights  considerations  and  interim
           orders to suspend removal) or 41 (temporary admission to  submit
           case in person);


  10. It was not until 28th March 2019, that the exclusion of an appeal
      against a decision to refuse to issue a document under regulations
      12(4), 17(5) or 18(4) to an extended family member, was revoked by the
      Immigration (European Economic Area Nationals) (EU Exit) Regulations
      2019/468 (Part 3 reg.3(2).  As at the date of the hearing before the
      FtT, and the date upon which the decision was promulgated, the
      appellant was not "the subject of an EEA decision", and quite
      properly, as set out at paragraph [8] of the judge's decision, the
      parties agreed that there was no right of appeal for extended family
      members and the appeal therefore proceeded as an appeal against a
      decision to refuse to issue the appellant with a residence card, to
      confirm that he is the family member of an EEA national under
      Regulation 7 of the 2016 Regulations.


  11. Turning to the validity of the marriage, the FtT judge noted, at [14],
      that it is for the appellant to demonstrate that the marriage
      certificate relied upon by the appellant was issued by a proper
      competent authority, and reliable independent evidence was required to
      show that the marriage would be recognised in Nigeria. At paragraph
      [15], the FtT judge noted that in this appeal the appellant has
      submitted a certificate of registration of a traditional marriage but
      had submitted no evidence that his marriage would be recognised in
      Nigeria in the same way as a civil marriage.


  12. We accept that the FtT Judge erroneously refers to a failure by the
      appellant's representatives to specify the COIS report relied upon.
      The Judge was however right to note that a copy had not been provided
      to the Tribunal.  The Nigeria Country of Origin Information Report
      dated 14th June 2013 is referred to in the appellant's skeleton
      argument. An extract of the relevant section was handed to us by Mr
      Nwaekwu.  We pause to note that a party relying upon background
      material in support of a proposition must ensure that the relevant
      material is before the Tribunal. Tribunal Judge's cannot be criticised
      for failing to consider material that has not been provided to the
      Tribunal.  The 'Nigeria Country of Origin Information (COI) Report
      published on 14th June 2013, that is referred to at paragraph [4] of
      the appellant's skeleton argument states:


           Proxy marriage


           Users should note that sources quoted below appeared to  provide
           inconsistent information on the legal status of proxy  marriages
           in Nigeria.


           23.26  The US  State  Department  Reciprocity  Schedule,  in  an
           undated  section  on  marriage  certificates  in  the   country,
           accessed 4 December 2012, recorded that: ?...  both  parties  to
           the marriage technically must be physically present at the  same
           location with witnesses  to  sign  certain  marriage  documents,
           proxy marriages have ceased to be valid but still occur.' [3e]


           23.27  However a letter from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
           to the UK Border Agency of 1  February  2013,  provided  by  the
           British  High  Commission  following  consultation  with   their
           honorary legal adviser, observed in response  to  the  following
           questions:(bold added):


           'Are proxy marriages recognised as being legal  by  the  Federal
           Government of Nigeria?


           Proxy marriage is a fairly common practice  amongst  communities
           in Nigeria. It is recognised under Nigerian customary law  as  a
           form of customary law marriage. A marriage is by proxy where the
           presence of the bride and groom is not required at the ceremony.
           In most cases, it is celebrated by the  immediate  and  extended
           family of the bride and groom ...  Proxy  marriages  find  their
           origin in the fact that under customary law, marriage creates  a
           relationship not only between the parties to  the  marriage  but
           also between their families. ?


           'Because  customary  law  marriages  are  legally  binding   and
           recognised as one of the types of marriages in  Nigeria,  "proxy
           marriages" which form part of customary law marriages  are  also
           legally binding where celebrated in accordance with  the  native
           law and custom of the particular community.


           'If proxy marriages are legal, what process is followed in order
           to obtain legal recognition of the marriage? ?


           One of the functions of  local  governments  in  Nigeria  is  to
           register all marriages. This  is  provided  for  in  the  Fourth
           Schedule to the 1999 Constitution of  the  Federal  Republic  of
           Nigeria. As a result, some local governments  have  byelaws  for
           the registration of  customary  law  marriages...Some  of  these
           byelaws make registration of customary law marriages  compulsory
           and prescribe a penalty for failure to register  such  marriage.
           In addition to the foregoing, the Birth, Deaths etc  (Compulsory
           Registration) Act Cap.B9, Laws of  the  Federation  of  Nigeria,
           2004 (the -Act) also stipulates that a customary law marriage be
           registered within  a  specific  period  after  its  celebration.
           Specifically, section 30 of the Act provides as follows: ?


           "Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  any  enactment  every
           customary marriage is to be registered within sixty (60) days in
           the area  court  or  customary  court  where  the  marriage  was
           contracted."


           'The foregoing provision of the Act  presupposes  the  statutory
           and therefore legal recognition of customary law marriages.  The
           Honorary Legal Adviser is  therefore  of  the  opinion  that  so
           called -proxy marriages, as an aspect of customary law marriage,
           are legal; and legal recognition is conferred by registration in
           an area or customary court. [2c]."


  13. There was no expert evidence before the FtT judge as to the legal
      status of proxy marriages in Nigeria, in particular if all proxy
      marriages are legal, the process to be followed to ensure that there
      is legal recognition of the marriage.


  14. Mr Nwaekwu submits that the 'Certificate of Registration of
      Traditional Marriage' that was relied upon by the applicant was issued
      by a Registrar of marriage, in the relevant Local Government Council
      of Ogun State.  He submits that the very fact that the certificate was
      issued, is evidence of a marriage that is recognised as a valid
      marriage in Nigeria.  We disagree.  It is immediately apparent from
      the COI report that was relied upon by the appellant that there is
      inconsistent information on the legal status of proxy marriages in
      Nigeria, but on at least one authoritative view, "proxy marriages",
      which form part of customary law marriages are legally binding where
      celebrated in accordance with the native law and custom of the
      particular community. As to the process to be followed in order to
      obtain legal recognition of the marriage, it appears that some local
      governments have bye-laws for the registration of customary law
      marriages and some of these bye-laws, make registration of customary
      law marriages compulsory and prescribe a penalty for failure to
      register such marriage. In addition there appears to be a statutory
      obligation under s30 of the Birth, Deaths etc (Compulsory
      Registration) Act Cap B9, Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 2004 that
      every customary marriage is to be registered within sixty days in the
      area court or customary court where the marriage was contracted.


  15. At paragraphs [8] to [12] and [15] to [27] of the appellant's skeleton
      argument before the FtT, the author makes assertions as to Nigerian
      customary law and the recognition of a proxy marriage that is
      permissible under Nigerian customary law, as a valid marriage. The
      author however discloses no expertise to assist the Tribunal upon
      matters relating to Nigerian customary law or the requirements to
      establish a valid marriage.


  16. We make no observations as to whether all proxy marriages are capable
      of being recognised as a valid marriage in Nigeria.  There is simply
      insufficient evidence before us to reach an informed view.  We do
      however observe that even on the very limited information set out in
      the 'Nigeria Country of Origin Information (COI) Report published on
      14th June 2013, there appear to be two pre-requisites to a marriage by
      proxy being recognised as a valid marriage in Nigeria.  First, the
      marriage must be celebrated in accordance with the native law and
      custom of the particular community where it takes place.  It appears
      that the appellant is of Yoruba ethnicity.  Before the FtT Judge there
      was an Affidavit of marriage signed by the appellant's mother.  She
      states "... all cultural requirements and marriage rites were observed
      and witnessed by a select group of elders community ...".  There was
      no expert evidence before the FtT as to the requirements for the
      celebration of a marriage within the Yoruba community so that the
      tribunal judge could be satisfied that the marriage was celebrated in
      accordance with the native law and custom of the Yoruba community.
      Second, there appears to be a requirement for the marriage to be
      registered in accordance with the laws of Nigeria, whether Federal or
      in accordance with local government byelaws.  It is apparent from the
      limited information that was before the FtT, that notwithstanding
      anything contained in any other enactment, every customary marriage is
      to be registered within sixty days in the area court or customary
      court where the marriage was contracted.


  17. On any view, this second requirement is in our judgment fatal to the
      appellant's appeal.  We drew Mr Nwaekwu's attention to the
      'Certificate of Registration' that was before the FtT judge.  The
      certificate confirms the date of marriage to be 16th February 2017,
      but the date of registration is said to be 5th June 2017.  That is
      plainly outside the 60-day requirement for registration.  Furthermore,
      the registration appears to have been by a registrar of marriage in
      Ijebu North Local Government Council in Ijebu Igbo Division of Ogun
      State of Nigeria, rather than in the area Court or Customary Court
      where the marriage was contracted, as appears to be required by
      Nigerian Law.


  18. Although the FtT Judge did not refer to the COI report that was relied
      upon by the appellant, it is clear that it was in the end open to the
      Judge to conclude, as he did at [15]:


           "...In the absence of any evidence in support of his assertion
           that the marriage is valid, I cannot be satisfied that the
           marriage would (sic) recognised in Nigeria. If the marriage is
           not recognised in Nigeria, it would not be recognised in the UK
           for the purposes of EEA Regulations"


  19. This appeal demonstrates the particular need for a party relying upon
      a marriage by proxy to ensure that there is adequate evidence before
      the decision maker that establishes on the balance of probabilities,
      that the marriage is valid and recognised by the law of the country
      where the marriage is celebrated ("the lex loci celebrationis").  In
      Kareem [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal confirmed that a
      document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not raise a
      presumption of the marriage it purports to record, unless it has been
      issued by an authority with legal power to create or confirm the facts
      it attests. Furthermore, the tribunal confirmed that it should be
      assumed that, without independent and reliable evidence about the
      recognition of the marriage under the laws of the country where the
      marriage took place, the tribunal is likely to be unable to find that
      sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of
      proof. Mere production of legal materials from the country where the
      marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because they will
      rarely show how such law is understood or applied in those countries.
      Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for similar
      reasons, carry no weight.   The observations made by the tribunal as
      to the evidential requirements Kareem remain undisturbed by the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in Awuku -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178.
       We take this opportunity to reaffirm the guidance provided in Kareem:


             a. A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who is a
                qualified person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of
                free movement and residence if proof of the marital
                relationship is provided.


             b. The production of a marriage certificate issued by a
                competent authority (that is, issued according to the
                registration laws of the country where the marriage took
                place) will usually be sufficient.  If not in English (or
                Welsh in relation to proceedings in Wales), a certified
                translation of the marriage certificate will be required.


             c. A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will
                not raise a presumption of the marriage it purports to
                record unless it has been issued by an authority with legal
                power to create or confirm the facts it attests.


             d. In appeals where there is no such marriage certificate or
                where there is doubt that a marriage certificate has been
                issued by a competent authority, then the marital
                relationship may be proved by other evidence.  This will
                require the Tribunal to determine whether a marriage was
                contracted.


             e. It should be assumed that, without independent and reliable
                evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the
                laws of the country where the marriage took place, the
                Tribunal is likely to be unable to find that sufficient
                evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.
                 Mere production of legal materials from the country where
                the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence
                because they will rarely show how such law is understood or
                applied in those countries. Mere assertions as to the effect
                of such laws will, for similar reasons, carry no weight.


  20. Upon a proper application of the principles here, it is the paucity of
      evidence confirming there to be a valid marriage under Nigerian law,
      that in the end, caused the appeal to be dismissed by the FtT judge.
      It was in our judgment open to the FtT judge to conclude that in the
      absence of any evidence in support of the appellant's assertion that
      the marriage is valid, the judge could not be satisfied that the
      marriage would be recognised in Nigeria.





Decision:


  21. The appeal is dismissed.


  22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material
      error of law and the decision of FtT Judge Taylor shall stand.


  23. No aanonymity direction was made by the FtT.


Signed                                  Date          23rd August 2019


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date          23rd August 2019



 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
