
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/05894/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 7th October 2019                  |On 15th October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                 Tarek Ahmed
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Gill, Gill Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born in 1985. He appeals with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Monaghan)  to  dismiss  his  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


 2. The  Appellant  seeks  confirmation  of  a  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 8. He claims to be a dependent 'extended' family member of a
    man named Md Arju Miah, whom he claims to be his uncle.   Mr Miah is  a
    national of Portugal who now lives in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused to grant a residence card. In a  decision  dated
    the 3rd May 2016 the Respondent concluded that the Appellant  (and  his
    dependent wife and child) had failed to supply sufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate that  they  were  related  to  Mr  Miah  as  claimed.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Monaghan) it
    had regard to the various birth certificates supplied by the Appellant.
     These showed that the Appellant's grandmother is called  Comola  Bibi,
    and his grandfather is  called  Md  Shadir  Ullah.    Mr  Miah's  birth
    certificate indicated that these were also the names  of  his  parents.
    Directing itself that the claimed dependency was  potentially  relevant
    to the issue of relationship the Tribunal had  regard  to  three  money
    transfer receipt showing that Mr Miah sent the Appellant money in 2011,
    and bank statements showing that Mr Miah had transferred the  Appellant
    money on a  number  of  occasions.    Having  considered  all  of  that
    evidence in the round the Tribunal found as follows:

           a) That in the absence of Mr Miah (who  had  twice  declined  to
              attend a First-tier Tribunal hearing on the  grounds  that  a
              relative had died in Bangladesh) the Tribunal  could  not  be
              satisfied  that  there  had  been  a  dependency  whilst  the
              Appellant was still  in  Bangladesh.  All  of  the  documents
              supplied post-dated his move here as a student.


           b) That there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate a current
              financial dependency in the United Kingdom. There had in  the
              past been bank transfers etc but nothing post April 2018.

           c) The claimed relationship was established.

 5. On the 30th April 2019 the Appellant obtained permission to  appeal  to
    this Tribunal on the ground that there was a procedural  unfairness  in
    approach, since the Tribunal found for the Appellant on the one  matter
    in issue (c), and yet dismissed the appeal on matters that were not put
    to the Appellant or his representatives, namely whether the  dependency
    had been established (a) and (b).


 6. I considered these grounds of appeal at a hearing on the 1st July 2019.
     For the Appellant on that day Ms Mensah of Counsel elaborated  on  the
    grounds to point out that the HOPO before the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    confirmed that  there  was  only  one  matter  in  issue:  the  claimed
    dependency. The record of proceedings confirms that this was indeed the
    case. The HOPO's submissions are recorded in the  note  as  opening  "1
    issue - relationship between A + EEA national"  and  continue  in  that
    vein. Although  it  appears  that  some  reference  was  made,  by  the
    Appellant's counsel, to the evidence of dependency,  this  was  in  the
    context  of  establishing  the  relationship.   Mr  Bates,  the  Senior
    Presenting Officer who appeared for the Secretary of State  before  me,
    agreed.

 7. In my written decision of the 1st July 2019  I  reflected  the  consent
    between the parties as follows:

         "Whilst I am satisfied that as a matter of principle it was open to
         the First-tier Tribunal to want to satisfy itself that all  of  the
         requirements of the Regulations were met, as a matter  of  fairness
         it was bound to indicate to the parties that it intended  to  widen
         the scope of the appeal, which until that point  had  been  clearly
         limited to the single issue of whether Mr  Miah  was  actually  the
         Appellant's uncle. For the Secretary of  State  Mr  Bates  accepted
         that this was so.


         Ms Mensah's case was that had the Appellant been put on notice that
         the Tribunal - or indeed the Respondent - wished to investigate the
         actual  dependency  he  would  have  provided  further  and  better
         evidence of that matter.  Indeed,  submitted  Ms  Mensah,  original
         documents relating to that dependency  had  been  supplied  to  the
         Respondent at the time of the application but had not  found  their
         way before the First-tier Tribunal  simply  because  those  matters
         were not in issue.


         I  am  satisfied  for  the  foregoing  reasons  that  a  procedural
         unfairness has arisen and I therefore set the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal aside".

 8. I then made the following directions:

              i) The Appellant is within 6 weeks (i.e. by  the  12th  August
                 2019) to supply the Respondent with any  relevant  evidence
                 regarding his past/present dependency  upon  his  uncle  Mr
                 Miah;


             ii) The Respondent has 6 weeks thereafter  (i.e.  by  the  30th
                 September 2019) to review that material, and  any  material
                 already held on file, and issue a decision, either granting
                 a residence card to the Appellant and  his  family,  or  by
                 issuing a supplementary  refusal  letter  identifying  what
                 aspects of the evidence are considered unsatisfactory.

 9. I indicated that if the matter could be disposed of by consent it could
    remain in the Upper Tribunal.  If  however  there  remained  a  dispute
    about whether the dependency had been established, the parties were  at
    liberty to apply for the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


10. The relevant information was duly supplied by  the  Appellant,  in  the
    form of a small bundle containing a 'statutory declaration'  by  Mr  Md
    Arju Miah,  Barclays Bank and RBS account statements  relating  to  the
    same.  The bank statements showed transfers to someone with the name of
    the Appellant.


11. On the 5th  September  2019  the  Secretary  of  State  responded.  The
    Secretary of State was not prepared to accept that  the  new  documents
    established dependency. Several detailed reasons are given but  in  the
    proverbial nutshell, the Secretary of State believed the  documents  to
    be fake.

12. Before me Mr Gill submitted that there was now  a  substantial  factual
    dispute, and it was one for which he was unprepared, the  Secretary  of
    State's letter of the 5th September 2019 having not reached  him  until
    very shortly before this hearing. He requested that I remit the  matter
    to the First-tier Tribunal for that reason. Mr Tan indicated  that  the
    Secretary of State had no preference as to where the decision would  be
    remade. In light of my earlier indication, and in  light  of  the  fact
    that the first decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been  set  aside
    on ground of fairness, I consider it appropriate  that  the  matter  is
    remitted as requested. The Tribunal will be required to  make  detailed
    findings of fact and  it  is  fair  that  the  Appellant  be  given  an
    opportunity to meet the forensic challenge set out in the Secretary  of
    State's letter of the 5th September 2019.




      Decisions


13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error  of
    law.


14. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


15. There is no order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                              7th October 2019
