
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05181/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 October 2020                            |On 1 July 2021                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                            Emmanuel Kenyah Afful
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Akouba Marcelline Assouan, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpreter:  Mr E Donker: Twi and English
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Ghana against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of the Entry
Clearance Officer refusing him a family permit as an extended family member
of an EEA national.

2. The grounds of appeal are rather protracted and make lofty references to
human rights law but permission was granted because it was arguable that
the appellant did not have actual knowledge of the hearing before the First-
tier Tribunal.

3. Before me the appellant was represented by his aunt Akouba Marcelline
Assouan.  She was assisted by Mr Donkor, an interpreter who interpreted in
the Twi and English languages.  I am grateful to Mr Donkor for his
assistance.

4. I am satisfied that for some reason the appellant did not know of the
hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  His aunt has responded on other
occasions and if for some reasons she was being silly and trying to avoid a
hearing she would not have answered the phone when she was telephoned by
the Tribunal in Birmingham to establish her whereabouts. I am satisfied she
has told me the truth about not knowing about the hearing.  I do not in any
way criticise the First-tier Tribunal for making the decision that it did
on the information before it but I have the advantage of hearing the
sponsor and I find there was a procedural irregularity amounting to an
error of law and I set aside the decision.

5. I intend to proceed immediately to remaking that decision.  I asked the
sponsor very carefully if there was any evidence or information she would
have sent in that she had not sent in and she answered in the negative.  I
then asked her what submissions she would have made and she indicated she
could say nothing more than asking for a fair hearing and looking at the
papers carefully, which, with respect to the First-tier Tribunal Judge, is
precisely what the appellant got in respect of the material before the
Tribunal.

6. The sponsor did not take an oath and did not formally give evidence.
Certainly, she was not cross-examined but I formed the impression that she
is very fond of the appellant, her nephew, and she may well have been a
mother figure to him when he was younger but he is now a man who has turned
20 and was over 18 when the application was made.  They have certainly
lived apart for at least eight years because that is the time in which the
sponsor has been in the United Kingdom.  There is no serious contention
that he is a member of the sponsor's household but it was said that the
appellant is the dependant of the sponsor.

7. The First-tier Tribunal concluded at paragraph 30 that there was not
sufficient evidence before it to demonstrate that he is dependent on the
sponsor to meet his everyday needs.  The judge was right and there is no
such evidence before me.  There is no detailed statement, there was no
schedule of income and expenditure, all that was produced in documentary
form was a series of transactions showing useful sums paid by the aunt to
her nephew.

8. There is nothing in the evidence which enables me to see that the
appellant really needed that money for his maintenance or that the sponsor
could afford that money in the long term.  I am quite satisfied that some
money was sent and I think it was probably very welcome but it is not
enough on its own to establish dependency.  The appellant bears the burden
to the balance of probabilities and has not discharged that burden.

9. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal because of
procedural irregularity that was not in any way the judge's fault and I
remake the decision and I dismiss the appeal.

10. The sponsor has conducted herself with dignity today but I have to make
the decision on evidence and the evidence necessary to allow the appeal is
not there.  That is my decision.



Notice of Decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its decision but
substitute a decision of my own dismissing the appeal against the
Respondent decision.

                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 November 2020               |


