
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/05467/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgation |
|On 16 January 2019                         |On 11 February 2019             |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Shabnaj Khanom                                    |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, of Counsel, instructed by CK
solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh born on 10 June  1993,  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I. M. Scott who,
    in a determination promulgated on 6 July 2018 following a hearing on 25
    April 2018, dismissed her appeal against a decision of  the  respondent
    of 14 March 2017 to revoke  a  residence  card  issued  to  her  on  23
    February 2015, valid for five years, as  confirmation  of  a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse of Mr Manzur Morshed Khan, a
    Polish national (date of birth: 23  December  1982)  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom then.

 2. The respondent's "reasons for revocation" letter dated  14  March  2017
    (the "RFRL") states that the appellant's  residence  card  was  revoked
    under regulation 24(3) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 (the "2016 Regulations").

 3. The issue before the judge was whether the  appellant  had  a  retained
    right of residence pursuant to regulation 10 of the 2016 regulations.

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal because he found that the appellant  did
    not satisfy regulation 10(6)(a). He considered this issue by  reference
    to the circumstances, as he found them to be, as at  the  date  of  the
    hearing. He found (para 28) that the appellant was working from January
    2016 until the end of March 2017 but she  was  not  working  from  that
    point (end March 2017) until April 2018 when she obtained another job.

 5. There are two issues before me. The first issue (Issue  1)  is  whether
    the judge was correct to determine whether the appellant had a retained
    right of residence as at the date of the  hearing  or  whether  (as  Ms
    Akinbolu submitted) he should have determined whether the appellant had
    a retained right of residence as at the date of the  decision.  If  the
    latter was the correct  approach,  then  (Ms  Akinbolu  submitted)  the
    decision was unlawful and the judge should have allowed the appellant's
    appeal, given his finding that the appellant was working as at the date
    of the decision and his  findings  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
    remaining criteria for a retained  right  of  residence  (see  para  14
    below).

 6. If the judge was correct to have determined whether the appellant had a
    retained right of residence  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  then
    (subject to Issue 2) the appellant did not satisfy regulation  10(6)(a)
    because (as he found) she was not employed from the end of  March  2017
    until April 2018.

 7. The second issue (Issue 2) arises only if  the  judge  was  correct  to
    determine  whether  the  appellant  satisfied  regulation  10(6)(a)  by
    reference to the circumstances as at the date of the hearing.  In  this
    regard, the grounds contend that the judge's finding that the appellant
    had terminated her employment at the end of March 2017 of her own  will
    was unreasonable. The appellant's case  is  that  the  reason  why  she
    stopped working was because the respondent had  revoked  her  residence
    card. Accordingly, it is contended  that  the  gap  in  her  employment
    subsequent to the date of the decision of 14 March 2017 (i.e. from  end
    March 2017 until April 2018) as found by the judge was because she  was
    involuntarily unemployed.  In the alternative, it is  argued  that  she
    was a jobseeker during the period when she was not employed.

Background

 8. The appellant and Mr Khan were married in  Bangladesh  on  9  September
    2014. The appellant joined Mr Khan in the United Kingdom on 8  November
    2014 with entry clearance as his family member. On  23  February  2015,
    she was issued with a  residence  card  valid  for  5  years.  Mr  Khan
    commenced divorce proceedings on 21 July 2016. The decree absolute  was
    issued on 3 March 2017.

 9. Following the decision of the respondent of 14 March 2017 to revoke the
    appellant's residence card, the  appellant  (it  seems)  wrote  to  the
    respondent requesting confirmation that she had a right to work.

10. On 20 March 2018, the appellant made an  application  for  a  residence
    card. The cover letter (page 25 of  the  appellant's  bundle)  from  CK
    solicitors, the appellant's representatives, requested confirmation  as
    to  whether  the  appellant  had  a  right  to  work.  The   respondent
    acknowledged the application by letter dated 4 April 2018 (page  21  of
    the appellant's bundle). The respondent's letter  stated,  inter  alia,
    that the appellant did not satisfy regulation 10(6) and that she had  a
    right to work until the appeal process was completed.

11. The appeal before the judge was an appeal against the  decision  of  14
    March 2017. The appellant's application of 20 March 2018  was  not  the
    subject of the appeal before the judge. This fact was relied upon by Ms
    Akinbolu at the hearing before me in support of her submission that any
    issue as to whether the appellant continued to satisfy the requirements
    of regulation 10(6)(a) from the date of the decision was a matter  that
    would be the subject of any challenge to the decision made (if adverse)
    to the appellant's application of 20 March 2018.

The relevant provisions

12. Regulations 4, 6, 10 and 24 and para  1  of  Schedule  2  of  the  2016
    Regulations, insofar as relevant, provide as follows:


         "4.      "Worker", "self-employed person", "self-sufficient person"
             and "student"
             (1) In these Regulations -
                  (a)  "worker" means a worker within the meaning of Article
                      45 of the treaty on the Functioning of  the  European
                      Union;
                  ...
         6. "Qualified person"
             (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person"  means  a  person
                  who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-
                  (a)  a jobseeker;
                  (b)  a worker;
                  (c)  a self-employed person;
                  (d)  a self-sufficient person; or
                  (e)  a student.
             (2) Subject to regulations 7A(4) and 7B(4), a person who is no
                  longer working shall not cease to be treated as  a  worker
                  for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-
                  (a)  he is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an
                      illness or accident;
                  (b)  he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                      having been employed in the  United  Kingdom  for  at
                      least one year, provided that he -
                      (i)   has registered as a jobseeker with the relevant
                           employment office; and
                      (ii)  satisfies conditions A and B;
                  (ba) he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                      having been employed in the United Kingdom  for  less
                      than one year, provided that he -
                      (i)   has registered as a jobseeker with the relevant
                           employment office; and
                      (ii)  satisfied conditions A and B.
                  (c)  he is involuntarily unemployed and  has  embarked  on
                      vocational training; or
                  (d)  he has voluntarily ceased  working  and  embarked  on
                      vocational training that is related to  his  previous
                      employment.
             (2A)      A person to whom paragraph (2)(ba) applies may  only
                  retain worker status for a maximum of six months.
              (3)      A person who is no longer in  self-employment  shall
                  not cease to be treated as a self-employed person for  the
                  purpose of paragraph (1)(c) if he is temporarily unable to
                  pursue his activity  as  a  self-employed  person  as  the
                  result of an illness or accident.
             (4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker"  means  a
                  person who satisfies conditions A, B and, where  relevant,
                  C.
             (5) Condition A is that the person -
                  (a)   entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  order   to   seek
                      employment; or
                  (b)  is present in the United Kingdom seeking  employment,
                      immediately after enjoying a right to reside pursuant
                      to paragraph (1)(b) to (e) (disregarding  any  period
                      during which worker status was retained  pursuant  to
                      paragraph (2)(b) or (ba).
             (6) Condition B is that the person can provide  evidence  that
                  he is seeking employment and has a genuine chance of being
                  engaged.
             (7) A person may not retain the status of a worker pursuant to
                  paragraph  (2)(b),  or  jobseeker  pursuant  to  paragraph
                  (1)(a), for longer than the relevant period unless she can
                  provide compelling evidence that he is continuing to  seek
                  employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged.
             (8) In paragraph (7), "the relevant period" means -
                  (a)  in the case  of  a  person  retaining  worker  status
                      pursuant to paragraph (2)(b), a continuous period  of
                      six months;
                  (b)  in the case  of  a  jobseeker,  91  days,  minus  the
                      cumulative total of any days during which the  person
                      concerned previously enjoyed a right to reside  as  a
                      jobseeker,  not  including  any  days  prior   to   a
                      continuous absence from  the  United  Kingdom  of  at
                      least 12 months.
             (9)  Condition  C  applies  where  the  person  concerned  has
                  previously,  enjoyed  a  right  to   reside   under   this
                  regulation as a result of satisfying conditions A and B -
                  (a)  in the case of a person to whom paragraph  (2)(b)  or
                      (ba) applied, for at least six months; or
                  (b)  in the case of a jobseeker, for at least 91  days  in
                      total,
                  unless the person concerned has, since enjoying the  above
                  right to reside, been continuously absent from the  United
                  Kingdom for at least 12 months.
             (10)      Condition C is that the person has had a  period  of
                  absence from the United Kingdom.
             (11)      Where condition C applies -
                  (a)  paragraph (7) does not apply; and
                  (b)  condition  B  has  effect  as  if  "compelling"  were
                      inserted before "evidence".


         10.      "Family member who has retained the right of residence"
             (1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained  the
                  right of residence" means, subject  to  paragraph  (8),  a
                  person who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3),
                  (4) or (5).
             (2) ...
             (3) ...
             (4) ...
             (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-
                  (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person
                      or of an EEA  national  with  a  permanent  right  of
                      residence on the termination of the marriage or civil
                      partnership of the qualified person;
                  (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
                      with  these  Regulations   at   the   date   of   the
                      termination;
                  (c)   he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
                  (d)  either-
                      (i)   prior to the initiation of the proceedings  for
                           the termination of  the  marriage  or  the  civil
                           partnership the marriage or civil partnership had
                           lasted for at least three years and  the  parties
                           to the marriage or civil partnership had  resided
                           in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  one  year
                           during its duration;
                      (ii)  the former  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                           qualified person has custody of a  child  of  the
                           qualified person  or  the  EEA  national  with  a
                           permanent right of residence;
                      (iii) the former  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                           qualified person  or  the  EEA  national  with  a
                           permanent right of residence  has  the  right  of
                           access to a child of the qualified person or  the
                           EEA national with a permanent right of residence,
                           where the child is under the age of 18 and  where
                           a court has ordered that such  access  must  take
                           place in the United Kingdom; or
                      (iv)  the continued right of residence in the  United
                           Kingdom   of   the   person   is   warranted   by
                           particularly difficult circumstances, such as  he
                           or another family member having been a victim  of
                           domestic violence while  the  marriage  or  civil
                           partnership as subsisting.
             (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-
                  (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if he were  an  EEA
                      national, be a worker, a self-employed  person  or  a
                      self-sufficient person under regulation 6; or
                  (b)  is the family member of a  person  who  falls  within
                      paragraph (a).
             (7) ...
             (8) ...


        24.-Refusal  to  issue  or  renew  and  revocation   of   residence
        documentation
      (1)  The Secretary of State may refuse to issue, revoke or refuse  to
                  renew a registration  certificate,  a  residence  card,  a
                  document certifying permanent  residence  or  a  permanent
                  residence card if the refusal or revocation  is  justified
                  on grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public
                  health, or on grounds of misuse of  rights  in  accordance
                  with regulation 26(3).


      (2)  A decision under regulation 23(6) or 32(4) to  remove  a  person
                  from the United Kingdom, or a decision under regulation 31
                  to revoke a  person's  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom
                  invalidates a registration  certificate,  residence  card,
                  document  certifying  permanent  residence  or   permanent
                  residence card held by that person or an application  made
                  by that person for such a certificate, card or document.


      (3)  The  Secretary  of  State  may  revoke  or  refuse  to  renew  a
                  registration certificate or a residence card if the holder
                  of the certificate or card has ceased to  have,  or  never
                  had, a right to reside under these Regulations.


      (4)  The Secretary of State may revoke or refuse to renew a  document
                  certifying permanent residence or  a  permanent  residence
                  card if the holder of the certificate or card  has  ceased
                  to have, or never had,  a  right  of  permanent  residence
                  under regulation 15.
           (5)   ...
           (6)   ...
           (7)   Any action taken  under  this  regulation  on  grounds  of
                       public policy, public security or public health  must
                       be in accordance with regulation 27.


            Schedule 2
            1.    The following provisions of, or made under, the  2002  Act
             have effect in relation to an appeal under these Regulations to
             the First-tier Tribunal as if  it  were  an  appeal  against  a
             decision of the Secretary of State under section 82(1)  of  the
             2002 Act (right of appeal to the Tribunal)-


                 section  84  (grounds  of  appeal),  as  though  the  sole
             permitted grounds of appeal were that the decision breaches the
             appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry to
             or residence in the United Kingdom ("an EU ground of appeal");
      ...

13. In the decision of the President and Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington  in
    Gauswami (retained right of residence: jobseekers)  India  [2018]  UKUT
    00275 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held that the reference to "worker"  in
    regulation 10(6)(a) includes a jobseeker.

The judge's decision

14. The judge's  positive  findings,  which  were  not  challenged  by  the
    respondent, may be summarised as follows:

      (i)   (para 24) that  the  appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of
regulation 10(5)(a);

       (ii)   (para  25)  that  the  appellant  had  provided  evidence   to
        demonstrate that her ex-husband was still exercising Treaty  rights
        at the date of commencement of the divorce proceedings and that the
        respondent had accepted that, in the circumstances of  the  instant
        case, checks could be carried out by the Home Office as to  whether
        her ex-husband was exercising Treaty rights at the  relevant  date;
        and

      (iii) (para 26) that the appellant satisfied the terms  of  regulation
          10(5)(d)(iv) because she was a victim of domestic violence  during
          the marriage.

15. The judge's assessment of the requirements of  regulation  10(6)(a)  is
    set out at paras 27-32 which read:


      "27.  The appellant must also show that she satisfies  Regulation  10
             (6) (a) by proving, in this case, that she would, if she  were
             an EEA national, be exercising Treaty rights as  a  worker.  I
             find that she has failed to do so.


      28.   From the evidence, I accept that the appellant started work for
             McDonald's in January 2016, before her divorce; that  in  June
             2016 she started work in a hotel as well; that in August  2016
             she gave up her job with McDonald's but kept  the  hotel  job,
             until the end of March 2017 when she gave  that  up  as  well.
             From then until April 2018, when she obtained another job, the
             appellant was not working.


            29.  On behalf of the appellant,  it  was  submitted  that  the
             respondent was responsible for her ceasing to work during that
             period,  because  of  the  unlawful  decision  to  revoke  her
             Residence Card and to curtail her permission to work.


      30.   I reject that submission because, in fact, the  respondent  did
             not curtail the appellant's permission to  work.  Contrary  to
             the appellant's assertion, the revocation decision was  silent
             on that matter and, as the Home Office letter dated 4th  April
             2018 makes clear,  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  continue
             working until the completion of the  appeal  process.  If  the
             appellant gave  up  work  purely  because  of  the  revocation
             decision, she did so under a misapprehension.


      31.   The appellant  also  claimed  that  her  hotel  employment  was
             terminated by her employer because  her  ex-husband  told  the
             employer that  they  had  separated.  I  do  not  accept  that
             assertion because: -


                 (     The appellant and her ex-husband separated in  April
                    2015 and the appellant did not start work  of  any  kind
                    until January 2016 (McDonald's) because  her  ex-husband
                    would not allow her to work while they were together.


                 (      There  is  nothing  at  all  to  suggest  that  the
                    appellant's ex-husband  was  aware  of  her  employment.
                    Indeed, the divorce petition expressly  states  that  he
                    did not know her occupation.


                 (     The reference letter from the hotel manager makes no
                    mention of any information being received and  does  not
                    say  that  it  was  the  employer  who  terminated   the
                    appellant's employment.  In  fact,  the  letter  clearly
                    refers to the appellant's decision to leave.


      32.   I conclude that, for whatever reason, the appellant decided  to
             stop work at the end  of  March  2017  and  did  not  take  up
             employment again until a year later, in April 2018. The result
             is that she does not satisfy Regulation 10 (6) and this appeal
             must fail."

The grounds

16.  Issue  1  was  raised  at  the  hearing  and  therefore  developed  in
    submissions at the hearing.

17. In relation to Issue 2, the grounds contend that,  upon  receiving  the
    respondent's decision to revoke  her  residence  card,  it  was  highly
    unlikely that any employer, without evidence  to  the  contrary,  would
    continue to employ a worker whom they knew had had a  right  to  reside
    revoked; that the  appellant  persisted  with  representations  to  the
    respondent  repeatedly  requesting  evidence  she  could   present   to
    employers that she was entitled to seek employment in her circumstances
    which, it is said, was eventually provided by the respondent  in  April
    2018 whereupon she obtained employment immediately afterwards.  In  any
    event, the appellant had provided evidence that she  had  continued  to
    attempt to engage with the work force in the United Kingdom by  seeking
    evidence from the respondent that she was entitled to  work  while  her
    appeal was pending and whilst her circumstances  were  considered  and,
    upon being provided with such evidence by the respondent, by  returning
    to work immediately.

Submissions

Issue 1

18. After the lunch adjournment, Ms Akinbolu and Mr Clarke informed me that
    they had been unable to locate  any  direct  authorities  on  issue  1,
    although the following decisions may, in their view, be of assistance:

    i)      Diatta v Land Berlin, a decision of the Court of Justice of the
        European Communities (case number 267/83, 13 February 1985); and

    ii)     Boodhoo and another (EEA regs: relevant evidence)  [2013]  UKUT
        00346 (IAC).

19. In Ms Akinbolu's submission,  the  judge  had  to  decide  whether  the
    appellant had a retained right of residence  as  at  the  date  of  the
    decision, ignoring circumstances that arose subsequent to the  date  of
    the decision. This is because:

      i)    The decision  appealed  against  was  a  decision  to  revoke  a
        residence card, not a decision  to  refuse  an  application  for  a
        residence card. In her submission, in an appeal against a  decision
        to revoke a residence card,  the  judge  must  decide  whether  the
        respondent had made the correct decision as  at  the  date  of  the
        decision.

      ii)   The effect of the respondent's decision  of  14  March  2017  to
        revoke the appellant's residence card was that she  lost  her  job.
        Accordingly, the question was whether the respondent's decision  of
        14 March 2017 was a lawful decision.

       iii)   The  question  whether  the  appellant's  retained  right   of
        residence was continuous from and after 14 March 2017 would be  the
        subject  of  any  appeal  against  any  adverse  decision  on   the
        appellant's subsequent application of 20 March 2018. Any  issue  as
        to whether the appellant should be regarded as a worker due to  any
        alleged involuntary working would arise in that  subsequent  appeal
        and not in the instant appeal.

20. Mr Clarke submitted that the issue before the  judge  was  whether  the
    appellant had a retained right of residence  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing  before  him.  This  is  because  EEA   appeals   concern   the
    individual's status.

21. Mr Clarke referred me to para 1 of Schedule 2 of the  2016  Regulations
    from which it was clear, in his submission, that the issue on appeal is
    whether the decision breaches  the  appellant's  rights  under  the  EU
    Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom.  In
    Boodhoo, the then President of the Tribunal  considered  whether  post-
    decision evidence was precluded by s.85A of the 2002  Act  as  it  then
    existed. Relying upon para 18 of Boodhoo, Mr Clarke submitted  that  an
    appeal is concerned with the status  of  an  individual  under  the  EU
    Treaties. Accordingly, in his submission, a  judge  on  appeal  has  to
    decide the individual's status. Mr Clarke submitted that the  appellant
    either had a retained right of residence as at the date of the  hearing
    before the judge or she did not.

22. Ms Akinbolu distinguished the decision in Boodhoo  on  the  basis  that
    Boodhoo concerned an application for  a  residence  card,  whereas  the
    instant  appeal  is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  to  revoke   the
    appellant's residence card. The respondent had made a positive decision
    to revoke her residence card. Accordingly,  the  respondent's  decision
    cannot be justified by reference to circumstances that arise after  the
    decision was made.

Issue 2

23.  Ms  Akinbolu  submitted  that  the  appellant  continued  to   satisfy
    regulation 10(6)(a) after 14 March 2017 because:

    (a)     she  was  involuntarily  unemployed  which,  in  Ms  Akinbolu's
        submission, suffices for her to be regarded as a worker; or

    (b)     she was a jobseeker.

24. In relation to (a), Ms Akinbolu referred me to the appellant's evidence
    that her employer was notified of her lack of legal  status  preventing
    her from working. At para 17 of her witness statement  dated  13  April
    2018 (page 5 of the appellant's bundle), the appellant  had  said  that
    her husband informed her workplace  about  her  divorce  and  that  she
    therefore had to leave her job in  Radisson  Blu.  This  was  when  she
    became unemployed. At para 14 of her witness  statement  dated  8  June
    2017 (page 54 of the appellant's bundle), the appellant said  that  she
    worked at Radisson Blu until her ex-husband filed for divorce.

25. Accordingly, Ms Akinbolu submitted that  the  appellant's  position  is
    that she was caused to leave work because of the decision to revoke her
    residence card and that it was not until the respondent's letter  dated
    4 April 2018 acknowledged the appellant's application of 20 March  2018
    for a residence card and stated that she had a right to work until  the
    appeal process was completed that she was able to return to work.

26. Ms Akinbolu submitted that it was unfair for the judge to rely upon the
    respondent's letter of 4 April 2018 stating that she  had  a  right  to
    work until the appeal process was  completed  in  order  to  reach  the
    finding that the appellant had left her employment  with  Radisson  Blu
    voluntarily given that respondent's letter of 4 April  2018  post-dated
    the revocation decision of 14 March 2017.

27. In the alternative, Ms Akinbolu submitted  that  the  appellant  was  a
    jobseeker  during  the  period  of  her  unemployment.  She  repeatedly
    petitioned the  respondent  and  requested  permission  to  work.  Upon
    receipt of the respondent's letter dated 4 April 2018, she began  work.
    Ms Akinbolu submitted that the judge failed to deal with this evidence.



28. Ms Akinbolu accepted that the appellant had not  been  registered  with
    the relevant employment office as a jobseeker as required by regulation
    6(2)(ba)(i). However, given  that  her  right  of  residence  had  been
    revoked, one should apply a broad interpretation to the requirement  of
    registration, she submitted, in reliance  upon  the  reasoning  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Gauswami at para 31 onwards.

29. In response, Mr Clarke referred  me  to  paras  28-31  of  the  judge's
    decision. The judge found that the appellant had  left  her  employment
    voluntarily. Mr Clarke submitted that the decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Grubb who granted permission did not identify any arguable  error
    of law in the decision of the judge nor did the grounds.

30. In relation to the issue whether the  appellant  was  a  jobseeker,  Mr
    Clarke accepted that Conditions A and B of regulation 6 were  satisfied
    as required by regulation 6(2)(ba)(ii). However, he drew  my  attention
    to the fact that regulation 6(2)(ba)(i) required the appellant to  have
    been registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office  and
    that there was no evidence of such registration before the  judge.  The
    fact that her residence card was  revoked  did  not  prevent  her  from
    registering herself as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office.
    If the appellant failed to register herself because she  misapprehended
    the position, this does not alter the position that she was required to
    have registered herself at the relevant employment office.

Assessment

Issue 1

31. Issue 1 is whether  the  question  whether,  in  an  appeal  against  a
    decision to revoke an appellant's residence card  where  the  appellant
    contends that he/she has a retained right of residence, the judge  must
    determine whether the appellant has a retained right  of  residence  by
    considering the circumstances as at the date of  the  decision  or  the
    circumstances as at the date of the hearing.

32. There is no dispute between the parties that, in the case of an  appeal
    against a decision to refuse a residence card, the question whether the
    appellant has a retained right  of  residence  must  be  determined  by
    reference to the circumstances as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.  Ms
    Akinbolu accepted that an appeal against a refusal of a residence  card
    involves  determination  of  the  individual's  status.  However,   she
    submitted that the position  was  different  in  an  appeal  against  a
    decision to revoke  a  residence  card.  In  her  submission,  this  is
    because, if the respondent was not entitled  to  revoke  the  residence
    card as at the date of the decision, the  decision  was  unlawful.  She
    submitted that a decision that was unlawful when it was taken could not
    be justified by events subsequent to the  date  of  the  decision,  for
    example, if (as in the instant appeal) the appellant ceased to work for
    a period between the date of the decision and the date of the hearing.

33. Ms Akinbolu and Mr  Clarke  informed  me  that  there  were  no  direct
    authorities on Issue 1 although the decisions in Diatta and Boodhoo may
    be of assistance. I was not referred to any  other  European  materials
    that may be relevant to the issue. In my view, the judgment  in  Diatta
    was not of any significant assistance on Issue 1.

34. There are several difficulties with Ms Akinbolu's submission.  Firstly,
    it runs counter to the authorities which  do  exist.  For  example,  in
    Boodhoo, the then President of the Upper Tribunal (Blake  J)  said,  at
    para  18,  that  the  purpose  of  residence  documentation  is  simply
    evidential confirmation of their status  and  not  a  source  of  their
    rights. There is simply no  principled  basis  upon  which  to  draw  a
    distinction between a  decision  to  refuse  a  residence  card  and  a
    decision to revoke a  residence  card  so  that  an  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse a residence card requires  a  judge  to  decide  the
    appellant's status but an appeal  against  a  decision  to  revoke  the
    appellant's residence card does not.

35. Ms Akinbolu submitted that the  distinction  was  that  a  decision  to
    revoke a residence  card  must  be  lawful  when  made  and  cannot  be
    justified by reference to events that occurred. This submission ignores
    the fact that an appeal is  not  a  challenge  to  the  legality  of  a
    decision. On appeal, the judge does not  have  jurisdiction  to  decide
    whether a decision is in accordance with the law.  The  legality  of  a
    decision can only be challenged on judicial review.

36. Ms Akinbolu's submission that an unlawful decision cannot be  justified
    by subsequent events is misconceived for another reason.  There  is  no
    question of justification of the decision by subsequent events  if  the
    correct legal position  is  that  the  appeal  is  concerned  with  the
    individual's status under the EU Treaties.

37. Finally, and importantly, regulation  36  provides  for  the  right  of
    appeal against an EEA decision, whether the decision  appealed  against
    is a decision to refuse a residence card or  a  decision  to  revoke  a
    residence card. Para 1 of Schedule 2,  which  applies  to  all  appeals
    against EEA decisions specifically provides that  the  sole  ground  of
    appeal is that "... the decision breaches the appellant's rights  under
    the EU Treaties in respect of entry  to  or  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom..." Para 1 of Schedule 2 makes no distinction between decisions
    to refuse a residence card and decisions to revoke a residence card. It
    is simply impossible to read into para 1 of Schedule 2 the  distinction
    that Ms Akinbolu seeks to make between the two types of  decisions.  In
    my judgment, it is plain from the wording of  para  1  of  Schedule  2,
    taken together with regulation 36, that in any appeal  against  an  EEA
    decision, the judge must determine the appellant's status under the  EU
    Treaties.

38. I have therefore concluded that, in any appeal under regulation  36  of
    the 2016 regulations in which the  appellant  relies  upon  a  retained
    right of residence, the judge must determine whether the appellant  has
    a  retained  right  of  residence  as  at  the  date  of  the   hearing
    irrespective of whether the appeal is against a decision  to  refuse  a
    residence card or against a decision to revoke a residence card.

39. Accordingly, I have concluded that the judge did  not  err  in  law  by
    considering  whether  the  appellant  satisfied  the  requirements   of
    regulation 10(6)(a) as at the date of the hearing.

Issue 2

40. This issue requires me to consider the following:

    (a)     whether the judge erred in law in finding  that  the  appellant
        left her hotel employment of her own free will at the end of  March
        2017;

    (b)     if he did not, then whether the appellant satisfied  regulation
        10(6)(a) by reason of her being a jobseeker in the period from  the
        end of March 2017 until April 2018.

41. In relation to (a),  several  reasons  were  advanced  as  to  why  the
    appellant was involuntarily unemployed, summarised at para 7 and  24-26
    above.

42. There is simply no substance in any of  these  submissions.  The  judge
    correctly stated that the decision to revoke the appellant's  residence
    card did not state that her right to remain was curtailed or  that  she
    no longer had the right to work. Whilst much has been made of the  fact
    that the appellant repeatedly asked the respondent to confirm that  she
    had a right to work, it appears that she was legally represented at the
    time. Whether that was so or not, it is reasonable to expect  that,  if
    she had sought proper legal opinion, she would have  been  advised,  or
    should have been advised, that she had the  right  to  work  until  the
    completion of the appeal process.

43. The judge rejected the appellant's evidence that her  hotel  employment
    was terminated by her employer  because  her  ex-husband  informed  her
    employer that they had separated, for the reasons he gave at para 31 of
    his decision. This included the fact that the employer's letter clearly
    referred to the appellant's decision to leave her employment.

44. There is therefore no substance in Ms Akinbolu's  submission  that  the
    effect of the decision to revoke the  appellant's  residence  card  was
    that she lost her job or that it caused her to leave work.

45. I have therefore concluded that the judge's finding, that the appellant
    had left her hotel employment at the end of March 2017 of her own  free
    will, is unassailable. He was fully entitled to reach his finding  that
    the appellant left her employment at the end of March 2017 of  her  own
    free will. This may well be because she misapprehended the position  as
    to her entitlement to work when she received the decision revoking  her
    residence card. Be that as it may, it does not alter the fact that  the
    judge did not err in law in reaching his  finding  that  the  appellant
    left her hotel employment of her own free will  at  the  end  of  March
    2017.

46. Turning to (b), the Upper Tribunal decided in Gauswami  that  the  term
    "worker" in regulation  10(6)(a)  must  be  construed  as  including  a
    jobseeker.  However,  this  does  not  assist  the   appellant.   Under
    regulation 6(ba)(i), it is necessary for a person to be registered as a
    jobseeker with the relevant employment office in order to  be  regarded
    as a jobseeker. The appellant was not registered. Ms Akinbolu  accepted
    that the appellant was not registered.

47. Ms Akinbolu submitted, in reliance upon  the  reasoning  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal at para 31 onwards of Gauswami, that one should apply a  broad
    interpretation to  the  requirement  of  registration  given  that  the
    appellant's right of residence had been revoked.  However, at paras 31-
    35 of Gauswami, the Upper Tribunal considered the meaning of  the  term
    "worker" in regulation 10(6) and the fact  that  regulation  10(6)  was
    intended to  give  domestic  legislative  effect  to  article  14.2  of
    Directive 2004/58/EC (the "Directive").   The  Upper  Tribunal  decided
    that regulation 10(6) does not give proper  or  at  least  sufficiently
    clear effect to that Article insofar as concerns what is meant by being
    a "worker". It is for this reason that  the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded
    that the reference  to  "worker"  in  regulation  1096)(a)  includes  a
    jobseeker. I was not referred to any provision of the  Directive  which
    suggests that the imposition  of  a  registration  requirement  for  an
    individual to be regarded as a jobseeker for the purposes of  the  2016
    Regulations fails to transpose the Directive correctly. In the  absence
    of this, I  reject  Ms  Akinbolu's  submission  that  the  registration
    requirement in regulation 6(2)(ba)(i) should be interpreted  so  widely
    that it is effectively disapplied.

48. I have therefore concluded that the judge did not err in law in failing
    to consider whether the appellant was a jobseeker. If he had considered
    the issue, he would have been bound  to  conclude,  on  any  legitimate
    view, that she was not a  jobseeker  for  the  purposes  of  regulation
    10(6)(a) and within the meaning of regulation 6, given that she had not
    registered herself as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office.

49. The appeal is therefore dismissed.


      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scott did not  involve
    the making of any error of law.

      Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent decision stands.




[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 9 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill



