
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/05241/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 20 August 2019                    |On 09 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             SULTAN AHMED KASHIF
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Alef, Solicitor from NR Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent on 10 July 2018 to refuse him a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 2. The appellant applied for a residence card as the husband of a  British
    citizen who he said was to be treated as an EEA  national  because  she
    was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  Republic  of  Ireland.    The
    application was refused because, according to the respondent:

         "Having considered all of the evidence and information provided  in
         support of your application, and applying the civil standard of the
         balance of probabilities, it is considered that the purpose of your
         residence in the EEA host country was as a means for  circumventing
         the UK's domestic Immigration Rules or other immigration law".

 3. I consider carefully the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This
    noted that the appellant entered the United Kingdom in June 2011.   His
    leave was extended and then curtailed to end on 9 December 2013 but  he
    remained in the United  Kingdom  for  some  time.   He  applied  for  a
    residence card under  the  EEA  Regulations  on  15  March  2018.   The
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that the appellant  married
    his sponsor, a British citizen originally from Pakistan, in June  2014.
    The marriage was conducted by proxy.  The  appellant  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom, apparently without permission, and his sponsor went  to
    Pakistan for a wedding ceremony.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal summarised the appellant's case as follows:

         "The appellant's case is that the sponsor, who has  never  been  in
         business before and whose sole employment experience  had  been  to
         work in a shop many years ago  and  more  recently  to  work  in  a
         takeaway, decided to move to the Republic  of  Ireland  and  run  a
         business called S.N. IT Solutions Ltd which she had  purchased  for
         E15,000.  The appellant and sponsor claim that they  lived  in  the
         Republic of Ireland between  May  2016  and  September  2017.   The
         business made a loss.  The sponsor says that she worked  delivering
         leaflets for an employer called  JD  Marketing  between  April  and
         August 2017.  In September 2017 the sponsor and  appellant  decided
         to return to the United Kingdom because the sponsor  was  suffering
         from depression.  They say they meet the requirements of Regulation
         9 of the EEA Regulations".

 5. The sponsor produced evidence  to  show  she  was  the  director  of  a
    company.  However, there were no accounts produced for the company  and
    no indication that tax returns were filed or any evidence  of  business
    activity.  When the sponsor gave evidence she  was  unable  to  explain
    what the business did.  She had  no  evidence  that  she  had  employed
    anyone.  The company had no bank account but, according to the sponsor,
    was able to receive money and pay bills and pay its employees.

 6. There is a letter in the bundle purporting to  come  from  the  company
    saying that the sponsor was employed as  a  housekeeper.   The  sponsor
    said that she is the sole owner of the company and sole director.   She
    did not know if she had written the letter.  She also claimed  to  have
    worked for a  company  called  JD  Marketing  delivering  leaflets  and
    produced some wage slips to support that claim but she was paid in cash
    and there was no record of payment into a bank account.  The  appellant
    had produced bank statements for the  period  18  January  2016  to  31
    August 2017 but there were no transactions until December 2016 and only
    one payment into the account and bank charges.  There was  no  evidence
    there of salary  or  income  from  employment.   There  was  a  tenancy
    agreement dated 17  May  2016  but  it  was  not  registered  with  the
    Residential Tenancies Board until 17 February 2017  and  there  was  no
    evidence there of a single payment of rent in the bank  statements  for
    the whole period of May through to September 2017  when  the  appellant
    and sponsor say they were resident in the Republic of Ireland.

 7. This led the First-tier Tribunal Judge to conclude as follows:

         "In any event I am satisfied that the purpose of the  residence  of
         the appellant and  sponsor  in  the  Republic  of  Ireland  was  to
         circumvent  the  provisions  of   the   Immigration   Rules.    The
         appellant's immigration history indicates a determination  to  stay
         in the United Kingdom after his leave expired.  The sponsor was not
         earning sufficient to enable the  appellant  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom under the Immigration Rules.  There is no other reason  why
         the sponsor should have gone to the Republic of Ireland.   She  had
         no connections with that country.  The company she acquired did not
         appear to have been trading.  She had not gone there for  the  sake
         of employment.  I am not satisfied that  the  sponsor  was  in  the
         Republic of Ireland before December 2016 when activity  started  on
         her bank account.  What the  sponsor  has  done  is  to  acquire  a
         company to give the impression that she was trading and then  spent
         a few months in the Republic of Ireland.  As soon as  possible  the
         appellant and sponsor returned to the United Kingdom".

 8. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal are not professionally
    drawn.  They are rich in criticism but light on substance.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal.  Permission was granted  by
    the Upper Tribunal.  The Deputy Judge's reasons for  giving  permission
    were set out in paragraph 3 of her decision where she said:

         "... It is arguable that the judge materially erred in  failing  to
         take  into  consideration  or  make  findings  in  respect  of  the
         correspondence from the Irish Tax and Customs Revenue at  pages  43
         to 56 of the appellant's bundle, which states that the sponsor  was
         liable to pay E980 and  in  arrears  in  respect  of  this  sum  on
         31.5.17, which would indicate that she had engaged in some sort  of
         employment or business whilst  resident  in  Ireland.   Whilst,  in
         itself, this is  insufficient  to  show  that  the  centre  of  the
         sponsor's life had been transferred to the Republic of Ireland,  it
         is clearly a material consideration in respect of any assessment of
         that issue".

 9. The point behind this is that it might be the case that the sponsor was
    economically active in the  Republic  of  Ireland  and  was  exercising
    treaty rights even if she had been incomplete  or  even  untruthful  in
    other parts of her evidence and decisions about her reasons  for  being
    in the Republic of Ireland should have been made against the background
    of what she was actually doing.  I follow that  argument.  However,  Ms
    Aboni pointed out a significant  problem.   I  have  reflected  on  the
    letter dated 6 June identifying the appellant's wife as a  housekeeper.
    It is evidence that she was paying tax  in  Ireland  and  therefore  it
    tends to suggest that she was  exercising  treaty  rights  by  working.
    However no explanation is given to explain the obligation  to  pay  tax
    and without some explanation I do not see how much weight can be  given
    to it.  I have considered the letter from the  Office  of  the  Revenue
    Commissioners in the Republic of Ireland indicating a payment due on  6
    June 2017 but this refers to the period 01 January 2015 to 31  December
    2015.  Paragraph 5 of the appellant's wife's statement  refers  to  her
    starting work in Ireland and buying a company on 19 May  2016.   It  is
    not clear why she should be paying any  tax  for  the  year  ending  31
    December 2015.

10. I have considered the submissions and the grounds such as they are, and
    particularly the Deputy Judge's grant of permission, but I can  see  no
    material fault in this decision.  The judge had  reached  a  conclusion
    plainly open to him on the evidence and I dismiss the appeal.

11. I note that the appellant and her husband attended before  me  although
    they were not expected to give evidence.  I note that it  was  said  in
    submissions that they are not educated people.  I understand that  they
    may well want to live together and find it hard to  satisfy  the  Rules
    but I am quite unpersuaded  that  there  is  anything  wrong  with  the
    judge's  decision  that  they  do  not  satisfy  the  requirements  for
    admission under the Regulations.

    Notice of Decision

12. I find no material error of law and I dismiss the  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision.



    |Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 October 2019                 |

