
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05962/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|Oral decision given following hearing         |On 1 August 2019             |
|On 3 July 2019                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                mr arjan kola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ali, Counsel, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Albania who was born in  November  1993.
    He appealed against the decision of the respondent  refusing  to  grant
    him a residence card as the  husband  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK.  It is common ground that he  entered  into  a
    ceremony of marriage with a Ms [AB] on 13 March 2018 in the UK.  Ms [B]
    is or was a national of Albania also, but having  studied  in  Bulgaria
    she acquired Bulgarian nationality in May 2016.

 2. The application was refused because the respondent  believed  that  the
    marriage was a marriage of convenience, or  in  other  words  a  "sham"
    marriage and it was against this decision that the appellant appealed.

 3. The appellant's appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    French sitting at Birmingham on 2 April 2019  but  in  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 10 April 2019 Judge French dismissed the appeal.
     The appellant now appeals against this  decision,  leave  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge E M Simpson on 31 May 2019.

 4. In his decision, Judge French set  out  a  number  of  reasons  why  he
    concluded that the marriage was indeed  a  sham  marriage  as  claimed.
    They are set out within his decision.  It is  sufficient  if  I  record
    that these reasons would certainly seem to be  at  least  arguable  and
    that but for what appears below could justify the  decision.   However,
    it is also necessary for the purposes of this decision to  record  that
    at the hearing evidence was adduced from six witnesses all of whom were
    cross-examined at the hearing.  The witness statements are  within  the
    file and I  will  summarise  the  evidence  given  within  the  witness
    statements of the four witnesses other than the appellant and Ms [B].

 5. Ms [DF], who is a Bulgarian national, claimed to be "best friends  with
    the sponsor" having met her in Bulgaria in  September  2014  when  they
    were studying together.  She claimed that they  had  spent  almost  all
    their free time together and that between them they  had  talked  about
    everything.  It is said in the statement that the sponsor had talked to
    her about the appellant, how they had met and how she felt  about  him,
    and that this couple had been talking together "every single day".

 6. At paragraph 7 of her statement, Ms [F] claims  that  the  sponsor  had
    told her that she had been thinking of moving to the UK in order to  be
    with the appellant and work in the UK in 2016.  She  then  records  how
    the relationship between the couple developed, how  the  couple  became
    engaged  in  February  2017,  moving  in  together  in  May  2017   and
    subsequently marrying on 13 March 2018.  She also states that following
    the marriage the sponsor and the appellant "continue to  live  together
    as husband and wife" and sets out the address that they are living  at.
    She also claimed that she lived with them for two weeks after initially
    coming to the UK and during that period she saw them in "a  loving  and
    caring relationship together".  She adds that  "they  are  one  of  the
    cutest couples that I know" and that "their  love  for  each  other  is
    really big".

 7. She adds (at paragraph 15 of  her  statement)  that  "Those  two  weeks
    living with them I saw the way they looked at  each  other,  talked  to
    each other and their  love  and  respect  for  one  another",  then  at
    paragraph 16 she adds that she can "confirm that the marriage  of  [the
    appellant and the sponsor] is genuine and subsisting" and that  "I  can
    honestly say that they dearly love and care for each other".

 8. She says that the couple now come to her flat all the time and they all
    go out together and socialise together.

 9. Mrs [VM] in her statement says that she is  the  sponsor's  sister  and
    that she also has known about the relationship between her  sister  and
    the appellant since July 2014.  She relates how she came to England  in
    2016 and that when she  had  originally  come  she  could  not  rent  a
    property because she had not got a job in the UK so she  (that  is  the
    sponsor) lived with her and her family at an  address  in  Northampton.
    She then says that the couple had a very close  relationship  and  also
    says how they were engaged in February 2017, moved in together  in  May
    2017 and then got married some several months later in March 2018.  She
    took some wedding photos at the time.   She  also  says  (in  identical
    wording) that the marriage is genuine and subsisting and that  she  can
    "honestly say that they dearly love and care for each other".

10. [MM], in his statement says  that  he  is  the  brother-in-law  of  the
    sponsor (he is the previous witness's husband)  and  his  statement  is
    similar to that of his wife.  He also sets out the same dates  when  it
    is claimed that the couple got engaged, started living together and got
    married.

11. Finally, Mrs [HK] is the appellant's aunt, and  she  in  her  statement
    says how she had first met the couple together in February  2017  after
    they had got engaged.  She also gives the  dates  when  they  moved  in
    together and subsequently got married.  Again in more or less identical
    wording she says that she can "confirm" that the marriage  is  "genuine
    and subsisting" and that "I can honestly say that they dearly love  and
    care for each other".

12. It would in the judgment of this  Tribunal  have  been  open  to  Judge
    French had he considered this to be the position to have  set  out  his
    reasons why  despite  this  evidence  he  did  not  consider  that  the
    witnesses were telling the  truth.   He  could  have  referred  to  the
    answers which were given in cross-examination  for  example  and  might
    have stated that on balance he was not persuaded by the  evidence  that
    it was a genuine marriage.  However, it is  difficult  to  see  how  he
    could have done so  without  making  adverse  credibility  findings  in
    respect of these witnesses as well as in respect of the  appellant  and
    the sponsor.  He did not do so.  He dealt  with  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses very briefly indeed in five lines at the end of  paragraph  5
    of his Decision as follows:

         "It was my opinion that the evidence of  the  supporting  witnesses
         was circumstantial.  None of them could  ever  know  what  was  the
         genuine nature of the relationship was (sic) between the  appellant
         and Miss [B].  All that any of them could say that was  that  (sic)
         they had observed the parties to be together  and  appeared  to  be
         affectionate with each other".

13. As is apparent from my summary of the  evidence  contained  within  the
    witness statements above, that is not all that any of them  said.   The
    evidence (which may or may not have been accepted) was that one of  the
    witnesses had discussed the relationship with the  sponsor  right  from
    the beginning, that the couple had been together as partners in a close
    relationship for some several years before they married, and that  they
    had been engaged and then  subsequently  moved  in  together  some  ten
    months or so before the marriage, all of which would if  true  make  it
    very difficult for a decision maker to find that the  relationship  was
    not a genuine one.  While  it  might  have  been  open  to  the  judge,
    provided he gave sufficient  reasons  for  so  finding,  to  have  made
    adverse credibility findings with regard to these witnesses, he did not
    do so.

14. Although in argument Ms Cunha accepted  that  the  description  of  the
    evidence  of  the  supporting   witnesses   as   "circumstantial"   was
    problematic, and could not in itself be justified, she  submitted  that
    this error was not material because  there  were  very  strong  reasons
    justifying the finding that the marriage was a sham marriage. I  cannot
    accept this submission.  It is incumbent on a judge  to  deal  properly
    with the evidence and if  and  to  the  extent  that  evidence  is  not
    accepted to give reasons why not (which may have been possible in  this
    case but was not done) and in any  event  to  set  out  accurately  the
    effect of this evidence.

15. It cannot be said that this error was not a material  one,  because  it
    would have been open to the judge to make a finding that  albeit  there
    are or would otherwise be question marks as  to  why  this  couple  got
    married when they did, if  the  relationship  was  as  close  as  these
    witnesses say for the reasons they have given,  it  was  nonetheless  a
    genuine marriage from its inception.  It follows that the decision will
    have to be remade.

16. Accordingly, there will have to be a rehearing  and  as  the  rehearing
    will have to be de novo, and findings of fact will have to be made with
    regard to the evidence of a number of witnesses, it is  appropriate  to
    remit this hearing back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  new  decision
    to be made.

17. It appears that at the original hearing although the respondent  sought
    to rely on discrepancies in the interviews given by the  appellant  and
    the sponsor, the interview notes were not  available.   Accordingly,  I
    direct that the respondent must produce these interview notes  for  the
    rehearing.

18. I accordingly make the following decision:

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge French  as  containing
a material error of  law  and  direct  that  this  appeal  be  remitted  for
rehearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham before any  judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge French.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2019
