
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
EA/06256/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |    Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 June 2019                      |    On 16 July 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                                 fatou dieng
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, Freedom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  dated  10  September
    2018 to refuse  to  issue  a  residence  card  confirming  a  right  of
    residence as the family member of an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK.

2.   The application made by  the  appellant's  solicitor  on  11  May  2019
    included  a  summary  of  the  appellant's  immigration   history   and
    explanations as to why certain documents, including  a  renewed  French
    passport for  her  son  and  her  own  Senegalese  passport,  were  not
    available.  The application in its original form was  for  a  residence
    card as the family member of an EEA national  as  the  spouse  but  the
    representations also included, in the alternative, a  request  for  the
    appellant's derived right of residence as the primary carer of a French
    citizen to be recognised.

3.   The  respondent  refused  the  application  solely  with  reference  to
    regulation 7 of The Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 ("the EEA Regulations 2016") because, although she had provided  a
    marriage certificate from Senegal to indicate  that  a  proxy  marriage
    took place on 17 August 2017, she failed to provide any other  evidence
    to confirm that the marriage was performed and properly  registered  so
    as to satisfy the requirements of the relevant laws in Senegal.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble ("the judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision dated 26 April 2019.  She found the  appellant,  who  she
    had spoken to in a previous appeal and found to be credible, was  still
    a credible witness.  She noted the evidence produced by  the  appellant
    and the oral evidence that she gave at the hearing explaining  how  she
    had attempted to verify the  documents  relating  to  her  most  recent
    marriage with the Senegalese Embassy.

5.   When she came to her findings, which began at [29], the judge  reminded
    herself correctly that the appellant was only  required  to  prove  her
    case on the balance of probabilities.  She found the appellant to be  a
    credible witness and noted that she previously  found  her  to  be  "an
    entirely credible  witness  who  provided  reliable  documents  to  the
    tribunal in 2017. I have no reason to doubt that position remains." She
    went on to say "I have no hesitation in accepting what she  said  about
    her relationship, the marriage and her current situation" [29].

6.   However when going on to consider whether there was  evidence  to  show
    that a valid marriage took place by proxy according to  Senegalese  law
    the judge made the following findings:

         "31. There can be little doubt that proxy  marriages  do  occur  in
             Senegal.  The background  evidence  is  clear  about  this  as
             provided in the Senegal Family Code (AB page 51)  and  I  have
             already noted I have no reason to doubt any of  the  documents
             provided to me by Mrs Dieng.  The problem I have is that those
             documents say that such  a  marriage  is  valid  only  if  the
             requirements of Articles 126 and  127  'have  been  previously
             respected'.


         32.  In this case not only do I not have any evidence of what  they
             are, I have no evidence that they have been respected.  It may
             be they  are  trivial  and  relate  to  identification  and/or
             residence; equally it may be that they are much  more  complex
             but it is for Mrs Dieng to show on balance  that  all  of  the
             requirements have been met.  So whilst I accept her  oral  and
             written evidence about the wedding and marriage  I  cannot  on
             balance be satisfied that whatever additional requirements set
             out in the code have been met.  I stress that it may  be  that
             she meets these requirements but without a translated copy  of
             what they are I cannot find that she meets the requirements as
             per Awuku.


         33.  In terms of  being  in  a  durable  relationship,  I  have  no
             hesitation in  finding  that  she  and  Mr  Ndiaye  are  in  a
             relationship and live together as evidenced by  the  documents
             and photographs they have provided; although it has not lasted
             for two years as the couple did not meet  and  become  engaged
             until June/July 2017.  However Regulation 2 and 18 do not give
             appeal rights against refusal of an application, which in  any
             event has not been made.
         ...
         35.  In terms of the ground of appeal that  she  has  a  derivative
             right given [the child's] status, Mrs Dieng has not provided a
             valid passport to form the basis of such an application so  it
             could not succeed in any event,  failing  on  the  first  limb
             requirement.  A decision following such an application (had it
             been made) is an EEA decision however Regulation  36(5)  deals
             with derivative right applications and states  that  a  person
             who claims to have such a  right  may  not  appeal  under  the
             Regulations unless they  produce  a  valid  national  ID  card
             issued by an EEA State or a valid passport and either a family
             permit or other documents showing that they meet the criteria.


         36.  My previous findings in respect of [the child] stand and as  I
             have emphasised there is no issue  at  all  with  Mrs  Dieng's
             credibility.  But she has not produced a valid passport so she
             cannot succeed on the first limb and whilst she would seem  to
             meet the other requirements, having  a  valid  passport  is  a
             prerequisite for obtaining a residence card on this basis."

Decision and reasons

7.   The appellant appealed on three grounds.   The  first  being  that  the
    judge failed to adequately tackle the evidence  that  was  before  her.
    The  second  ground  related  to  an  argument   regarding   procedural
    unfairness in that the judge did not point out at the hearing that  she
    would find that Articles 126 and 127 of the Senegal Family Code were of
    such crucial importance.  The third related to her  findings  regarding
    derived rights of residence.

8.   After discussion at the hearing  it  seemed  quite  clear  that  second
    ground could not succeed given that Mr  Swain  accepted  there  was  no
    evidence relating to Articles 126 and  127  before  the  judge  in  any
    event. The only argument that was likely to succeed was that the  judge
    failed to assess the evidence before her and  thereby  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons.  In relation to the first ground I am satisfied  that
    there was evidence which the judge failed to consider. The judge failed
    to conduct any assessment as to whether the documents that were  before
    her showed, at least to the balance  of  probabilities,  that  a  valid
    marriage took place by proxy. Whilst it would have been helpful for the
    judge to have copies of Articles 126 and 127 of the  Senegalese  Family
    Code, that was not the only  aspect  of  the  evidence  which  required
    evaluation. For these reasons I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error of law.

9.   I take into account the fact that the appellant  was  found  to  be  an
    entirely credible witness who produced reliable evidence in  the  past.
    There is no suggestion that the documents are false or unreliable.  The
    appellant produced several documents  relating  to  the  marriage.  The
    exact nature of some of those documents is a little unclear. The  first
    document outlines the details of the  marriage  and  provides  extracts
    from the Senegalese Family Code referring to the fact that  details  of
    the family would be logged as evidence and would deem  to  be  properly
    registered if they were inserted into the family logbook. It is unclear
    whether the document translated at [pg.55-60] is in fact  a  translated
    copy of the family book but nevertheless it was a  document  confirming
    the details of the marriage and it appeared to be signed by  the  local
    registrar.

10.  There was another document described in the translation as a full  copy
    of the marriage entry.  That  document  outlined  the  details  of  the
    marriage, confirmed that a dowry had been paid and gave the details  of
    witnesses.  Again, the document appears to  show  registration  of  the
    marriage with the relevant registrar.  Another document at  [pg.79]  of
    the appellant's bundle with a translation at [pg.77] stated that it was
    a registered marriage certificate.  Again this was signed by the  local
    civil registrar and is dated 21 September 2018. That document confirmed
    that the marriage was contracted by custom on 17  April  2018  and  the
    marriage was registered on 21 September 2018.  On the face of  it  this
    document appears to  show  that  a  marriage  contracted  by  proxy  (a
    customary marriage) was registered with the local registrar.

11.  Whilst some of the finer details  of  Senegalese  family  law  are  not
    quite explained by the evidence, I bear in mind that the appellant does
    not need to prove her case with certainty.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was sufficient to show that  it
    was at least more likely than not that a proxy  marriage  was  properly
    registered with the relevant authorities according to  Senegalese  law,
    especially given the judge accepted that the appellant is  an  entirely
    credible witness and there was evidence to show  that  proxy  marriages
    are permitted in that country. For these reasons, I am  satisfied  that
    there  is  enough  evidence  to  show,  at  least  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that the appellant contracted a valid marriage  with  an
    EU national which was recognised by Senegalese law. She  is  a  'family
    member' under regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations 2016.

12.  In my assessment the judge wrongly concluded that the  appellant  could
    not succeed under regulation 8 because she did  not  have  a  right  of
    appeal as an 'extended family member'. Once the appeal  was  instituted
    against an appealable 'EEA decision' the ground contained in  paragraph
    1 of Schedule 2 of the EEA Regulations 2016  is  sufficiently  wide  to
    include consideration of any number of  relevant  matters  relating  to
    rights under European law and could only be restricted by the scope  of
    section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA
    2002). The judge erred in failing to consider whether it was  necessary
    to seek the respondent's consent to determine whether the appellant was
    an 'extended family member' as a 'new matter': also see Oksuzoglu  (EEA
    appeal - "new matter") [2018] UKUT 00385.

13.  Even if I am wrong in finding that the evidence relating to  the  proxy
    marriage in Senegal is sufficient to  show  that  the  appellant  is  a
    'family member' for the  purpose  of  regulation  7,  in  remaking  the
    decision,  Mr  Tufan  gave  consent  for  the  issue  of  the   durable
    relationship under regulation 8 to be considered as a 'new matter'. The
    consequence of the judge's clear finding at [33], that the appellant is
    in a durable relationship with an EEA  national,  is  that  the  appeal
    should, in the alternative, be allowed with reference to  regulation  8
    of the EEA Regulations 2016.

14.  The third point argued in the grounds becomes immaterial. Whilst it  is
    at least arguable that the appellant also has rights under European law
    to remain on the basis of her relationship  with  a  European  national
    child it is not necessary to determine  the  matter  in  light  of  the
    findings I have already made in relation to regulations 7 and 8 of  the
    EEA Regulations 2016.

15.  I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved  the  making
    of  errors  of  law.  The  decision  is  set  aside  and  remade.   The
    respondent's decision breaches the  appellant's  rights  under  the  EU
    Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
    of law

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED on EU law grounds


Signed   [pic]                  Date  11 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


