
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      Appeal Number: EA/06632/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |      Decision & Reasons           |
|on 11th July 2019               |Promulgated                        |
|                                |on 8th August 2019                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                            MRS NIJDEKA HELEN UDE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Waithe, instructed by Mascot Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State made the application for  permission  to  appeal
    but for the purposes of this determination I shall refer to the parties
    as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal that is Ms Ude as
    the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The respondent seeks, with permission, to challenge  the  determination
    of First Tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre  ('the  judge'),  promulgated  on
    20th April 2019 allowing the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of
    a residence card to confirm that she was a  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

 3. The one issue before me and on which permission had  been  granted  was
    that the judge had arguably erred in hearing  the  appeal  despite  the
    respondent having certified the appeal under regulation 36 (8).  It was
    asserted by the Secretary of State  that  the  judge  had  acted  ultra
    vires.

 4. In a decision dated 20 September 2018 the respondent set out  that  the
    application dated 23 August 2018 for a residence card had been  refused
    because the appellant had not provided adequate evidence to  show  that
    she qualified for a right to reside as the family  member  of  her  EEA
    sponsor.

 5. The refusal  letter  of  the  Secretary  of  State  detailed  that  the
    appellant had stated that  she  was  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    provided a marriage certificate issued on  1  April  2015.  She  was  a
    Nigerian national who had been issued with entry clearance as a visitor
    for the period from 7 August 2012  to  7  August  2014.  The  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom on 29 October 2012. In 2013 she applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis she had  a  Portuguese  partner  but  that
    application was refused on 8 October 2013. She was issued  with  notice
    of liability to removal on 10 April 2015.

 6. She then claimed to have married a Bulgarian national on 1 April  2015.
    That marriage was not accepted as  genuine  but  found  to  be  one  of
    convenience because she had previously overstayed  her  multiple  entry
    visa and had  no  intention  of  returning  to  Nigeria.  She  made  an
    application for a residence card on 17 April 2015 which was refused  on
    15 July 2015 after a marriage interview concluded that the relationship
    was a marriage of convenience.   She applied for a residence card on 26
    June 2017 which was rejected owing to no fee and  she  again  reapplied
    for a residence card of 12 September 2017 which was refused  on  the  1
    December 2017.   Her  marriage  again  was  deemed  to  be  a  marriage
    convenience after a home visit marriage interview  was  conducted.  She
    appealed the refusal decision and First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  A  Khan
    upheld the decision finding the relationship was clearly a sham.

 7. The refusal letter of the Secretary of State dated  20  September  2018
    set out the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan from  paragraphs
    42 to 48.  The judge identified the inconsistencies in their interviews
    and also their oral evidence finding that their  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

 8. The refusal letter continued that on 17 September  2017  the  appellant
    reapplied for a residence card as a direct  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national and this was despite the fact that both the  Home  Office  and
    immigration judge had found that the marriage was  one  of  convenience
    entered into  solely  to  benefit  from  EU  immigration  law  and  the
    application is duly refused on 1 December 2017.

 9. The decision letter  which  is  currently  being  appealed  dated  20th
    September 2018 proceeded

    'In this latest  application,  the  documentation  you  have  submitted
    amounts to being at best current evidence of cohabitation. While  these
    documents may or may not show you are residing with your  sponsor  none
    of this evidence addresses the previous grounds for refusal stated  nor
    do they address the concerns laid out by the Immigration Judge  in  the
    appeal determination as stated.

    As outlined in  the  evidence  listed  above,  you  have  not  provided
    anything materially different from your first application,  or  in  the
    appeal dated  29th  of  November  2016  which  would  demonstrate  your
    marriage is not one of convenience. You have therefore been  refused  a
    residence card with reference to regulation 2 of the regulations.

    In addition, regulations 36  (7)  and  (8)  of  the  regulation  states
    following:

    "(7) A person may not bring an appeal  under  these  regulations  on  a
    ground certified under paragraph (8) or rely on such  a  ground  in  an
    appeal under these regulations.

    (8) The Secretary of State or an  immigration  officer  may  certify  a
    ground for the purposes of paragraph (7) if it has been considered in a
    previous appeal brought under these regulations and section 82  (1)  of
    the 2002 Act"

    Based on the information provided in your applications dated  17  April
    2015 and 12 July 2017, in your appeal dated 29  November  2016  and  in
    your current application dated 17 January 2017, the Secretary of  State
    considers that your claim to  be  in  a  genuine  marriage  with  Petar
    Krasimirov Petrov should be certified in accordance with regulation  36
    (7). You may not therefore bring an appeal, or rely on such a ground in
    any appeal under these regulations.

    Redress through  other  legal  channels  may  be  possible  and  it  is
    recommended you seek legal advice should you choose to do so.

    Therefore, despite your relationship with Petar has been deemed a  sham
    4 times and recently certified, plus the immigration judge also  agreed
    that the relationship is not genuine, you made  a  further  application
    for a residence card as the spouse of Petar on 23 August 2018.

    ...

    Next Steps

    You have a right of appeal against this decision under regulation 36 of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  This appeal
    may be brought before the first-tier tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) (IAC)) while you are in the UK and may continue while you  are
    outside of cake if necessary.

    You have 14 calendar days of the date this decision was sent to appeal.
    Information on how to appeal the appeal process and  the  fees  payable
    are all available online  at:  https:  www.gov.  uk/immigration-asylum-
    tribunal/overview'.




    The application for permission to appeal.

10. The grounds of appeal by the Secretary of State set out that judge made
    a material error of law in the determination by acting ultra vires  and
    the judge misdirected herself 'to her jurisdiction  to  so  do'  (sic).
    Any  mistaken  reference  by   the   officer   drafting   the   refusal
    letter/decision to an appeal right existing was  just  so,  a  mistaken
    reference. This was  brought  to  the  judge's  attention  as  soon  as
    practicable by the Home Office presenting  Officer.   The  grounds  for
    permission explained

    "Appeal rights are not conferred by whims  or  slips  of  the  pen,  or
    omissions or errors.  They stem solely from Statute.  The relevant  law
    covering this decision is as follows

    Statutory Instruments 2016 No 1052 Immigration

    The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016..."

11. The application submitted that as the decision  was  clearly  certified
    under regulation 36(7) and (8) of the EEA regulations the learned judge
    had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal as no appeal existed in law. For
    the judge to proceed to grant an appeal right which could not exist was
    materially erroneous and ultra vires whether or not an appeal right had
    been implied erroneously by incautious drafting. The issue under appeal
    had been dealt with and dismissed by an immigration judge as a previous
    hearing and had not been  subject  to  any  successful  appeal  by  the
    appellant subsequent to that appeal hence the certification.

    The First-tier Tribunal determination

12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre set out from paragraphs 10 to 14 the
    issues on jurisdiction raised as a preliminary issue by the  presenting
    officer at the hearing before her in  relation  to  the  certification.
    The judge recorded at [10] that the Presenting Officer  submitted  that
    the appellant had no appeal right because her application  made  on  23
    August 2018 for a residence card had been certified in the letter  20th
    of September 2018 as had the earlier application 17 January 2017  in  a
    letter dated 25 April 2018.

13. The judge set out sections of the refusal letter under  challenge,  and
    which I have set out above, and at [11] the  judge  recorded  that  the
    presenting officer conceded that the template paragraph  regarding  the
    appeal should have been deleted but nonetheless the presenting  officer
    relied on in the body of the letter; it was plain that the  appeal  had
    been certified because on page 5 of 8, it was stated that the appellant
    had  not  provided  anything  materially  different  from   her   first
    application or in the appeal dated 29 November 2016 and made  reference
    to regulations 36 (7) and (8) of the EEA  regulations.   The  identical
    points were made in the respondent's earlier letter of 25th April  2018
    but the Next Steps paragraph  was  omitted.    The  presenting  officer
    submitted that the  issues  of  a  marriage  of  convenience  had  been
    considered by the respondent and by an Immigration Judge on 11 November
    2016 who had upheld the  respondent's  refusal  and  found  a  marriage
    convenience.

14. Judge Plumptre at [12] recorded that Mr Waithe submitted that it was  a
    very late application and it was inequitable and unfair.

15. In agreement with Mr Waithe, the judge found at [13] that the form  IAF
    T/5 had been lodged by the solicitors, the  fee  paid  which  had  been
    accepted by the tribunal, and a notice of hearing had been sent to  the
    appellant  and  solicitors  as  long  ago  as  24  October   2018   and
    specifically that an appeal bundle had been prepared by the Home Office
    and to the appellant's solicitor on  12  November  2018,  without  this
    preliminary issue being raised.  The judge  noted  that  the  appellant
    rightly relied on the terms of  the  letter.   The  presenting  officer
    stated that an appeal bundle was  generated  by  a  processing/bundling
    team and that the respondent covering letter 12 November  2018  at  the
    start of the bundle was a generic document.

16. The judge proceeded

    'I refused the respondent's  application  to  strike  out  this  appeal
    finding that it  was  made  far  too  late  in  the  conduct  of  these
    proceedings. This issue could and should have been raised much earlier.
    Further, the respondent had specifically granted in writing a right  of
    appeal in the refusal letter dated 20  September  2018  and  whilst  it
    might be inconsistent with the body of the letter and inadvertent,  the
    appellant was entitled to rely on these words  duly  lodged  an  appeal
    which had not been rejected. Thereafter, the tribunal had processed the
    appeal in the standard manner without the issue of there being no right
    of appeal [n]ever being brought to the appellant's attention. I  agreed
    with and adopted the submission of Mr Waithe that it  was  both  unfair
    and far too late to raise this preliminary issue on the morning of  the
    hearing'

17. The judge in assessing the appeal noted Devaseelan v SSHD [2002]  UKIAT
    00702, noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Khan  had  misdirected
    himself in relation to the burden of proof in Sadovska  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 54.  Judge Plumptre found that the appellant and her  husband  had
    lived together in the property from January 2015 and they continued  to
    live together to the date of the hearing. The parties  had  married  in
    April 2015, had  been  living  together  since  January  2015  and  had
    undergone IVF treatment which the judge found was evidence of a genuine
    and subsisting marriage and  relationship.  Further  to  Sadovska,  the
    respondent had failed to discharge the burden to show that the marriage
    was not genuine and subsisting.  The Secretary of State was recorded as
    not having challenged the  oral  evidence.  There  was  a  durable  and
    subsisting relationship.

18. At the hearing before me Mr Clarke submitted that the ground of  appeal
    in relation to the marriage had been previously certified and that only
    an express 'de-certification' would allow the  appellant  to  bring  an
    appeal on the ground certified under paragraph 36(7) or rely on such  a
    ground.  Mr Clarke referred to the body of the decision letter which he
    contended showed that the ground had been certified even if  an  appeal
    had been attached.

19. Mr Waithe contended an appeal right had been granted there was  a  duty
    of fairness and a duty of candour on  the  part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

    Analysis

20.  The  relevant  parts  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 are set out above.

21. There are a number of difficulties with the position of  the  Secretary
    of State.  First, it is clear that regulation 36 (7)  states  that  the
    Secretary of State may certify a ground for the purposes  of  paragraph
    36(8).  Nowhere in regulation 36 does it state that certification  will
    endure indefinitely and that only express removal of that certification
    will allow an appellant to bring an appeal on such a ground.

22. Even if that were not correct, the Secretary of State  clearly  granted
    the appellant a right of appeal at the close of  the  letter  and  this
    right of appeal is set out in full.  If there needed to be  an  express
    removal of the certification the granting of a right  of  appeal  would
    act as that mechanism.

23. Secondly, the body of the letter as I  have  set  out  above  does  not
    clearly certify that the ground of marriage of convenience  was  to  be
    certified.  Page  5  of  the  refusal  letter  which  I  have  set  out
    extensively, refers to  the  current  application  as  being  dated  17
    January 2017, which it was not, and this suggests that the Secretary of
    State was confused as to the material being  considered.  The  decision
    which followed the previous application was dated  25  April  2018  and
    large sections of that decision were merely copied and pasted into this
    decision without any quotation marks or reported speech marks, and thus
    it was impossible for  a  reader  to  decipher  what  was  specifically
    decided in relation to the certification in the current decision  under
    challenge.  I have underlined the section  which  was  merely  cut  and
    pasted from the previous  decision.  This  also  suggests  that  little
    thought was given to any maintenance of certification independently  of
    the consideration of the material.

24. There may have been an attempt to certify but this was not clearly  set
    out in the decision. The paragraph on which Mr Clarke  relied  made  no
    reference to current certification but to a  marriage  being  "recently
    certified".  There was no confirmation that the certification was being
    maintained. In the light,  however,  of  the  confused  format  of  the
    decision letter and the attaching of a right of appeal at the close  of
    the letter, the refusal  suggests  that  the  ground  relating  to  the
    marriage was no longer certified and that the  appellant  was  able  to
    appeal in country. That was compounded as Judge Plumtree  laid  out  by
    the failure of the Secretary of State to take the  point  earlier  when
    the tribunal forwarded a notice of hearing to the Secretary of State in
    November 2018 nearly 6 months beforehand, and the service of an  appeal
    bundle.

25. The tribunal is a creature of statute and cannot create  appeal  rights
    and the grounds for permission to appeal are to  that  extent,  correct
    but  the  refusal  letter  was  not  clearly  drafted   in   terms   of
    certification, lifted wholesale sections of a previous refusal  without
    any demarcation, and attached a right of  appeal.   Equally  rights  of
    appeal cannot merely be stripped by merely  asserting  that  they  were
    given by a slip of a pen or in error.  In these circumstances I am  not
    even persuaded that the appeal notice was inconsistent with the body of
    the refusal letter.

26. The only ground of appeal was that the judge acted ultra vires. For the
    reasons I have given above I find that that was not the  case.  It  was
    not the judge who granted the  appellant  an  appeal  but  the  refusal
    letter of the Secretary of State in failing to clearly certify  and  by
    attaching a right of appeal explained over three paragraphs.

27.  I  find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre and it will stand.



    Signed                        Helen  Rimington               Date  11th
    July 2019



Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

