

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/06530/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice     | Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                                 |                                    |
|On: 18th June 2019                     | On 25th June 2019                  |
|                                              |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     RN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     (in person)
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 25th October  1979.
    She appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Anthony) to dismiss her appeal against a decision to  refuse  to
    grant  her  'retained'  rights  of  residence  under  the   Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.




 2. The matters in issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  threefold.
    First, had the Appellant's EEA national husband been exercising  treaty
    rights at the date that divorce proceedings were initiated; second, had
    she been exercising treaty rights as if she were an EEA  national;  and
    three whether she was in fact divorced. The First-tier  Tribunal  found
    against the Appellant in respect of all three matters and dismissed the
    appeal.


 3. The Appellant drafted grounds herself which First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    EM Simpson, sensing potential injustice, considered arguable enough  to
    grant permission. Judge Simpson was quite right to sense injustice, and
    that is a matter that I shall return to below. The grounds however, are
    not arguable, and on the law the appeal must be dismissed.

 4. The relevant parts of Regulation 10 read as follows:

         10.-(1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained  the
         right of residence" means, subject to paragraphs  (8)  and  (9),  a
         person who satisfies a condition in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).



         ....

          (5) The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-

              (a)  ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or an
              EEA national with a right of permanent residence on the
              termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A;

              (b) was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with
              these Regulations at the date of the termination;

              (c) satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

              (d) either-

                 (i) prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the
                 termination of the marriage or the civil partnership, the
                 marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at least three
                 years and the parties to the marriage or civil partnership
                 had resided in the United Kingdom for at least one year
                 during its duration;

                 (ii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified
                 person or the EEA national with a right of permanent
                 residence has custody of a child of that qualified person
                 or EEA national;

                 (iii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified
                 person or the EEA national with a right of permanent
                 residence has the right of access to a child of that
                 qualified person or EEA national, where the child is under
                 the age of 18 and where a court has ordered that such
                 access must take place in the United Kingdom; or

                 (iv) the continued right of residence in the United Kingdom
                 of A is warranted by particularly difficult circumstances,
                 such as where A or another family member has been a victim
                 of domestic violence whilst the marriage or civil
                 partnership was subsisting.

           (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

                 (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if the person were
                 an EEA national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a
                 self-sufficient person under regulation 6; or

                 (b)  is the family member of a person who falls within
              paragraph (a).



 5. The evidence before Judge Anthony was very limited.  He appears to have
    dealt with the matter on the papers; Judge Simpson considered that this
    might have been a procedural error but for the reasons  I  explain  any
    such error would be immaterial. That is because  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal there was  no  prospect  of  the
    appeal succeeding under Regulation  10(5).    Judge  Anthony  found  no
    evidence that the Appellant was in fact divorced from her  husband.  At
    the date he heard the appeal, on  the  16th  November  2018,  that  was
    plainly correct, since  I  have  now  been  shown  the  talaqnama  from
    Pakistan which shows the date of dissolution of marriage to be the 17th
    November 2018.    Judge Anthony was  further  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant herself had been working at the relevant  time;  since  there
    was nothing before him to indicate that she had, this too was plainly a
    finding open to him on the evidence.   Nor could  the  Appellant's  ex-
    husband have possibly been exercising treaty  rights  upon  either  the
    initiation or completion of divorce proceedings since at  all  material
    times he was in Pakistan.  It follows that on the facts he was bound to
    dismiss the appeal under the Regs and there was no error of law in  his
    decision.

 6. The appeal under the Regs dismissed, I find  that  it  is  nevertheless
    important to mark the unusual and difficult circumstances of this case.

 7. The Appellant was married to her husband in Pakistan on  the  29th  May
    2009. He is a dual Pakistani /Spanish national and they duly  moved  to
    live in Spain. By the time they arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  the
    25th April 2014 they had three children, born in 2009, 2011, and 2013.

 8. As the Appellant's children grew older her husband  started  exhibiting
    increasingly erratic and  strange  behaviour.  He  was  aggressive  and
    possessive. When the Appellant attended college to take  a  diploma  he
    would follow her there and harass her. He was violent towards  her  and
    the children. Social Services became involved with the family after the
    eldest child confided in her schoolteacher that her father had hit her.
    At one point the Appellant herself approached the  police  because  she
    became afraid that her husband  was  going  to  take  the  children  to
    Pakistan. None of these interventions came to anything and on  the  6th
    April 2018 when the  Appellant  was  at  work,  her  husband  took  the
    children, went to the airport and flew to Pakistan.  He took with  them
    a good deal of the  Appellant's  money,  jewellery  and  her  Pakistani
    passport with her EEA family permit enclosed.  On the 2nd May 2018  the
    Family Division of the High Court (HHJ Butler),  being  satisfied  that
    the children were habitually resident in the United  Kingdom,  made  an
    order under section 8 of the Children Act 1989  that  the  children  be
    returned to the United Kingdom forthwith.

 9. This was the background to the Appellant making, on the 22nd May  2018,
    the application under the EEA Regulations.  For  the  reasons  set  out
    above, that was an application bound to fail, since at that  stage  she
    was no longer a family member of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights. Her husband had ceased his self-employment as a taxi driver  on
    the 5th April 2018 and he had ceased to be in the United Kingdom by the
    evening of the 6th. Applying Singh C-218/14 EU: C: 2015: 476 her rights
    came to an end that day; by the time that the divorce proceedings  were
    initiated in August 2018 she had no rights to 'retain'.  In NA C-115/15
    ECLI: EU: C: 2016 487 the Court of Justice  considered  the  very  same
    factual matrix: a woman  subjected  to  domestic  violence  by  an  EEA
    partner who left the host state before  divorce  proceedings  could  be
    instituted. The  Court  considered  the  purpose  and  meaning  of  the
    Directive, and recognised the potential for abuse by  the  perpetrator,
    but concluded:


         51. In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question
         is that Article 13(2)(c) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted
         as meaning that a third-country national, who is  divorced  from  a
         Union citizen at whose hands she has been the  victim  of  domestic
         violence during the marriage, cannot rely on the retention  of  her
         right of residence in the host Member State, on the basis  of  that
         provision, where the commencement of divorce proceedings post-dates
         the departure of the Union citizen spouse from that Member State.

    There can therefore be no doubt that the Regs are of no  assistance  to
    the Appellant.


10. The Appellant asked me to consider human rights law in the alternative.
    Unfortunately, I cannot because the  Respondent  has  not  yet  had  an
    opportunity  to  consider  whether  leave  should  be  granted   on   a
    discretionary basis, and this appeal was brought under the EEA Regs.  I
    therefore lack the jurisdiction to do so: Amirteymour  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353.  It might further be
    said that this is not so much a case that engages human rights -  which
    are primarily  engaged  by  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  three
    victims of abduction currently resident in Pakistan  -  but  one  which
    calls for the Respondent to exercise his discretion.


11. The words  'exceptional'  and  'compelling'  are  often  used  in  this
    jurisdiction to refer to cases which are sad, but frankly  commonplace.
    I am however in no doubt at all that they could properly be applied  to
    the predicament that the Appellant currently  finds  herself  in.   The
    post-script to the events described above is as follows:

              i) The Appellant has not seen her children since  the  morning
                 of the 6th April 2018 when she left them and went to work;


             ii) The children's father returned to the United  Kingdom  last
                 month and was arrested on arrival  at  Glasgow  airport.  I
                 understand from Mr McVeety that Home  Office  records  show
                 that he was arrested while  still  on  the  plane.   He  is
                 currently being held on remand pending a trial in  October,
                 at which the Appellant is expected to give evidence;

            iii) The Appellant and her family have launched  proceedings  in
                 the courts in Pakistan to retrieve custody of the children,
                 but her father has been told that the children will not  be
                 allowed to live with him unless the  Appellant  returns  to
                 Pakistan;

             iv) This she is unwilling to do, because she fears that as soon
                 as she does  this,  her  ex-husband's  family  will  simply
                 remove the children from the jurisdiction of Pakistan,  and
                 return them to Spain, where they  have  two  uncles  living
                 with permanent residence;

              v) The Appellant would then be stuck in Pakistan with no means
                 to get back to Europe and the children;

             vi) If she leaves the United Kingdom she will not  be  able  to
                 appear  as  a  witness  in  the  October  trial   and   the
                 prosecution against her ex-husband will likely collapse;

            vii) The Appellant has sought  the  advice  of  groups  such  as
                 'Reunite International' but has been told that it  will  be
                 difficult for them to pursue her case  if  her  immigration
                 status in this country remains unresolved;

           viii) The Spanish embassy in the United Kingdom have informed the
                 Appellant that they are unable to pursue any action to  get
                 the children back because they were resident in the  United
                 Kingdom.


12. It seems to me that in these circumstances the most appropriate  course
    of action would be  for  the  Appellant  to  make  an  application  for
    Discretionary Leave 'outside of the rules'.   If  such  an  application
    were  to  be  made  the  Respondent  may  wish   to   give   particular
    consideration to these matters: that the Appellant's  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom is required by the CPS in  the  trial  against  her  ex-
    husband, and that if her status in the United Kingdom is regularised in
    the short-term, this may  enable  her  to  make  some  headway  in  her
    struggle to get her children back.  The Appellant tells me  that  since
    her husband has taken her passport she has been unable to work  in  the
    United Kingdom and has no money at all. I have advised her that if  she
    should make an application to the Home  Office,  she  should  in  those
    circumstances accompany it by making an application for a 'fee  waiver'
    and enclosing the required evidence.




    Decisions


13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


14. I make an order for anonymity in the following terms:


15. "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  Appellant  and  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings"











                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          Dated 20th June
                                    2019
