

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06884/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 22 January 2021                         |On: 4 February 2021            |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                           JOSEPH KINYANJUI WAMBUI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face  to  face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  all  issues  could
be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant, a national of Kenya born  on  3  March  1981,  appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his
appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2016 ("the EEA Regulations"), as  the  family  member  (spouse)  of  an  EEA
national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

The appellant entered the UK on 27 July 2017. He entered into a marriage  on
9 May 2018 with an Italian national, Joanina Kitengele Langiu,  and  applied
for a residence card as the family member of an EEA national  on  16  August
2018. The  respondent  had  some  concerns  about  the  genuineness  of  the
marriage, as a result of a lack of evidence of cohabitation  and  noted  the
appellant's claim to be the father of a child born on  2  January  2018  but
yet he had only entered the UK on 27 July  2017.  The  respondent  therefore
invited the appellant and his wife to an interview, which took place  on  25
September 2018. The respondent considered that the interview  highlighted  a
number of inconsistencies between the evidence of the appellant and the  EEA
national sponsor and accordingly suspected that  the  marriage  was  one  of
convenience for the sole purpose of obtaining an immigration advantage.  The
application was therefore refused on 4 October 2018.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 24 May 2019. The appellant and his wife gave  oral  evidence  at
the appeal but were without legal representation. The judge  concluded  that
the marriage was one of convenience owing to a number of  discrepancies  and
inconsistencies in the evidence and he dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal that decision was sought on behalf  of  the  appellant.
It was explained in the grounds that the appellant and his wife had  met  in
Kenya in 2015 and had lived together in  a  relationship  akin  to  marriage
from March 2016 until the appellant came to the UK on a  visit  visa  on  27
July 2017. The sponsor joined him in the UK on 12 September 2017  and  their
daughter, conceived whilst they were in Kenya, was born on 2 January 2018.

The grounds asserted that the judge had erred  by  refusing  an  adjournment
application made by the appellant at the hearing on the basis  that  he  had
only been informed on the day of the hearing  that  his  representative  was
unable to attend, and further on the basis that the  respondent  had  served
the 60-page marriage interview only at the hearing.  It  was  asserted  that
the judge had relied on that interview record to dismiss the appeal  without
having given the appellant an opportunity to address the  issues  raised  by
the respondent and  that  the  proceedings  were  therefore  not  fair.  The
grounds asserted further that the judge had misapplied the test in  marriage
of convenience cases and had  'rubber-stamped'  the  respondent's  documents
served at the hearing  without  considering  the  appellant's  position.  No
mention was made  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  wife  and  daughter
attended the hearing and there was a perception of bias. The judge  did  not
consider  other  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  and   gave   no
consideration to the couple's child.

Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 9 July 2019.

At the hearing Ms Cunha conceded  that  she  had  difficulty  defending  the
judge's decision, particularly given the failure to mention the  appellant's
and sponsor's child when there was evidence before him in that  regard.  She
agreed that the decision ought to be set aside, but she  did  not  want  the
decision to be re-made without further oral evidence.

There was some discussion about whether the matter  should  be  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal or whether there could  be  evidence  taken  at  the
hearing before me. Mr Jafar said that he was  inclined  not  to  tender  the
appellant as it was his submission that the respondent had simply failed  to
discharge the burden of  proof,  given  the  unsatisfactory  and  misleading
nature of the interview record. However it was agreed  by  both  parties  in
the end that the appellant and his wife would  give  oral  evidence  and  Ms
Cunha was content that the arrangements  for  so  doing  were  satisfactory,
with the appellant's  wife  leaving  the  room  whilst  the  appellant  gave
evidence and vice-versa.

Ms Cunha asked the appellant various questions about his  relationship  with
his wife, about her pregnancy, when he found out  about  the  pregnancy  and
whether it was planned, how they decided on their child's  name,  what  made
him and his wife decide to come to the UK, what family his wife had  in  the
UK and in Kenya, what employment his wife had in Kenya and in the  UK,  what
his own work was in the UK and what was his current  employment  status,  as
well as about the marriage ceremony. Mr Jafar re-examined the  appellant  on
some of his evidence. The appellant's wife was  then  cross-examined  by  Ms
Cunha on the same issues as the appellant.

Having completed the oral evidence  and  accepted  the  consistency  of  the
evidence given by the appellant and his wife, Ms Cunha conceded  that  their
marriage was entirely credible  and  genuine  and  asked  me  to  allow  the
appeal.

In view of Ms Cunha's concession, there is  no  need  for  me  to  make  any
detailed findings. I would just add that, as found by Ms Cunha, I also  have
no hesitation in finding that the appellant's and the sponsor's marriage  is
entirely genuine.  Their  answers  to  personal  questions  were  completely
consistent and it was clear from observing them together that  they  were  a
genuine and loving couple. The nature of the questions was such  that  their
answers could not have been rehearsed. It seems  to  me  that  any  previous
conclusions reached on the genuineness of their relationship were  unfounded
and that any discrepancies which had arisen  in  their  evidence  previously
were no doubt as a result of misunderstanding or human error.

Accordingly, I find that the respondent has not  discharged  the  burden  of
proving that the marriage is one of convenience. On the contrary this  is  a
genuine marriage. As such, and given that no other  reasons  were  given  by
the respondent for refusing the  appellant's  application,  and  furthermore
that it is clear that the sponsor is exercising treaty rights in the  UK,  I
conclude that the appellant has met the requirements of the EEA  Regulations
to show that he is the family member of a  qualified  EEA  national  and  is
entitled to a residence  card  on  that  basis.   The  appeal  is  therefore
allowed.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and is  re-made  by
allowing the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016.







Signed:   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 22 January
2021

