
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06034/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2018                  |On 09 January 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                   PAMELA DANIELLE DE FIGUEIREDO CIRIBELLI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of  Brazil  born  on  30  May  1989.  She
       appeals with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
       decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  M  K  Lawrence,
       dismissing her appeal against a decision of the respondent, dated 22
       June 2017, to refuse her a permanent residence card.  The  appellant
       exercised the right of appeal  afforded  by  Regulation  36  of  the
       Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  EEA
       Regulations")


    2. Permission to appeal was granted  on  all  grounds  because  it  was
       arguable that  Judge  Lawrence  had  misunderstood  the  issues  for
       decision. The appellant had argued that she had acquired a permanent
       right of residence while living with her father, Mr Rubson Ciribelli
       Pereira, who was married to an Italian  national  exercising  Treaty
       rights in the UK.  The  judge  had  confused  the  requirements  for
       extended family members to show recent and prior dependency.

    3. At the beginning of the  hearing  Mr  Wilding  accepted  that  Judge
       Lawrence had made a material error of law and had failed to  address
       the central question, which was whether the appellant had acquired a
       permanent right of residence as a result of living with  her  father
       and stepmother. There were  no  adverse  credibility  findings  made
       against the appellant or her  witnesses.  The  respondent  had  been
       unrepresented at the hearing.

    4. In the circumstances, it is perfectly clear  that  Judge  Lawrence's
       decision was erroneous in law and must be set aside for the  reasons
       identified by Mr Lee  in  his  grounds.  I  decided  to  remake  the
       decision.

    5. The  appellant  attended  the  hearing  and  was  prepared  to  give
       evidence. However, it was not  necessary  to  call  her  because  Mr
       Wilding did not wish to challenge  her  evidence  and  he  helpfully
       agreed that the appellant was  entitled  to  a  permanent  residence
       card.

    6. The EEA Regulations read as follows:

             ""Family member"


             7.-(1) In these Regulations, "family member" means, in
             relation to a person ("A")-


                  (a) ...


                  (b) A's direct descendants, or the direct  descendants  of
                  A's spouse or civil partner who are either-


                      (i) aged under 21; or


                      (ii) dependants of A,  or  of  A's  spouse  or  civil
                  partner; ...


             Right of permanent residence


             15.-(1) The following persons acquire the right to reside in
             the United Kingdom permanently-


                  (a) ...


                  (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not  an  EEA
                  national but who has resided in the  United  Kingdom  with
                  the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations  for
                  a continuous period of five years; ..."

    7. This appeal  turns  on  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  was
       dependent on her father for a continuous period  of  five  years.  I
       find as fact that she was. The appellant was born on  30  May  1989.
       She entered the UK on 14  August  2007,  aged  18,  and  joined  her
       father's household. Up to the point she turned 21, on 30  May  2010,
       she  was  the  'family  member'  of  her  stepmother  by  virtue  of
       Regulation 7(1)(b)(i).


    8. From  that  point  until  14  August  2012  the  appellant  met  the
       requirements of Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) provided she was dependent on
       her father. The unchallenged evidence of the appellant is  that  she
       lived in her father's household, worked part-time as  a  childminder
       and paid a contribution to the household rent. She  commenced  full-
       time employment with Lacoste  on  23  September  2013.  Her  father,
       stepmother and siblings were granted permanent residence cards on 10
       October 2011. Evidently, the respondent was satisfied at that  point
       that the appellant's father  was  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
       exercising Treaty rights.  It  is  more  likely  than  not  that  he
       continued to be so.


    9. I find the appellant was dependent on her father up to and beyond 14
       August 2012. Although she had some income  from  childminding,  this
       was not enough to meet her essential needs. She  required  financial
       support from her father and  stepmother  and  she  continued  to  be
       accommodated by them in return for a modest contribution towards the
       rent.


   10. I find the appellant resided  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
       Regulations for a continuous period of five  years  from  14  August
       2007 until 14 August 2012. In fact, she remained  dependent  on  her
       father until at least 23 September 2013. It  follows  the  appellant
       satisfies  the  requirements  of  Regulation  15(1)(b)  and  she  is
       entitled to a permanent residence card.




NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

     The following decision is substituted:

         The appeal is allowed under the EEA Regulations.

         No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 14 December 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
