
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06623/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd August 2019                   |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


                                   Between

                          Babatunde Adebayo Ayoade
                        (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:  No representation
Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

The appellant, a national of Nigeria born on 12th May 1980 appeals against
the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence promulgated on 18th
January 2019 which refused his appeal.  That appeal was against the
Secretary of State's refusal dated 14th September 2018 of his application
for a residence card under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
Regulations 2016 on the basis that he had engaged in a proxy marriage to
[JM] a Lithuanian national exercising treaty rights.

According to the decision of the Secretary of State, the applicant had not
provided sufficient evidence to show he qualified as the spouse of an EEA
national.  The Secretary of State refused his application on the basis that
(i) the registration of the marriage did not include all the elements
required by the statutory provisions under Nigerian statutory law and (ii)
that it was deemed that the claimed Court Registrar in Nigeria, confirming
the marriage was in accordance with native and customary law, did not refer
to statutory law and therefore the registration was not in accordance with
Nigerian statutory law.  The Court Registrar appeared not to be aware of
the requirements and thus was not a competent authority with legal power to
create or confirm the facts attested.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence decided the matter on the papers and set
out the position of the respondent and referred to Section 42 Births Deaths
etc (Customary Registration) Decree No 69 1992 Act Cap. B9 Laws of the
Federation of Nigeria 2004 ('the 2004 Act').  He concluded that the
Certificate of Marriage did not comply with the requirements of Section 42
of the 2004 Act namely that it did not include the EEA national's (the
sponsor) relationship to the person who consented on her behalf to the
marriage, the name of the person consenting, her nationality, her usual
place of residence, State of origin, her age, marital status, the
appellant's relationship to the person who consented to the marriage, the
person who consented, the appellant's nationality,  his usual place of
residence, his state of origin , his age and marital status.

The judge concluded that the appellant had provided a 'to Whom It May
concern' letter which was purposed to be issued by the Registrar of
Marriages and found that a Registrar purporting to confirm that the
marriage conformed with the 2004 Act did not mean it did conform and that
conformation should be on the face of the document.  Further there was no
evidence of anyone consenting on behalf of the sponsor.  The judge
disagreed with the grounds of appeal at paragraph 16 and added that he had
read the relevant Section 42, which provided the substance of what amounted
to a proxy (customary) marriage but local governments had the duty to
provide the procedure for the actual registration of the marriage.   The
judge found that those were two distinct matters.

The grounds of appeal advanced that

    (i)    the judge erred because the document containing the details
    sought (form CM1) was already available and had been issued by the
    Customary Court

    (ii)   the appellant had no control over how the local government
    issued the marriage certificate. There was enough evidence to show the
    marriage took place. Their relationship was genuine, and his wife was
    eight months pregnant.

The grant of permission noted that the judge made no reference to Awuku v
SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178 and there were arguable errors of law. Awuku held
at paragraph 23

         'More fundamentally, I consider that in cases such as the present
         the application of the rules of private international law in the
         law of England and Wales would not, on any view, result in any
         incompatibility with EU law. The law of England and Wales
         recognises proxy marriage if valid by the lex loci celebrationis.
         Accordingly, a spouse of an EU national who has concluded such a
         marriage will qualify as a family member within Article 2 of the
         Directive'.

Analysis

The background to this appeal was that the appellant and his partner (the
EEA national sponsor) had met at the University of Coventry in 2011, where
they were both students. The appellant proposed to his partner in September
2017 after they had begun living together.  They married under Nigerian
customary law on 5th February 2018.  The sponsor's mother ([RC]) and
stepfather lived in the UK and gave their consent to the marriage which was
arranged by the appellant's father.  There was written evidence from the
mother dated February 2018 that the couple had known each other for 7
years.

Both the appellant and his partner asserted they could not go to Nigeria
for the marriage as the appellant at that time was pregnant.  As set out in
the witness statements, which were before the First-tier Tribunal judge,
and dated 21st November 2018 the appellant's partner (the sponsor) had
miscarried twice.   She put it down to the stress she was suffering. There
is medical evidence in the file which was before the First-tier Tribunal
(antenatal reports naming the appellant), and thus confirming the
relationship which was before the First-tier Tribunal. Those reports
support the fact of a miscarriage on 11th November 2017.  There is also
medical evidence to show that the appellant was pregnant when she underwent
the said proxy marriage in February 2018.  It would appear from the reports
that she experienced yet another miscarriage.  Finally, a child was born on
25th June 2019.

    The appellant made an application on 29th May 2018 for a residence card
    on the basis of a proxy marriage and in that application he set out
    when the relationship commenced, identified that the couple had
    commenced living together in September 2017 and that the sponsor was
    pregnant and expecting their first child. He noted that the sponsor was
    sick and could not travel. As the sponsor was (and is) employed and
    currently working (evidenced by a contract of employment and payslips
    in the bundle), no issue was taken with the issue of the sponsor
    exercising treaty rights. The appellant's partner has a residence card
    and is exercising treaty rights.

The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 set out as
follows

         "Family member"

         7. -     (1)  In  these  Regulations,  "family  member"  means,  in
             relation to a person ("A")-

                  (a)  A's spouse or civil partner;

         ...

         "Extended family member"

         8. -     (1)  In these Regulations "extended family member" means a
             person who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under
             regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies  a  condition
             in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

             ...

             (5) The condition in this paragraph is that the person is  the
             partner (other than a civil partner)  of,  and  in  a  durable
             relationship with, an EEA national, and is able to prove  this
             to the decision maker.

I find that the findings of the judge in relation to the proxy marriage
itself were not subject to material error because although the appellant
had maintained that not all documents had been considered, there was no
record of a person consenting on behalf of the sponsor on the face of the
marriage certificate itself.

Further to AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT
00245 (IAC)

         "Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted on  a
         ground that was not advanced by an applicant for  permission,  only
         if:

         (a)      the judge is satisfied that  the  ground  he  or  she  has
         identified is one which has a strong prospect of success:

             (i) for the original appellant ..."

The appellant had in his grounds of appeal challenged the decision of the
respondent on the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the
EEA regulations. At the hearing before me Mr Walker conceded that the First-
tier Tribunal should have considered, and did not which was an error,
whether there was a durable relationship under regulation 8.   It was not a
new matter but even so consented to its consideration. There was a wealth
of documentation in the bundle which included witness statements,
photographs, tenancy agreement, and antenatal medical reports, which
indicated that the appellant and sponsor were in a durable relationship
well before any proxy marriage.  I accept that that was an obvious point on
which the appellant did have, on the evidence, a strong prospect of success
and that omission, with which Mr Walker agreed, was an error of law.

On that basis although I do not set aside the conclusions on the basis of
the proxy marriage, I do set aside the dismissal of the appeal under the
EEA regulations and remake the decision. There was an obvious omission in
the reasoning and findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

A marriage certificate was produced which showed that the appellant and
sponsor had married in the UK on 15th May 2019.  The appellant sponsor and
a child attended at court.  A birth certificate was also produced which
confirmed that the appellant and sponsor had a child born on 25th June
2019.  With the agreement of Mr Walker, who conceded this was not a new
matter as it related to the marriage, I admitted this evidence under rules
2 and 5 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  With
reference to the EEA regulations I must consider the facts as they present
at the date of the hearing, Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs: relevant
evidence) [2013] UKUT 00346 (IAC).  In the light of all the documentary
evidence, including the UK marriage certificate (and the baby at court) I
accept that the appellant and sponsor are married in the UK pursuant to the
Marriage Act 1949 and this is not a marriage of convenience. The sponsor is
an EEA national exercising treaty rights and I therefore allow the appeal
under regulation 7 of the EEA regulations 2016.

For the reasons given above the Judge erred materially.  I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision under section 12(2)
(b) (ii) of the TCE 2007

Decision

    The appeal of Mr Ayoade is allowed under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.




    Helen Rimington


    Upper Tribunal Judge    Dated 2nd August 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed the appeal an I make no fee  award  because  of  the
complexity of the matter.

