
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/06553/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 February 2018                        |On 11 April 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Hammad Hanif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Malik, instructed by City Law Practice
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home  Department.   I  shall  refer  herein  to  Mr  Hanif  as  the
    'claimant'.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan,  born  2  August  1985.   On  10
    November 2015 he applied for an EEA residence card as  confirmation  of
    his right to reside in the United as the spouse of a Hungarian national
    (Ms Escedi).

 3. This application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of
    10 June  2016,  it  being  concluded  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience and therefore not  a  marriage  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (see regulation 2 thereof).

 4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge E Smith on  4  January
    2017  and  was  allowed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  9   January.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  thereafter  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker on 25 August 2017, and thus the matter
    comes before me.

Decision and Discussion

 5. Ms Aboni initially framed the Secretary of State's challenge as one  of
    inadequacy of reasoning in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  In this
    regard she observed as follows:

      i) At paragraph 23 of its decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
         that there had been a change of interpreter during  the  claimant's
         immigration interview, but inaccurately observed that this had  not
         been recorded in the transcript of the  interview.   This  led  the
         Tribunal to erroneously conclude that the  failure  to  record  the
         change of interpreter "undermines the accuracy of  the  [interview]
         transcript";

     ii) In paragraph 24 of its decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
         that discrepancies existed as between the  evidence  given  by  the
         claimant and that given by the EEA sponsor during their  respective
         interviews, and that such discrepancies had not been explained.  It
         further found the claimant  to  be  "an  unhelpful  and  unreliable
         witness".  The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing  to  adequately
         explain why the nature and extent of  such  discrepancies  did  not
         lead it to find the marriage to have been one of convenience.

 6. After taking stock of Mr Malik's oral  submissions  Ms  Aboni  accepted
    that as the consequence of the combination of the  reasoning  found  in
    paragraph 29 of the Supreme Court's judgment in Sadovska v SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 54 and certain of the findings of fact made by that the First-tier
    Tribunal, the claimant's appeal would inevitably  have  to  be  allowed
    even if the First-tier Tribunal decision were set aside.

 7. In Sadovska the Supreme Court said as follows:

         "For this purpose 'marriage of  convenience'  is  a  term  of  art.
         Although it is defined in the Directive and the 2009  Communication
         as a marriage the sole purpose of which is to gain rights of  entry
         to and residence in the European Union, the 2014 Handbook  suggests
         a more flexible approach, in which this  must  be  the  predominant
         purpose.  It is not enough that the marriage may  bring  incidental
         immigration and other benefits  if  this  is  not  its  predominant
         purpose.  Furthermore, except in cases  of  deceit  by  the  non-EU
         national, this must be the purpose of them both.  Clearly a  non-EU
         national may be guilty of abuse when the EU national is not because
         she believes that it is a genuine relationship."

 8. Ms Aboni accepted that the  instant  case  is  not  one  in  which  the
    sponsor's intentions in marrying the claimant were said to be  for  the
    purpose of allowing the  claimant  to  gain  rights  of  entry  to  and
    residence in the European Union.

 9. Consequently, it was accepted that even if the  SSHD  establishes  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law as claimed, such  errors  were
    not material to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appeal.

10. In  any  event,  even  absent  Ms  Aboni's  concessions  I  would  have
    concluded, for the reasons that follow, that the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision should remain standing.

11. The core of the Tribunal's reasoning is as follows:

         "25. In Babar ...the Tribunal said that the burden of proving  that
             there has been a valid  marriage  will  usually  fall  on  the
             parties claiming it has taken place, but if  the  parties  can
             produce a reliable marriage certificate, the  party  disputing
             the marriage must prove to a high degree of  probability  that
             the marriage is not valid.  Inevitably this  decision  depends
             upon  the  reliability  of  the  marriage  certificate.    The
             certificate produced in this case  is  not  disputed.   It  is
             anything other than  a  genuinely  issued  certificate.   This
             decision was followed through in  the  case  of  Agho  v  SSHD
             [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 where it was held that where an applicant
             sought an EEA residence card on the basis that he was  married
             to an EEA national, he simply  had  to  produce  his  marriage
             certificate  and  his  spouse's  passport.   As  a  matter  of
             principle, a spouse established a prima facie case that he was
             the family member of an EEA national by providing the marriage
             certificate and his sponsor's passport.  The legal burden  was
             on the Secretary of State  to  show  that  any  marriage  thus
             proved was a marriage of convenience and that burden  was  not
             discharged  merely  by  showing  reasonable  suspicion.    The
             evidential burden might shift to the  applicant  by  proof  of
             facts that justify the inference that  the  marriage  was  not
             genuine.  The facts giving rise to the  inference  included  a
             failure to answer a  request  for  documentary  proof  of  the
             genuineness of the marriage where grounds for  suspicion  have
             been raised.  Again, in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ it was held  that
             the legal burden was on the SSHD to prove  that  an  otherwise
             valid marriage was a marriage of convenience so as to  justify
             the refusal of a residence card  under  the  EEA  Regulations.
             The legal burden of proof in relation to marriage lay  on  the
             Secretary of State, but if she had used  evidence  capable  of
             pointing to the  conclusion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
             convenience, the evidential burden shifted  to  the  applicant
             (paras 24-27).

         26.   I  found  the  appellant  to  be  an  unhelpful  witness  but
             appreciating where the burden of proof lies I cannot find  the
             discrepancies in the interviews are significant or  that  they
             go beyond reasonable suspicion and, therefore, I am  satisfied
             the respondent has not discharged the burden of proof and that
             the burden has not, on the evidence before me shifted  to  the
             appellant."

12. Taking the two grounds raised by Ms Aboni in her initial submissions in
    turn, although it is  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    paragraph 23 of its decision in stating that the change of  interpreter
    was not recorded in the transcript of the claimant's interview and that
    this undermined the accuracy of the transcript,  it  is  equally  plain
    that this error had no material bearing on  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusions.  The Tribunal accepted both the existence of discrepancies
    as between the evidence given by claimant and  his  wife  during  their
    respective interviews,  and  that  these  discrepancies  had  not  been
    satisfactorily  explained.   It  was  to   the   existence   of   these
    discrepancies, and the explanation  thereof,  that  the  issue  of  the
    recording of the change of interpreter went. Both issues were  resolved
    in the SSHD's favour.

13. As to the second ground, it is to be recalled that the SSHD has made no
    attempt to visit the property  in  which  the  claimant  and  his  wife
    purport to reside.  The only evidence relied upon  in  support  of  the
    contention that the claimant engaged in a marriage of  convenience  are
    the discrepancies in evidence given by the claimant  and  his  wife  in
    their respect interviews. However, these discrepancies must  be  viewed
    in the context of the interview records read as a whole.  Both claimant
    and his wife were asked in the region  of  200  questions  each  during
    their interviews. Much of the evidence given was  entirely  consistent.
    The First-tier Tribunal looked at the interview records in  the  round,
    identified  the  existence  of  the  discrepancies  and  evaluated  the
    explanation for those  discrepancies.    In  my  view  it  was  plainly
    entitled to conclude on the basis of all of the evidence before it that
    the SSHD had  not  demonstrated  to  the  required  standard  that  the
    claimant had engaged in a marriage of convenience.  Although  I  accept
    that the First-tier Tribunal could have expressed its  conclusions  and
    reasons in more detail, its decision discloses the process  the  First-
    tier Tribunal undertook to reach its conclusions. It was required to no
    more in my view.

14. For all  these  reasons  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision does not contain an error of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
    outcome of the appeal, and it is to remain standing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is to remain standing.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
