

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06688/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 December 2020                          |                              |
|                                             |On 31 December 2020           |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                artan stamati
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the remaking decision in  this  appeal  following  my  previous
    error of law decision that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and
    that its decision should be set aside.  That decision  is  set  out  in
    full as an annex.  I expressly preserved the finding by the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the appellant's repeated offending was very serious.

 2. At the end of the error of law  hearing  on  22  September  2020,  both
    representatives were of the view that a further hearing  in  this  case
    would be unnecessary unless I considered that additional  evidence  was
    required.  My error of law decision contained directions to the parties
    to file and serve any further written submissions if  they  so  wished.
    In the event I formed the view that no further  evidence  was  in  fact
    required and that  I  could  remake  the  decision  without  a  further
    hearing, pursuant to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  I had regard to the overriding objective, the guidance set
    out by the Supreme Court in Osborn v The Parole Board [2013]  UKSC  61;
    [2013] 3 WLR 1020, and the recent judgment of Fordham J in JCWI  v  The
    President of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2020]
    EWHC 3103 (Admin).

 3. In compliance  with  my  directions,  the  appellant's  representatives
    submitted a bundle containing the evidence that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  At the same  time  they  confirmed  that  they  had  no
    further written submissions to make.  Nothing  was  received  from  the
    respondent.

 4. In order to ensure that the respondent had  had  every  opportunity  to
    make any further written submissions whether going to the substance  of
    the case or to the method by which  the  remaking  decision  should  be
    arrived at), I issued  further  directions,  dated  26  November  2020.
    Having undertaken checks with the  Upper  Tribunal's  records,  nothing
    further has been received from the respondent as at the date stated  at
    the end of this decision.

Background

 5. The appellant, a citizen of Albania, first came to the  United  Kingdom
    in May 2015.  In 2016 he  was  convicted  of  offences  concerning  the
    possession of criminal property (a very large sum of cash),  possession
    with intent to supply a Class A drug, and possession of false  identity
    documents.  A deportation order  was  made  against  him,  pursuant  to
    section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  On 15 September  2016  he
    was deported to Albania.  On  16  December  2016  he  married  a  Greek
    national, KS, in Albania.  She was ordinarily residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant re-entered the United Kingdom on or  around  14
    September 2017 and joined KS here.  On 2 February 2018 he applied for a
    residence card as the family member of an EEA national, namely KS.   In
    May of that year, he was  convicted  of  possessing  a  Class  A  drug,
    driving a vehicle whilst uninsured, and being under  the  influence  of
    drugs whilst driving.  In July, KS gave birth to their son.

 6. The application for a residence card was refused on 25 September  2018.
    The  basis  for  this  was  Regulation  24(1)  of  the  Regulations  in
    conjunction with Regulation 27(3)  and  (5).   It  was  said  that  the
    appellant's offending disclosed grounds of  public  policy  and  public
    security, that he represented  a  genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to  the  fundamental  interests  of  society,  and  that
    deportation would be proportionate.  The five fundamental interests  of
    society specifically referred to in the decision letter were:

              i.  preventing  unlawful  immigration   and   abuse   of   the
                 immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the   integrity   and
                 effectiveness of the immigration control system;

             ii. excluding or removing a... family member of an EEA national
                 with a conviction... and maintaining public  confidence  in
                 the ability  of  the  relevant  authorities  to  take  such
                 action;

            iii. tackling offences likely to cause harm to society;

             iv. combating the effects of persistent offending; and

                 so

              v. protecting the public.

 7. The decision letter asserts  that  the  appellant  had  re-entered  the
    United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order.

 8. The letter states in terms that the refusal of the  application  for  a
    residence card did not "attach any requirement for [the  appellant]  to
    imminently leave the United Kingdom and does not place any restrictions
    on [the appellant's] claimed right of residence."  It was said that the
    appellant would be contacted by the relevant casework unit  in  respect
    of whether a deportation order would be made against him in due course.

 9. There was no dispute as to the genuineness of the marriage or the  fact
    that KS had been exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

10. At the time of writing this remake decision, no such deportation action
    under the Regulations has been taken by the respondent.

Findings and conclusions

11. I begin by setting out a number of undisputed matters.   The  appellant
    became a direct family member of an EEA national when he married KS  in
    Albania in 2016.  He had this status  when  he  re-entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2017.  There has never been any suggestion that his marriage
    was one of convenience, or that KS has not been exercising  her  Treaty
    rights in this country.  It follows that the appellant has been at  all
    material times a family member of an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.  His right of residence in this  capacity
    arises from the Directive and is not conditional upon the  issuance  of
    any documentation such as a residence card. The  respondent's  decision
    to refuse to issue a residence card did not require  the  appellant  to
    leave United Kingdom, nor did it, in the words of the  decision  letter
    itself, "place any restrictions on [his] claimed right  of  residence."
    In light of what I have already said, the reference  to  the  right  of
    residence being "claimed" is misplaced.

12. The appellant's argument has been and remains that  these  basic  facts
    have the effect that the respondent is unable to justify  her  decision
    to refuse to issue a residence card on public policy grounds.

13. When setting out my reasons in the error of law decision,  I  was,  and
    remain,  in  no  doubt  that  the  appellant's  central   argument   is
    effectively determinative of this appeal.

14. The judge's preserved finding that the appellant's offending record was
    very serious combined with my own assessment of the evidence as a whole
    leads me to find that the appellant represents a genuine, present,  and
    sufficiently serious threat in general terms.  However, that is not, of
    itself,  sufficient.   Pursuant   to   regulation   27(5)(c)   of   the
    Regulations, the threat must affect one (or more)  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society, as set out in Schedule 1 to the Regulations.   In
    other words, must be a nexus between the  threat  and  the  fundamental
    interests.

15. The five facets of the fundamental interests of society  relied  on  by
    the respondent in her decision letter are as follows:

              i.  preventing  unlawful  immigration   and   abuse   of   the
                 immigration  laws  and  maintaining   the   integrity   and
                 effectiveness of the immigration control system;

             ii. excluding or removing an EEA national or family  member  of
                 an EEA national with a conviction  and  maintaining  public
                 confidence in the ability of the  relevant  authorities  to
                 take such action;

            iii. tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where  an
                 immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but
                 where there  is  wider  societal  harm  (such  as  offences
                 relating to the misuse of drugs  or  crime  with  a  cross-
                 border dimension...;

             iv. combating the effects of persistent offending;

              v. protecting the public.

16. These interests fall to be considered in the context of  the  appellant
    having a right of residence, with all  its  accompanying  entitlements,
    entirely independent of the issuance of a residence card.

17. As matters stand, there is no question of him being  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom.  It cannot sensibly be said that  the  public  will  be
    protected,  or  the  effects  of  persistent  offending  combated:  the
    appellant is currently permitted to remain in United Kingdom and  could
    potentially continue to commit crimes.  It is  extremely  difficult  to
    see how the refusal to issue a  residence  card,  without  accompanying
    deportation action pursuant to the Regulations, could be said to assist
    the maintenance of public confidence in the ability of the  authorities
    to take action against relevant individuals.  Indeed, the  respondent's
    failure to instigate deportation action would appear to run contrary to
    this particular aim.  As to preventing unlawful  immigration,  this  is
    not a case in which the  appellant  was  refused  admission  to  United
    Kingdom on public policy grounds.

18. In my view, the reality of the situation was crystalised by Ms Cunha in
    her submissions at the error of  law  hearing.   It  was  felt  by  the
    respondent that the refusal of a residence  card  would  "inhibit"  the
    appellant's ability to  be  "economically  viable",  and  therefore  to
    exercise his right of residence under EU law, by denying him a document
    which would be of assistance when satisfying potential employers of his
    right to work in this country.  In a sense, this could be described  as
    a form of constructive denial (or at least significant  impediment)  of
    his rights under EU law.  Not to put too  fine  a  point  on  it,  this
    effect (whether intended or not) comes close to being  abusive  of  the
    rights afforded under  the  Directive.   In  my  judgment,  it  clearly
    renders the respondent's ability to rely on the  fundamental  interests
    of society set out in the  decision  letter  so  diminished  as  to  be
    incapable of constituting sufficient  justification  for  the  decision
    under appeal.

19. I turn to Regulation 24(1), which provides, in so far as is relevant:

          "The Secretary of  State  may  refuse  to  issue...  a  residence
          card... if the refusal...  is  justified  on  grounds  of  public
          policy, public security or public health..."

20. As discussed in paragraph 17 of my error of law decision, I had held  a
    concern that this provision  may  be  seen  as  devoid  of  utility  if
    justification for the refusal of a residence card  to  someone  in  the
    appellant's  position  is  very  difficult,  if  not   impossible,   to
    establish.  However, with reference to paragraph 32 of my error of  law
    decision, I conclude that  the  discretionary  power  under  Regulation
    24(1) does have useful application.  An example of this is the extended
    family member applying for residence card who could  be  refused  under
    the discretion within that provision.

21. The First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to  address  the  proportionality
    exercise at all.  In light of my conclusion on the appellant's  primary
    contention, above, I can deal with this matter briefly.  In the absence
    of any, or at least any adequate, justification  for  the  respondent's
    decision, and combined  with  the  interference  with  the  appellant's
    practical ability to actually obtain work  (an  interference  that  has
    been expressly acknowledged and indeed relied on by the respondent),  I
    am satisfied that the decision is also disproportionate.

22. Finally, I turn to the issue of the deportation order.  The  conclusion
    I reached in my error of law decision can simply be re-stated here.   A
    deportation order made under section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971 in respect of third country national without  any  EU  law  rights
    cannot in my judgment override or circumvent the subsequent acquisition
    of such rights by the subject of that order.   If  an  individual  does
    acquire EU law rights such as, for example, those pertaining to  direct
    family member of an  EEA  national,  they  then  become  subject  to  a
    different legal regime, as contained in the Directive and, in so far as
    they are compatible with it, the Regulations.   In  the  present  case,
    there has never been a deportation order made under Regulation 32(3) of
    the Regulations.  The appellant was  never  refused  admission  to  the
    United Kingdom by virtue of being subject to such a deportation  order.
    I conclude that whilst there was an extent  deportation  order  against
    the appellant made when he had no EU law rights, this did not mean that
    he re-entered the United Kingdom in 2017 as an illegal entrant,  as  at
    that time he had acquired EU law rights and there  was  no  deportation
    order pursuant to the Regulations.

23. As stated in my error of law decision, I do not  see  that  this  issue
    ultimately has any real bearing on this case.  Even if it could be said
    that the appellant re-entered the United Kingdom in 2017 in  breach  of
    the deportation order made in  2016  and  should  therefore  have  been
    considered as an illegal entrant, that of itself has no material impact
    on his right of residence under EU law.   Indeed,  the  respondent  has
    expressly acknowledged this in the decision letter.

24. The appellant's appeal must be allowed.

25. It is of course entirely a matter for the respondent as to whether  she
    will issue a deportation decision pursuant to the Regulations.




Anonymity

26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and I have
    not been asked to do so.  I make no such direction.



Notice of Decision

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and it has been set aside.

28. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal to issue him  with  a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 16 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of �140.00.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 16 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06688/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 September 2020                         |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                artan stamati
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel, instructed by Rashid and
                    Rashid Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A J M Baldwin ("the judge"), promulgated on 17 September
    2019,  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of his application for a residence card under  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2016   ("the
    Regulations").

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Albania, first came to the  United  Kingdom
    in May 2015.  In 2016 he  was  convicted  of  offences  concerning  the
    possession of criminal property (a very large sum of cash),  possession
    with intent to supply a Class A drug, and possession of false  identity
    documents.  A deportation order  was  made  against  him,  pursuant  to
    section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  On 15 September  2016  he
    was deported to Albania.  On  16  December  2016  he  married  a  Greek
    national, KS, in Albania.  She was ordinarily residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant re-entered the United Kingdom on or  around  14
    September 2017 and joined KS here.  On 2 February 2018 he applied for a
    residence card as the family member of an EEA national, namely KS.   In
    May of that year, he was  convicted  of  possessing  a  Class  A  drug,
    driving a vehicle whilst uninsured, and being under  the  influence  of
    drugs whilst driving.  In July, KS gave birth to their son.

 3. The application for a residence card was refused on 25 September  2018.
    The  basis  for  this  was  Regulation  24(1)  of  the  Regulations  in
    conjunction with Regulation 27(3)  and  (5).   It  was  said  that  the
    appellant's offending disclosed grounds of  public  policy  and  public
    security, that he represented  a  genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to  the  fundamental  interests  of  society,  and  that
    deportation would be proportionate.  The five fundamental interests  of
    society specifically referred to in the decision letter were:

             vi.  preventing  unlawful  immigration   and   abuse   of   the
                 immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the   integrity   and
                 effectiveness of the immigration control system;

            vii. excluding or removing a... family member of an EEA national
                 with a conviction... and maintaining public  confidence  in
                 the ability  of  the  relevant  authorities  to  take  such
                 action;

           viii. tackling offences likely to cause harm to society;

             ix. combating the effects of persistent offending; and

              x. protecting the public.

 4. The decision letter asserts  that  the  appellant  had  re-entered  the
    United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order.

 5. The letter states in terms that the refusal of the  application  for  a
    residence card did not "attach any requirement for [the  appellant]  to
    imminently leave the United Kingdom and does not place any restrictions
    on [the appellant's] claimed right of residence."  It was said that the
    appellant would be contacted by the relevant casework unit  in  respect
    of whether a deportation order would be made against him in due course.

 6. There was no dispute as to the genuineness of the marriage or the  fact
    that KS had been exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 7. To date, no such deportation action  under  the  Regulations  has  been
    taken by the respondent.





The judge's decision

 8. The judge addressed the issue of whether the appellant had  indeed  re-
    entered the United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order.   At  [18]
    he concluded that the extant deportation order made in 2016 was not one
    made  pursuant  to  the  Regulations  and,  given  that  no  subsequent
    deportation  order  under  the  Regulations  had  yet  been  made,  the
    appellant had not in fact re-entered in  breach  of  "the"  deportation
    order.

 9. The judge goes on to give  careful  consideration  to  the  appellant's
    offending history.  It is abundantly clear from what is  said  at  [19]
    that he regarded the appellant's conduct as very serious indeed, having
    regard  to  the  nature  of  the  drugs  offences,  the  use  of  false
    identification documents, and the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  re-
    offended after having come back to the United Kingdom in 2017.  At [20]
    the judge concluded that the appellant's offending  was  the  "starting
    point" in the case and that the respondent had shown that the appellant
    represented  a  genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently  serious   threat
    affecting the fundamental interests of society.  He goes  on  to  state
    that the refusal to issue a residence card was proportionate.   In  the
    judge's view, the refusal of the residence  card  might  have  had  the
    effect of focusing the appellant's mind on his past offending  and  the
    need to change his ways.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. Two grounds of appeal were put forward.  First, it was said  that  when
    making the decision to refuse to issue a residence card, the respondent
    had entirely failed to identify any public interest factors  (including
    the fundamental interests of society) which could  have  actually  been
    affected by the decision.  This was in the context  that  the  decision
    did not involve removing the appellant from United Kingdom and did  not
    affect his right of residence and consequent entitlements as the family
    member of an EEA national.  It  was  said  that  the  judge  failed  to
    address this  argument  and  failed  to  identify  on  what  basis  the
    respondent had shown that the decision was properly connected to public
    policy considerations.

11. The second ground, as originally drafted, was linked to the first.   As
    the appellant's right of residence in the United Kingdom was unaffected
    by the decision to refuse to issue the residence card, the absence of a
    document (namely a residence card) would only have the effect of making
    it more difficult for the appellant to satisfy potential  employers  of
    his  right  to  work  here.   This   represented   a   disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's EU law rights.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    19 February 2020.   Permission  was  granted  on  an  unlimited  basis,
    although the judge focused on the proportionality issue.  He framed the
    arguable error in  terms  of  a  failure  to  have  undertaken  a  full
    proportionality exercise,  having  regard  to  the  appellant's  family
    circumstances and suchlike.

13. In further written submissions from Ms Harris, dated 20 April 2020  and
    21 May 2020, she sought permission to rely on what was described as  an
    "additional ground", namely that the judge had failed to  undertake  an
    adequate proportionality exercise (with reference to  the  observations
    of the Judge Keane in his grant of permission).

14. In written submissions from the respondent, dated 23 April 2020,   what
    may be described as a purported "cross-appeal" was put forward  on  the
    basis that the judge was wrong to have concluded that the appellant did
    not re-enter the United Kingdom  in  breach  of  a  deportation  order.
    There was a deportation order in force at the time, albeit not one made
    under the Regulations.

The hearing before me

15. At the outset, I gave Ms Harris permission to rely  on  the  additional
    ground on the basis that it was connected to the original second ground
    of appeal, that the respondent had been aware of it since May 2020, and
    that, in the event, Ms Cunha  took  no  objection  to  this  course  of
    action.  In the absence of any objection by Ms  Harris  and  given  the
    fact that the appellant had been aware of the cross-appeal point  since
    April 2020, I granted Ms Cunha permission to rely on  the  respondent's
    ground of appeal.

16. Ms Harris' submissions followed the grounds of appeal.  The only impact
    of the respondent's decision to refuse to issue a residence card was to
    make it more difficult for the appellant to find work.  It  effectively
    went to frustrate his EU  law  rights.   This  was  at  least  arguably
    abusive.  In respect of the judge's decision, he had failed  to  engage
    with the  appellant's  submission  on  this  point  and  had  seemingly
    inserted his own speculative reason for why  the  public  interest  may
    benefit  from   the   respondent's   decision.    However,   this   was
    impermissible, as it was for the respondent to  show  that  the  public
    policy grounds were justified.

17. During the hearing I raised the question of whether Regulation 24(1) of
    the Regulations would  have  any  utility  if  a  refusal  to  issue  a
    residence card without an accompanying deportation decision  could  not
    be shown to be justified.  In response, Ms Harris gave the  example  of
    an extended family member who might apply for a residence card in  that
    capacity.  As  the  issuance  of  a  card  is  in  those  circumstances
    discretionary, the public policy grounds issue would be relevant to the
    exercise  of  that  discretion.   If  the  extended   family   member's
    application was refused, they would be left  with  no  EU  law  rights.
    This is in contrast to the  appellant's  situation:  he  was  a  direct
    family member and so had  a  right  of  residence  notwithstanding  the
    absence of a residence card.

18. Ms Harris maintained her position that the appellant had not re-entered
    the United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order because he  had  at
    that time been a family member of an EEA national and there had been no
    deportation order made pursuant to the Regulations.

19. Finally, Ms Harris acknowledged that she had not challenged the judge's
    specific  findings  of  fact  relating  to  the  seriousness   of   the
    appellant's offending.

20. Ms Cunha accepted that the judge had materially erred in law by failing
    to undertake a full proportionality exercise.  However,  she  submitted
    that there were no errors in  respect  of  the  other  aspects  of  the
    appellant's  challenge.   In  terms  of  the  deportation  order,   she
    submitted that there was "homogenisation" of domestic and EU law.  As I
    understood her argument,  the  deportation  order  made  under  section
    3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 whilst the appellant was  simply  a
    third-country national had effect when  he  came  back  to  the  United
    Kingdom as the family member of  an  EEA  national.   That  deportation
    order was "demonstrative" of the appellant being an individual to  whom
    the  public  policy  grounds  applied.   There  was  no  error  on  the
    respondent's part in not making  a  new  deportation  order  under  the
    Regulations.

21. As regards the central aspect  of  the  appellant's  challenge  on  the
    effect of the decision to refuse a residence card, Ms  Cunha  confirmed
    that that decision did have a material impact,  namely  that  it  would
    prevent or at  least  restrict  the  appellant's  access  to  work  and
    therefore his ability to exercise his Treaty rights as a family  member
    of an EEA national.  It would effectively  reduce  his  ability  to  be
    "economically  viable".   Regulation  24(1)  was  said  to   give   the
    respondent a discretion to restrict the appellant's  enjoyment  of  his
    undisputed right of residence in United Kingdom.

Decision on error of law

22. I conclude that the judge has erred in law in two respects.  First,  he
    failed to engage with the appellant's  central  submission  as  to  the
    purported  justification  for  the  respondent's  refusal  to  issue  a
    residence card and  failed  to  identify  which,  if  any,  fundamental
    interests of society put forward by the respondent were  applicable  in
    the particular circumstances  of  this  case.   Second,  he  failed  to
    adequately address the question of proportionality.

23. I conclude that the judge did not err in respect of his  conclusion  on
    the deportation order issue.  Having said that,  for  reasons  which  I
    will set out later, this issue has no real bearing on  the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

24. It is important to  set  out  a  number  of  undisputed  matters.   The
    appellant became a direct family member of  an  EEA  national  when  he
    married KS in Albania in 2016.  He had this status when  he  re-entered
    the United Kingdom in 2017.  There has never been any  suggestion  that
    his marriage was one of convenience, or that KS has not been exercising
    her Treaty rights in this country.  It follows that the  appellant  has
    been at  all  material  times  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  His right of residence
    in this capacity arises from the Directive and is not conditional  upon
    the issuance of  any  documentation  such  as  a  residence  card.  The
    respondent's decision to refuse to  issue  a  residence  card  did  not
    require the appellant to leave United Kingdom, nor did it, in the words
    of the decision letter itself, "place any restrictions on [his] claimed
    right of residence."  (In light  of  what  I  have  already  said,  the
    reference to  the  right  of  residence  being  "claimed"  is  entirely
    misplaced).

25. The  appellant's  argument  that  these  basic  facts  meant  that  the
    respondent was unable to justify the decision on public policy  grounds
    was put to the judge (see [20]).  Whilst acknowledging  that  argument,
    the judge failed to then engage with it.  That constitutes an error.

26. The question really is whether the appellant's argument had  any  merit
    to it, such as to render the judge's omission material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal.  I am in no doubt that it was  not  simply  meritorious,
    but effectively determinative.

27. The judge's finding that the appellant represented a genuine,  present,
    and sufficiently serious threat was not,  in  and  of  itself,  enough.
    There needed to be a nexus between the threat and one or  more  of  the
    fundamental interests of society, as set  out  in  Schedule  1  to  the
    Regulations.

28. The five facets of the fundamental interests of society  relied  on  by
    the respondent in her decision letter (set out early  in  my  decision)
    were not, I accept, expanded upon at the hearing.  These interests fell
    to be considered in the context of the  appellant  having  a  right  of
    residence, with all its accompanying entitlements, entirely independent
    of the issuance of a residence card.  There  was  no  question  of  him
    being removed from the United Kingdom.  It could not sensibly  be  said
    that the public were being  protected  or  the  effects  of  persistent
    offending combated: the appellant remained in United Kingdom and  could
    potentially have continued to commit crimes.  It is extremely difficult
    to see how the refusal to issue a residence card, without  accompanying
    deportation action pursuant to the Regulations, could be said to assist
    the maintenance of public confidence in the ability of the  authorities
    to take action against relevant individuals.  As to preventing unlawful
    immigration, this is not a case in  which  the  appellant  was  refused
    admission to United Kingdom on public policy grounds.

29. In my view, the reality of the situation was crystalised by Ms Cunha in
    her submissions.  It was felt by the respondent that the the refusal of
    a  residence  card  would  inhibit  the  appellant's  ability   to   be
    "economically viable" and therefore to exercise his right of  residence
    under EU law by denying him a document which would be of assistance  to
    him when satisfying potential employers of his right to work here.   In
    a sense, this could be described as a form of constructive  denial  (or
    at least significant impediment) of his rights under EU  law.   Not  to
    put too fine a point on it, this effect (whether intended or not) comes
    very  close  indeed  to  being  abusive.   It  certainly  rendered  the
    respondent's ability to rely on the fundamental  interests  of  society
    set out in  the  decision  letter  so  diminished  as  to  be  arguably
    incapable of constituting sufficient justification.

30. For the avoidance of any doubt, the purported  public  interest  factor
    suggested by the judge himself at [20] could not provide  a  substitute
    for reasons put forward by the respondent, given that the burden rested
    with her to justify the decision.  In any event, the judge's reason was
    certainly not sufficient to create justification where  none  otherwise
    existed.

31. I turn to Regulation 24(1), which provides, in so far as is relevant:

          "The Secretary of  State  may  refuse  to  issue...  a  residence
          card... if the refusal...  is  justified  on  grounds  of  public
          policy, public security or public health..."

32. As mentioned earlier, I raised my concern  at  the  hearing  that  this
    provision may be seen as devoid of utility  if  justification  for  the
    refusal of a residence card to someone such as the  appellant  is  very
    difficult, if not impossible,  to  establish.   However,  I  accept  Ms
    Harris' submission that the discretionary power under Regulation  24(1)
    does have useful application.  The example  she  gave  of  an  extended
    family member applying for residence card is, in my view,  illustrative
    of this.

33. Moving on to the issue of proportionality, Ms  Cunha's  concession  was
    rightly made.  The  judge  quite  clearly  did  not  undertake  a  full
    assessment of all relevant factors relating to the appellant's personal
    and familial circumstances.  However, notwithstanding  this  particular
    error, I agree with Ms Harris' submission that the absence of  any,  or
    any appropriate, justification for  the  decision,  together  with  the
    interference with the appellant's ability to actually obtain  work  (an
    interference that has been expressly acknowledged and indeed relied  on
    by  the  respondent),  at  the  very  least   arguably   rendered   the
    respondent's decision disproportionate on that basis alone.  The  judge
    did not engage with this aspect of the appellant's  case.   This  is  a
    further error.

34. Finally, I turn to the issue of the deportation order.  If it is  being
    suggested by the respondent that a deportation order made under section
    3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971  in  respect  of  third  country
    national without any  EU  law  rights  can  in  some  way  override  or
    circumvent the subsequent acquisition of such rights by the subject  of
    that order, then I would disagree.  If an individual  does  acquire  EU
    law rights such as, for example, a  direct  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national, they then become subject to  a  different  legal  regime,  as
    contained in the Directive and, in so far as they are  compatible  with
    it, the Regulations.  In the present  case,  there  has  never  been  a
    deportation order made under Regulation 32(3) of the Regulations.   The
    appellant was never refused admission to the United Kingdom  by  virtue
    of being subject to such a deportation order.  I conclude  that  whilst
    there was an extent deportation order against the appellant  made  when
    he had no EU law rights, this did  not  mean  that  he  re-entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2017 as an illegal entrant, as at that  time  he  had
    acquired EU law rights and there was no deportation order  pursuant  to
    the Regulations.

35. As alluded to previously, I do not see that this issue  ultimately  has
    any real bearing on this case.  Even if  it  could  be  said  that  the
    appellant re-entered the United  Kingdom  in  2017  in  breach  of  the
    deportation  order  made  in  2016  and  should  therefore  have   been
    considered as an illegal entrant, that of itself has no material impact
    on his right of residence under EU law.   Indeed,  the  respondent  has
    expressly acknowledged this in the decision letter.

36. In light of the above, I set the judge's decision aside.

Disposal

37. Given the nature of my conclusions on the error of law issue, I propose
    to remake the decision in this appeal on the  basis  of  the  materials
    currently before me, subject to any representations from the parties in
    compliance with the directions set out below.

38. The findings of the judge at [19] have not been specifically challenged
    and they will be preserved.

Anonymity

39. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and I have
    not been asked to do so.  I make no such direction.

Notice of Decision

40. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

41. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

42. This appeal will be retained in the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  re-making
    decision in due course.

Directions to the parties

   1. No later than 7  days  from  when  this  decision  is  sent  out,  the
      appellant may file and serve  in  physical  and  electronic  form  any
      further submissions relating to the re-making of the decision in  this
      appeal, having regard to the contents of this error of law decision;

   2. No later than 14 days  from  when  this  decision  is  sent  out,  the
      respondent may file and serve in  physical  and  electronic  form  any
      further submissions relating to the re-making up the decision in  this
      appeal, having regard to the contents of this error of law decision;

   3. No later than 21 days  from  when  this  decision  is  sent  out,  the
      appellant  may,  if  appropriate,  file  and  serve  in  physical  and
      electronic form a reply;

   4. With liberty to apply.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 23 September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

