
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06712/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Working Remotely by Skype for        |                                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 4 February 2021                   |On 25 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 amal Riadi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, instructed by Farani Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco who was born on 27 February 1983.



 2. On 19 August 2019, the appellant applied for a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member ("EFM") of an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in  the  UK  under  reg  18(4)  (read  with  reg  8(2))  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052 as amended) (the  "EEA
    Regulations").

 3. On 26 November 2019, the Secretary of State refused the application for
    a residence card on the basis that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had been dependent upon her  brother,  the  sponsor  and  EEA
    national, prior to  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2011.   As  a
    consequence, the appellant did not meet the requirements to be  an  EFM
    under reg 8(2)(b).

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 5 March 2020, Judge V A Cox dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.
    Like the respondent, the judge found, on the  basis  of  the  oral  and
    documentary evidence, that she was not satisfied that the appellant had
    been dependent upon the sponsor as it  had  not  been  shown  that  any
    financial support  provided  to  him  had  met  her  "essential  living
    expenses".

 5. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    essentially on two grounds.  First, the judge had  misdirected  herself
    as to  the  meaning  of  "dependency"  under  the  EEA  Regulations  by
    requiring the appellant to  establish  that  money  received  from  her
    brother provided for "all of her essential needs".  Secondly, the judge
    had erred in-law by failing to take a holistic view of the relationship
    between the appellant and sponsor, in particular  by  failing  to  take
    into account her emotional dependency upon her brother and her personal
    history and the closeness of their relationship.

 6. On 23 June 2020, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bird)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on both grounds.

 7. Following the issue of directions by the UT in the light of the  COVID-
    19 crisis, further submissions were made on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State on 25 August 2020 and by the appellant on 2 September 2020.

 8. Thereafter, the appeal  was  listed  for  a  hearing  to  be  conducted
    remotely by Skype for Business.  The appeal was listed at  the  Cardiff
    Civil Justice  Centre  on  4  February  2020  with  the  court  working
    remotely.  Mr Solomon, who represented the appellant, and  Mr  Howells,
    who represented the respondent, joined the hearing remotely.

 9. In his oral submissions, Mr Solomon relied upon the further submissions
    dated 2 September 2020 which he had drafted.   In  summary,  he  relied
    upon both grounds.

10. First, Mr Solomon submitted that the judge had misdirected  herself  in
    para  35  of  her  determination  when  stating  that  the  meaning  of
    "dependency" required the  appellant  to  establish  that  her  brother
    provided financially for "all of  her  essential  needs".   Mr  Solomon
    submitted that there was no requirement that her essential needs should
    be wholly met by the sponsor.  It was plain that it was sufficient,  in
    order to establish dependency  under  the  EEA  Regulations,  that  the
    sponsor's financial support provided for some of her  essential  living
    needs.  Mr Solomon relied upon the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT 314 at [22]'  He  also  relied
    on the Home Office Guidance, "Free  Movement  Rights:  Extended  Family
    Members of EEA Nationals", (version 7.0)  dated  27  March  2019  which
    remained in force and which, at page 18 of 33, stated that:

         "The applicant does not need to be dependent on the EEA national to
         meet all or  most  of  their  essential  needs.   For  example,  an
         applicant is considered dependent if they receive a  pension  which
         covers half of their essential  needs  and  money  from  their  EEA
         national sponsor which covers the other half ...."

11. In his submissions, Mr Solomon pointed out that, at para 45, the  judge
    had found that the appellant's  brother  did  provide  "some  financial
    support" and yet went on to find that she had not established that that
    support provided for  her  "essential  living  expenses".   Mr  Solomon
    submitted that  it  was  unclear  whether  the  judge  had,  therefore,
    properly applied the approach to "dependency"  which  did  not  require
    that the appellant  establish  that  her  brother's  financial  support
    provide "wholly or mainly" for her essential needs.

12. Secondly, Mr Solomon submitted, again in reliance upon, inter alia, the
    UT's decision in Reyes [19]:

         "The court envisages that  questions  of  dependency  must  not  be
         reduced to a bare calculation of financial dependency but should be
         construed broadly to involve a holistic examination of a number  of
         factors, including financial, physical and social conditions, so as
         to establish whether there is dependency that is genuine."

13. Mr Solomon submitted that the judge had  failed  to  engage  with  that
    definition and apply it when, on the basis of the evidence,  there  was
    acceptance by the judge of emotional support.

14. In response, and having heard  Mr  Solomon's  submissions,  Mr  Howells
    accepted that the judge had materially erred  in  law  as  set  out  in
    Ground 1.  He accepted that the judge had misdirected herself  in  para
    35  by  requiring  the  Appellant  to  establish,  in  order  to  prove
    "dependency" upon her brother, that money received  from  him  provided
    for "all of her essential needs".  Mr Howells accepted that that  error
    was material since, in particular in para 45 of her  determination,  it
    was unclear how the judge had reached her conclusion that the appellant
    had  not  established  dependency  upon  her  brother  in  meeting  her
    "essential living expenses" when the judge had also accepted  that  the
    appellant had, in fact, through a friend provided  her  with  financial
    support.  Mr Howells accepted that the judge's decision could not stand
    and that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo hearing in order to remake the decision.  Mr Howells  did  not,
    however, concede Ground 2.

15. In the light of Mr Howells' concession on Ground 1, I raised with  both
    representatives whether it was necessary for me to  resolve  Ground  2.
    Both agreed that it was not  necessary  and  that  I  should  reach  my
    decision on the basis of Ground 1 and remit  the  appeal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

16. I agree with Mr Howells' concession.  It is plain from the  authorities
    that in order to establish "dependency" under the EEA Regulations it is
    not necessary to establish that a sponsor's financial support meets all
    the individual's essential needs.  The EEA national's financial support
    must be "material" in order to meet some of the individual's  essential
    needs in fact even, of course, if that reliance is, as a result, of the
    individual's choice not to provide for their own needs, for example, by
    not working at all or sufficiently to meet  their  essential  or  basic
    needs (see Lim v ECO, Manila [2015] EWCA Civ 1383 at [32]).  The  judge
    misdirected herself at para 35 and thereafter, having  found  that  the
    sponsor did provide "some" financial support, failed to  give  adequate
    reasons  why,  in  para  45  in  particular,  the  appellant  had   not
    established she was "dependent" upon the sponsor.  That was a  material
    error of law and the judge's decision cannot be legally sustained.

17. In the light of that, the appeal will necessarily need to  be  re-heard
    de novo by the First-tier Tribunal, I do not consider it  necessary  to
    reach any concluded view on Ground  2.   The  decision  clearly  cannot
    stand on the basis of the material error of law identified in Ground 1.
     I would  simply  observe  that,  on  the  face  of  it,  Mr  Solomon's
    submissions in relation to Ground 2 do mirror what was said by  the  UT
    in Reyes at [19].  The issue  of  whether  that  view  is  correct  and
    consistent with the ECJ/CJEU's decisions and what was said by the Court
    of Appeal in Lim v ECO should remain to be determined when  central  to
    the disposition of a case.  Here, it is not and I  would  not  wish  to
    express any view as to whether the clear statement by the UT  in  Reyes
    should be reconsidered.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 involved the making
    of a material error of law.  That decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
    aside.

19. Having regard to the extent and nature of  fact-finding  required,  and
    para 7.2 of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than  Judge  V  A
    Cox.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             8 February 2021

