
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06872/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 September 2018                          |On 28 September 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                Ivan Myroniuk
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Ukraine.   His  date  of  birth  is  28
    January 1990.  He Appellant made an application on 18 December 2015 for
    a permanent  residence  card  under  the  EEA  Regulations  2006.   His
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 26 May 2016.   The
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that the Appellant  was  genuinely
    dependent on  his  Sponsor,  his  step-father,  Mr  Lanman  during  the
    qualifying period. It is not an issue that Mr Lanman is an EEA national
    exercising Treaty rights.

2.   The Appellant appealed against the decision.  His appeal was  dismissed
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal G Andrews in a decision promulgated
    on 16 November 2017, following a hearing at Taylor House on 3  November
    2017.  Permission was granted to the Appellant by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Kebede on 13 July 2018.  The salient part of Judge Kebede's decision is
    as follows:

         "2.  The grounds raise arguable issues about the  judge's  approach
             to dependency and membership of the  same  household  for  the
             purposes  of   the   EEA   Regulations   and   merit   further
             consideration.  Whilst there is less  arguable  merit  in  the
             first ground I do not  exclude  it  and  all  grounds  may  be
             argued."

3.   The matter came before me on 10 September  2018  to  determine  whether
    the judge erred in law.

The Findings of the FtT

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  his  stepfather.
    In addition, they  relied  on  their  witness  statements.   She  heard
    submissions from  both  representatives.  The  judge  referred  to  the
    Sponsor as SL. The judge made salient findings at paragraphs 6, 18, 19,
    20, 31, 32 and 33.  They read as follows:

         "6.  At the outset, Mr Collins referred me to paragraphs  [13]  and
             [33] of Banger, and  to  headnote  (3)  of  that  case,  which
             headnote  says  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  referred  the
             following question (as well as other questions)  to  the  CJEU
             for a preliminary ruling under Article 267 TFEU:

                  '(3) Where a decision to refuse a residence  authorisation
                      is not founded on an  extensive  examination  of  the
                      personal circumstances of the Applicant  and  is  not
                      justified by adequate or sufficient reasons  is  such
                      decision unlawful as being in breach of Article  3(2)
                      of the Citizens Directive?'

             Mr  Collins  submitted  that,  in  refusing  this  appellant's
             appeal, the  respondent  had  not  carried  out  an  extensive
             examination   of   his   personal   circumstances.    In   the
             circumstances, Mr Collins  invited  me  to  stay  the  instant
             proceedings pending the CJEU's ruling on the  above  question.
             Ms McKenzie told me  she  accepted  that  there  had  been  no
             extensive   examination   of   this    appellant's    personal
             circumstances, but she said this was because the appellant had
             not  provided  the   information   necessary   for   such   an
             examination.  In the circumstances, Ms McKenzie submitted that
             the hearing should not be stayed,  but  should  go  ahead.   I
             considered   both    representatives'    submissions.     Both
             representatives confirmed that there was only one question  in
             issue  in  this  appeal:  whether,  at  relevant  times,   the
             appellant  was  SL's  'dependent'  (as  referred  to  in   EEA
             Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii)).  As stated in paragraph [19] of Reyes
             (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT 314, the test of dependency
             is a purely factual test.  I took the view that the First-tier
             Tribunal is a fact-finding tribunal.   In  the  circumstances,
             whilst the respondent may not have  undertaken  the  necessary
             extensive examination, I  could  do  so,  as  Tribunal  Judge.
             Further, dealing  with  a  case  fairly  and  justly  includes
             avoiding  delay  so  far  as  compatible   with   the   proper
             consideration of the issues, and I considered that it might be
             some time before  the  CJEU  gave  the  requested  preliminary
             ruling, pursuant to Banger.  Taking everything  into  account,
             including in particular my responsibilities in  terms  of  the
             overriding objective in rule 2, I considered  it  appropriate,
             and in the interests of justice, to proceed with the  hearing.
             I accordingly refused to stay  the  proceedings.   Mr  Collins
             told me he objected to this, but I nevertheless  confirmed  my
             decision not to stay the proceedings.  We then continued  with
             the hearing.

             ...

         18.  I have carefully considered, in the round,  all  the  evidence
             before me (both oral and written evidence) whether  or  not  I
             specifically refer to it in this decision.  I  have  also  had
             the opportunity to see and hear  the  appellant  and  SL  give
             evidence.  In the light of my analysis of the evidence, I make
             the following findings.

         19.  The following findings are gleaned from  the  appellant's  and
             SL's evidence, and they were not challenged by Ms McKenzie:

             (i)  SL was married to the appellant's  mother.   SL  and  the
                  appellant's mother already lived in the UK  prior  to  the
                  appellant coming to the UK.

             (ii) Before coming to the UK, the  appellant  lived  with  his
                  biological father in  Ukraine.   SL  and  the  appellant's
                  mother would visit the appellant  in  Ukraine,  and  would
                  also regularly send him  money  (for  his  studies,  food,
                  etc.).

             (iii)    The appellant came to the UK in March 2010 (aged  20)
                  and has lived here since then.  In December 2010 (when  he
                  was still aged 20), he was issued with a  residence  card,
                  valid until 20 December 2015, as the family member of  SL,
                  an EEA national.  That residence card  was  never  revoked
                  (WS4-6).

             (iv) Apart  from  when  he  lived  with  his  girlfriend  (see
                  paragraph 20 below), the appellant and SL  lived  together
                  (at different addresses) from March 2010 to May 2016.  The
                  appellant's mother also  lived  with  them  until  shortly
                  before her death (she died of cancer in April 2012  -  see
                  AB137-144).

             (v)  The appellant told me that, whilst his mother was  alive,
                  SL paid for the appellant's food and  accommodation.   The
                  appellant does not claim to have had any  other  financial
                  support from SL since coming to the  UK.   Based  on  this
                  evidence, I find that SL has not  provided  the  appellant
                  with any financial support  since  April  2012  (when  the
                  appellant's mother died).

             (vi) The appellant has worked most of the time since 2011 (see
                  his  oral  evidence,  and  also  question  12.4   of   his
                  application, which is in the respondent's bundle).

             (vii)    The appellant and SL have a very close  relationship.
                  They both  see  it  as  a  father/son  relationship.   The
                  appellant comes to SL for advice.

         20.  I also find as follows, in relation to  the  appellant  living
             with his girlfriend in Highfield Road:

             (i)  The appellant told me he lived there (and  not  with  SL)
                  for about 2 months  during  the  5-year  period  after  he
                  arrived in the UK.  This differs slightly from  SL's  oral
                  evidence, that SL and the appellant lived together  during
                  the period from March 2010 to 2015.  But  Mr  Collins  did
                  not submit that the appellant did not in  fact  live  with
                  his girlfriend during  this  5-year  period.   Because  of
                  this, I find that SL's answer was giving a broad  view  of
                  the situation, and the appellant did in fact live with his
                  girlfriend during the relevant the 5-year period.

             (ii) Ms McKenzie did not challenge  the  appellant's  evidence
                  that, during the 5-year period after arriving in  the  UK,
                  he lived with his girlfriend for only about 2  months.   I
                  accordingly  find  that  this  is  not  in  dispute.   The
                  appellant did not give me the dates of those approximately
                  2 months.  But the AB includes bank  statements  addressed
                  to him at Highfield Road, dated 4 November  2014  (AB411),
                  March 2015 (AB398) and September 2015 (AB375).  I consider
                  it very unlikely that the  appellant  asked  his  bank  to
                  change his address, to the Highfield Road  address,  prior
                  to moving into that address.  It is much more likely  that
                  he delayed telling the bank that he had moved back in with
                  SL.  In the  circumstances,  I  find  on  the  balance  of
                  probabilities that the appellant lived with his girlfriend
                  (and not with SL) for a period of about  2  months  during
                  late 2014 (possibly stretching into January 2015).

             (iii)    As at the date of the Tribunal hearing, the appellant
                  now lives with the same girlfriend, at the Highfield  Road
                  address.

         ...

         31.  However, during the approximately 2 months when the  appellant
             lived with his girlfriend (in late 2014 and  possibly  January
             2015 - paragraph 20(ii) above):

             (i)  The appellant was 24 years old, and he had worked most of
                  the time since 2011 (paragraph 19(vi) above).

             (ii) The appellant was not living with SL.

             (iii)    He had not been financially dependent on SL for  over
                  2 years (paragraph 19(v) above).

             (iv) It was then more than  2  and  a  half  years  since  the
                  appellant's mother's death, and  the  appellant  does  not
                  claim that  he  had  to  move  back  with  SL  (after  the
                  approximately  2-months)   because   of   any   particular
                  emotional reliance on SL.

             I have undertaken the required extensive examination, and have
             considered all the evidence in the round.  I take  no  account
             of the fact SL is not the appellant's biological  father  -  I
             approach this case on the basis that they are father and  son.
             But, overall, I do not accept that the appellant  was  reliant
             on SL for essential living needs (as referred to in  paragraph
             [22] of Reyes) during the approximately 2 months when he lived
             with his girlfriend (in late 2014 and possibly January  2015).
             I find that he was not SL's dependent, and thus not his family
             member, during that approximately 2-month period.

         32.  This means the appellant has not resided in the United Kingdom
             in accordance with the EEA Regulations for a continuous period
             of five years.  He has therefore not  acquired  the  right  to
             reside in the United Kingdom permanently, and is not  entitled
             to be issued with a document  certifying  permanent  residence
             under regulation 18 of the EEA Regulations.

         33.  For completeness, I also  mention  the  appellant's  residence
             card which (as stated above) was valid  until  December  2015,
             and was never revoked.  But, as stated in Ojo, this card  does
             not in itself confer a right to reside (indeed, Mr Collins did
             not argue otherwise).   This  therefore  does  not  impact  my
             decision in this case."

5.   The judge directed herself in  relation  to  the  EEA  Regulations  and
    specifically dependency at paragraphs 21 to 25  and  on  SSHD  and  Ojo
    [2015] EWCA Civ 130.

The Grounds of Appeal

6.   The first ground of appeal relates  to  Banger  (Unmarried  Partner  of
    British National) [2017] UKUT 00125.  It  is  argued  that  the  appeal
    should have been stayed pending the decision of the CJEU. It is  argued
    that given that it was accepted by the Respondent's  representative  at
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in a concession, later  that
    day withdrawn, that there had not been an extensive examination of  the
    Appellant's personal circumstances, it is  submitted  that  it  was  an
    erroneous approach for the judge to purport  to  determine  the  appeal
    pending an answer from the CJEU to the question, at paragraph 3 of  the
    headnote in Banger; namely, where a  decision  to  refuse  a  residence
    authorisation is  not  founded  on  an  extensive  examination  of  the
    personal circumstances  of  the  Appellant  and  is  not  justified  by
    adequate or sufficient reasons, is such decision unlawful as  being  in
    breach of Article 3(2) of the Citizens Directive.  The judge's approach
    appears to be that she  can  determine  facts  but  equally  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Banger could have done so but instead saw fit to  refer  to
    the CJEU.

7.    Ground  2  claims  that  the  decision  relating  to   dependency   is
    irrational.   It  appears  (as  stated  in  the   grounds)   from   the
    determination that the judge accepted that  apart  from  a  two  -month
    period in late 2014, the Appellant was dependent on his mother and then
    his stepfather (after his mother's death).  Reading  the  determination
    as a whole indicates how close  the  Appellant  was  and  is  with  his
    stepfather.  By virtue of moving in with his girlfriend for a period of
    two months, which did not initially work out, this should not in itself
    bring an end to dependency.

8.   Ground 3 claims that the judge erred in failing to make findings  about
    whether the Appellant is an extended family member.

9.   I heard oral submissions from both parties.  Mr Collins submitted  that
    the judge's decision was irrational in respect of dependency.  However,
    he accepted that there was a lack of clarity in relation to whether the
    judge found dependency outside of the two- month period in the light of
    his findings at paragraph 31(i) and (iii).  This  being  the  case,  Mr
    Collins sought to amend the grounds to  argue  that  the  decision  was
    lacking in  clarity  and  inadequately  reasoned.   The  Appellant  was
    accommodated and given food throughout the five -year  period  and  was
    emotionally dependent on his  stepfather  (giving  rise  to  dependency
    under EU law) and remained so during the brief period when he moved out
    to reside with his girlfriend.  If the judge found that  the  Appellant
    was not dependent on his father outside the two- month period  when  he
    was living with him, it is argued that there is an absence  of  reasons
    for this decision.

10.  It was accepted by Mr Collins that the  Appellant  did  not  advance  a
    case on  the  basis  that  he  was  an  extended  family  member  under
    Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations. The case was advanced on the basis
    that he was a family member.  In any event, Mr Collins argued that  the
    Appellant could meet the requirements of Regulation 8,  with  reference
    to the case of Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8 (2) [2012] UKUT 79.

11.  Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no error of law. Banger  did  not
    apply. It related to extended family members and Article  3(2)  of  the
    Citizen's Directive 2004/38/EC.  There  are  a  number  of  lawful  and
    sustainable findings made by the judge; including  that  there  was  no
    financial support from 2012 and that the  Appellant  had  worked  since
    2011.  The  focus  of  the  present  application  was  that  there  was
    substantial emotional support. However, Ms  Isherwood  referred  me  to
    paragraphs 20(i) and 31(iv)of the decision. She  submitted  that  these
    unchallenged findings were open to the judge.

The 2006 EEA Regulations

12.  The relevant parts of the 2006 EEA Regulations are as follows:

         7.-(1)   Subject to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
                  Regulations the following persons shall be treated as  the
                  family members of another person-

                  ...

                  (b)  direct descendants of his, his spouse  or  his  civil
                      partner who are-

                  (i)  under 21; or

                  (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;

                  (c)  dependent direct relatives in his ascending  line  or
                      that of his spouse or his civil partner;

                  ...

         Permanent right of residence

         15.-(1)  The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
                  the United Kingdom permanently-

                  ...

                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                      an EEA national but who has  resided  in  the  United
                      Kingdom with the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with
                      these Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five
                      years;

                  ...

Conclusions

13.  It is not been raised as an issue throughout the  proceedings,  but  to
    confirm,  the   Appellant  has  remained  in  the  UK  and   in   those
    circumstances can meet part of the requirement  in  Regulation  15  (1)
    (b);  "has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA  national
    throughout the entire period" (see PM EEA  -  spouse  -residing  with")
    Turkey[2011] UKUT  89.  The  issue  was  whether  he  has  done  so  in
    accordance with the Regulations.

14.  It was the Respondent's case that the Appellant was  not  dependant  on
    the Sponsor during the qualifying period and not only  during  the  two
    months when they were not living together. I accept that  the  findings
    of the judge about whether the Appellant was a dependant outside of the
    two- month period could have been better  expressed.  Whilst  I  accept
    that the final sentence of paragraph 31 of the decision  would  suggest
    that the judge accepted dependency outside of the period, this does not
    accord with the clear findings at paragraph  31  (i),  (iii)  and  (iv)
    which unarguably relate to the period as a whole rather than  just  the
    two- month period when the Appellant lived with his girlfriend.   These
    findings followed the findings at paragraph 19 that when his mother was
    alive the Sponsor would pay for the Appellant's food and  accommodation
    and that there had not been any other financial support since then  and
    that the Appellant had worked since 2011. The judge did  not  take  the
    view  that  living  with  the  Sponsor  was  sufficient  to   establish
    dependency, in the circumstances and on the evidence this was  entirely
    rational.   This  would  be  the  correct  approach  to  dependency  in
    accordance with theEuropean Court of Justice  in  Case  C-1/105  Jia  v
    Migrationsverket JiaandReyes (EEA Regs: dependency) 2013 UKUT314. There
    was simply no evidence that would  establish  that  the  Appellant  was
    reliant on the Sponsor for his essential living needs throughout any of
    the period when they were living together  or  when  they  were  living
    separately.

15.  In my view, a sensible reading of the decision as  a  whole,  leads  to
    the inevitable conclusion that the judge did not accept that there  had
    been dependency, in the sense envisaged in Jia, since the death of  the
    Appellant's mother and therefore outside of the two- month  period.  It
    is difficult to see how she could have reached a  different  conclusion
    on the evidence and taking into  account  the  lawful  and  sustainable
    findings that are not challenged. The judge gave adequate  reasons  for
    this conclusion. The judge  found  a  close  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor. However, even applying a broad  construction
    of  dependency  there  was  no  evidence  of  emotional  or   financial
    dependency which would establish a genuine dependency in the Jia  sense
    since the Appellant's mother's death.

16.  If the interpretation of the judge's decision favoured  by  Mr  Collins
    is correct (which I do not accept), it is not material  because  it  is
    agreed that the judge found that there was no dependency during the two-
    month period. This is an entirely rational conclusion.  There had  been
    a change; namely, that the Appellant was  no  longer  living  with  the
    Sponsor.  The judge on the evidence was entitled to conclude that there
    was no dependency during  the  two-month  period.  Permanent  residence
    depends on continuous residence in a qualifying  status  and  therefore
    the appeal cannot succeed; see SSHD v Ojo [2015] EWCA Civ 1301.

17.  The argument based on Banger is misconceived. The grounds  predate  the
    decision of the CJEU Banger C-89/17. However, there is no error arising
    from the decision of the FtT to determine the appeal. This  application
    does not concern Article 3 (2) of Citizen's  Directive.  The  Appellant
    had redress in the form of a statutory appeal whereby matters  of  both
    fact and law have been considered by a judge.

18.  The Appellant did not advance a  case  on  the  basis  that  he  is  an
    extended family member. In any event, there was  insufficient  evidence
    before the Tribunal to enable the judge to make findings as to  whether
    the Appellant was able to satisfy the requirements set  out  in  Dauhoo
    (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79.  It is a  matter  for  the
    Appellant should he wish to make an application on this basis.

19.  There is no error of law properly identified in the grounds capable  of
    having an impact on the outcome in this case. The decision of the judge
    to dismiss the appeal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 21 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

