
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06008/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2019                       |On 05 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Ishtiaq khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office
Presenting
     Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Khan):   Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Rahman
&
     Company Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor.  However, for ease of  reference,  I
    shall throughout this decision refer to Mr Khan, who was  the  original
    appellant as "the claimant" and to the Secretary of State, who was  the
    original respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan who was born on 4 July 1990.  He
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision, made on  23  August
    2018 refusing to issue him with a residence card under the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016.  The basis of his application was his  marriage
    to a Polish national; the basis of refusal was that  the  Secretary  of
    State considered that the marriage, which has subsequently broken down,
    was a sham marriage.

 3. This appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor (as he
    then was) on 22 March 2019 at  Taylor  House  and  in  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated shortly thereafter on 5 April 2019 the  appeal  was
    allowed.

 4. As the judge noted in his decision, the claimant  had  made  previously
    three unsuccessful EEA applications, and this one,  the  one  currently
    under appeal was his fourth.   What  the  judge  seemed  to  have  been
    unaware of, however, was that  in  respect  of  at  least  one  of  the
    previous refusals the claimant had appealed and  his  appeal  had  been
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Telford in a decision which  was
    promulgated on 3 February 2017,  following  a  hearing  before  him  at
    Hatton Cross on 9 January 2017.  Again, a matter of which the judge was
    seemingly unaware was that this application had been based on the  same
    marriage to the Polish lady and Judge Telford had dismissed the  appeal
    against the refusal of permission on the basis that  he  was  satisfied
    that it was a sham marriage and he gave reasons within his decision why
    this was so.  This decision was  not  referred  to  by  either  of  the
    parties before Judge Norton-Taylor and although I have seen a  copy  it
    is not entirely clear whether or not it was in the file which was  then
    before that judge.

 5. There is another difficulty with regard to this appeal which is that by
    the time it came before Judge Norton-Taylor, although the Secretary  of
    State was claiming that inconsistent answers  had  been  given  by  the
    claimant and his "wife" within interview, the  interview  records  were
    not before the judge in hard copy and he perfectly properly refused  an
    application made at the date of hearing for the Secretary of  State  to
    be allowed to introduce evidence of these interviews by means  of  what
    was on the Secretary of State's representative's Smart phone during the
    hearing.  However, on behalf of Mr Khan, Mr Gilbert  entirely  properly
    and consistent with his duties as Counsel informed the court that he in
    fact had a copy now of these interview notes and  they  had  apparently
    been before First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard who  had  also  considered
    this matter at some stage.  For reasons which will  probably  never  be
    clear the interview notes, which obviously had  been  produced  by  the
    Secretary of State at some stage and had been in the  court  file  must
    have been removed from the court file so  that  they  were  not  before
    Judge Norton-Taylor.

 6. It is common ground between the parties that the failure of whoever  it
    was to ensure that the material which had been produced  in  this  case
    was put before the judge (that is both  the  prior  decision  of  Judge
    Telford and also the interview notes) was sufficiently serious as to be
    a procedural errors amounting to a  material  error  of  law.   In  the
    judgment of this Tribunal the parties are right so to  agree.   Clearly
    the starting point for  any  decision  maker  must,  having  regard  to
    Devaseelan, be Judge Telford's previous decision and because the  judge
    was apparently unaware of this previous decision that did  not  happen.
    Also, the interview notes were clearly relevant, and should  have  been
    before the judge but were not.

 7. Because the claimant will want to call about five witnesses  and  there
    will need to be a complete rehearing of the  appeal  both  parties  are
    agreed that it would be appropriate to remit  this  case  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will so order.

Decision

I set aside the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  as
containing a material error  of  law  (being  procedural  irregularities  as
referred to above) and direct that  the  appeal  now  be  remitted  back  to
Taylor House for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than
Judges Telford, Howard or Norton-Taylor, for  a  de  novo  hearing  with  no
findings of fact retained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 5 July 2019



