
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  EA/06462/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 September 2020                       |On 28 September 2020            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MRS PRECIOUS AKPOMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Saeed, Legal Representative, Legal Eagles
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.   The Appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge T Lawrence promulgated on 24 March 2020 ("the Decision").  By the
    Decision, the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 6 November 2019  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    Although that is a decision made under the Immigration Acts, it is made
    on the basis that the Appellant no longer meets the provisions  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the   EEA
    Regulations") and therefore the appeal involves  considerations  of  EU
    law as I will come to.

2.   The Appellant has previously exercised a  right  of  appeal  against  a
    decision refusing her and her mother a permanent residence card as  the
    extended family members of a Mr  Ogiesoba  ("the  Sponsor")  who  is  a
    national of Germany and the cousin  of  the  Appellant's  mother.   The
    Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  CH
    Bennett in a decision promulgated  on  24  November  2017  ("the  First
    Appeal Decision").  The First Appeal Decision held that  the  Appellant
    and her mother were not entitled to permanent residence as they had not
    remained dependent on or the members of the household  of  the  Sponsor
    during a five-year period.  Although  the  First  Appeal  Decision  was
    appealed, it was not appealed on the basis that Judge Bennett had erred
    in his interpretation of EU law.

3.   I do not need to set out the background facts of the case  extensively.
     The Appellant and her mother were issued  residence  cards  under  the
    2006 version of the EEA Regulations as extended family members  of  the
    Sponsor valid from 29  September  2010  to  29  September  2015.   They
    applied for permanent residence on  28  September  2015  but  that  was
    refused, and the Appellant's  appeal  dismissed  by  the  First  Appeal
    Decision.  Judge Bennett found that he was "not  satisfied  that  there
    has been any continuous 5 year period  since  29  September  2010  when
    either Mrs D or Miss A have been dependent on Mr O or been  members  of
    his household" ([32] of the First Appeal Decision).    Although  I  was
    informed by Mr Saeed that the Appellant has since lost her job and  may
    have become dependent once again on the Sponsor following the making of
    the Respondent's decision in this appeal, there is no evidence to  that
    effect before me, no  application  under  Rule  15(2A)  to  adduce  any
    further evidence and Mr Saeed confirmed that, as at  the  date  of  the
    hearing before Judge Lawrence, the Appellant was still in  work,  as  I
    understand it working out her notice period.  I will come back  to  the
    relevance of that in due course.

4.   The position of the Appellant in this appeal and indeed at the time  of
    the appeal before Judge Bennett is that she does not have to show  that
    she has been continuously dependent on or a member of the household  of
    the Sponsor in order to be entitled to remain under EU  law.   Reliance
    is  placed  by  the  Appellant  on  the  CJEU's  judgment  in  Reyes  v
    Migrationsverket (C-423/12) ("Reyes").  Although Judge Bennett rejected
    that  argument,  Judge  Lawrence  appears  to  have  accepted  it.   He
    therefore went on to consider whether the Appellant  could  "show  that
    she had been dependent on the EU citizen, independent due to taking  up
    employment  or  self-employment,  or  a  member  of  the  EU  citizen's
    household,  continuously  since  the  Respondent  recognised  that  she
    satisfied  the  requirements  in  regulation  8(2)(c)   of   the   2006
    Regulations on 29 September 2010, until such time as she  acquired  the
    right to permanent residence" ([28] of the Decision).

5.   The Appellant's grounds  assert  that  the  Decision  "was  correct  in
    relation to how the law applied but [the Judge] failed to recognise  or
    note material findings and information and thus materially  misdirected
    himself as to the conclusions  he  draws  on  the  appeal".   In  short
    summary, the grounds assert that the Judge failed to deal with evidence
    about the Appellant's earnings and misunderstood some of  the  findings
    made by Judge Bennett in the First Appeal Decision which were  at  odds
    with the findings made by Judge Lawrence.   It  is  said  that,  having
    accepted that the Appellant did not have to show continuous  dependency
    on the  Sponsor,  Judge  Lawrence  erred  in  his  finding  as  to  the
    Appellant's self-sufficiency based on her own employment.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes  on
    10 June 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred in the  assessment
             of the previous determination and the factual matrix.

         3.   I have considered the grounds as provided.  I have  read  them
             three times and can still not fathom what the actual  argument
             is that is being advanced.  It may be  somewhere  between  the
             Tribunal and UT in 2017/18 got it  wrong  and  Judge  Lawrence
             similarly did not understand the factual matrix sufficiently.

         4.   I grant permission solely on the basis that there seems to  be
             a need to examine a number of other  documents  and  judgments
             which I do not have access to and which may be relevant to the
             outcome.

         5.   Permission is granted not on the  basis  that  there  is  some
             clear and identifiable  merit  in  the  application  but  that
             having read the grounds and judgment, I cannot say there is or
             is not merit in the application.

         6.   Permission is thus granted."

7.   The matter comes before me to determine whether the  Decision  contains
    an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make  the  decision
    or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

8.   The parties were given notice that the hearing would be  conducted  via
    Skype for Business. Although I was unable to see Mr Saeed on the video-
    link due to problems with his connection, he confirmed that he was able
    to see me and although the sound did cut  out  intermittently,  he  was
    able to indicate to me when this occurred and I ensured  that  anything
    he missed during those (short) interruptions was repeated  so  that  he
    could follow the hearing.  Both parties confirmed at  the  end  of  the
    hearing that they were able to follow the hearing.  I had before  me  a
    bundle of documents prepared by the Appellant for the hearing before me
    and the Appellant's bundle for hearing before Judge Lawrence and  other
    sundry documents.  The Appellant's bundle for  the  hearing  before  me
    contained the Reyes decision and reference was  made  to  a  number  of
    other  cases  and  EU  law/statutory  provisions  which,  although  not
    contained in the papers before me, were of relevance and with which  Mr
    Saeed was clearly familiar.  Mr Saeed also produced a skeleton argument
    for  the  purposes  of  the  hearing  before  me.    I  also  had   the
    Respondent's Rule 24 reply.



DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

9.   Judge Lawrence set out the issue which he considered  that  he  had  to
    decide at [28] of the Decision as follows:

         "The difficulty for the Appellant in the instant appeal is  however
         that, even if her argument as to the correct meaning of  dependency
         in point 2(a) of Article 3 of  Directive  2004/38  is  correct,  it
         would still in my consideration be necessary at least  for  her  to
         show that she had been dependent on the EU citizen, independent due
         to taking up employment or self-employment, or a member of  the  EU
         citizen's household, continuously since the  Respondent  recognised
         that she satisfied the requirements in regulation  8(2)(c)  of  the
         2006 Regulations on 29  September  2010  until  such  time  as  she
         acquired the right to permanent residence..."

10.  The error asserted in the grounds relates to the Judge's finding as  to
    self-sufficiency.  Mr Saeed confirmed that the Appellant  accepts  that
    she was neither dependent on the Sponsor nor a member of his  household
    at the time of the hearing before Judge Lawrence (although he said that
    the position may have changed since then as the Appellant has lost  her
    job as a result of the Respondent's decision under  appeal).   However,
    as at the time of the  hearing  before  Judge  Lawrence,  even  if  the
    finding as to self-sufficiency is open to challenge  (as  I  accept  it
    might be), the materiality of any error in that regard depends  whether
    the Judge has asked himself the right question.  If that  question  was
    not legally relevant, then it matters not if  the  Judge  has  made  an
    error in deciding it.  For that reason, the main part  of  the  hearing
    was devoted to discussion of the law with which I  will  need  to  deal
    first.  If I decide that issue against the Appellant, I do not need  to
    go on to consider the challenge to the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
    self-sufficiency issue for reasons which I will come to.

11.      Judge Lawrence set out the paragraphs  of  the  Reyes  judgment  on
    which  the  Appellant  relies  at  [24]  of  the  Decision  and  it  is
    appropriate to start with that citation as follows:

         "29. By its second question, the referring court asks, in  essence,
             whether, in  interpreting  the  term  'dependant'  in  Article
             2(2)(c) of Directive 2004/38, any significance attaches to the
             fact that a family member - due to personal circumstances such
             as age, education and health - is deemed to be well placed  to
             obtain employment and in addition intends to start work in the
             Member State, which would mean that the conditions for him  to
             be regarded as  a  relative  who  is  a  dependant  under  the
             provision are no longer met.

         30.  In that regard,  it  must  be  noted  that  the  situation  of
             dependence must exist, in the country from  which  the  family
             member comes, at the time when he applies to  join  the  Union
             citizen on whom he is dependent  (see  to  that  effect,  Jia,
             paragraph 37, and  Case  C-83/11  Rahman  [2012]  ECR  I-0000,
             paragraph 33).

         31.  It follows that, as, in essence, has been stated  by  all  the
             parties which have submitted observations to  the  Court,  any
             prospects of obtaining work in the  host  Member  State  which
             would enable, if necessary, a direct  descendant,  who  is  21
             years old or older,  of  a  Union  citizen  no  longer  to  be
             dependent on that citizen once he has the right  of  residence
             are not such as to affect the interpretation of the  condition
             of being a 'dependant'  referred  to  in  Article  2(2)(c)  of
             Directive 2004/38.

         32.  Furthermore, as the European Commission  has  rightly  pointed
             out, the opposite solution would, in practice,  prohibit  that
             descendant from looking for  employment  in  the  host  Member
             State and  would  accordingly  infringe  Article  23  of  that
             directive, which expressly authorises such a descendant, if he
             has the right of residence, to take  up  employment  or  self-
             employment (see, by analogy, Lebon, paragraph 20).

         33.  In consequence the answer  to  the  second  question  is  that
             Article 2(2)(c) of Directive 2004/38 must  be  interpreted  as
             meaning that the fact  that  a  relative  -  due  to  personal
             circumstances such as age, education and health - is deemed to
             be well placed to obtain employment and in addition intends to
             start  work  in  the  Member  State  does   not   affect   the
             interpretation of the requirement in that provision that he be
             a 'dependant'".

12.  Judge Lawrence went on to cite Article 23 of  Directive  2004/38  which
    concerns the right to take up employment for family  members  with  the
    right of residence and permanent residence in a member state.  He  then
    continued with his analysis of the law as follows:

         "27. Regulation 7(3) of the 2006 Regulations also provided that  an
             extended family member who has been issued  with  a  residence
             card must be treated as a family member of  the  EEA  national
             family member provided  that  they  continue  to  satisfy  the
             condition on which they were recognised as such, but  I  would
             accept that the provision may need to be 'read down' in  order
             to give effect to the meaning of dependency in point  2(a)  of
             Article  3  of  Directive  2004/38  for  which  the  Appellant
             contends."

13.  As I have already pointed out and as Judge Lawrence noted  at  [16]  of
    the Decision, Judge Bennett did not accept  the  Appellant's  arguments
    about the lack of a need for continued dependency.  I accept of  course
    that Judge Lawrence was not bound by Judge Bennett's conclusions as  to
    the law.  The issue though is whether he was right to conclude that, in
    order to give effect to EU law, one  must  read  down  the  very  clear
    provision in the EEA Regulations (the 2016 ones  which  apply  in  this
    case as much as the 2006  version)  which  provides  that  an  extended
    family member who has been given a residence card is to be treated as a
    family member only for so  long  as  he/she  continues  to  fulfil  the
    requirements of qualification as an extended family member.

14.  As I pointed out to Mr Saeed, and I took him to  accept,  Reyes  itself
    was concerned directly with a person  who  is  a  family  member  under
    Article 2 of Directive  2004/38  ("the  Directive").  A  family  member
    includes directly related relatives who continue to be dependent on the
    EEA national sponsor (direct  descendants  over  21  years  and  direct
    relatives in the  ascending  line  of  the  EEA  national  or  the  EEA
    national's spouse or partner).  It is not disputed, as I understand it,
    that the Appellant in this case does not fall within that category.

15.  The issue therefore is whether EU law confers the  same  rights  on  an
    extended family member who has been a dependent but, by reason  of  the
    obtaining of employment, ceases to be so, to fall within the definition
    of "family member".

16.  Mr Saeed referred in passing to the Tribunal's decision in  Reyes  (EEA
    Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT 00314(IAC) which appears in  the  updated
    bundle before me but, so far  as  I  can  see,  was  not  before  Judge
    Lawrence.  In spite of the same surname of appellant, that is  not  the
    same case as was before the CJEU.  The appellant in the  Tribunal  case
    was the father-in-law of  an  EEA  national.   However,  although,  the
    appellant in that case was initially given  a  residence  card  as  the
    extended family member of an EEA national, as  paragraph  [4]  of  that
    decision makes clear, the First-tier Tribunal had  concluded  that  the
    appellant was a "family member in the ascending line of the  spouse  of
    an EEA national" and therefore that  "the appellant  should  have  been
    considered under regulation  7(1)(c)  which  covers  'dependent  direct
    relatives in his ascending line or that of  his  spouse  or  his  civil
    partner'".  Accordingly, as with  the  CJEU  case,  the  appellant  was
    accepted to be within the definition in Article 2 of the Directive  and
    the consideration of dependency arose in that context.  Otherwise,  the
    case is reported for what it has to say about  evidence  of  dependency
    which does not arise in this case as the Appellant accepts that, as  at
    the date of hearing  before  Judge  Lawrence  at  least,  she  was  not
    dependent on the Sponsor.

17.  Turning then to the position of extended  family  members,  I  drew  Mr
    Saeed's attention to the case  of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Rahman and others (C-83/11) ("Rahman"), a decision of  the
    Grand Chamber of the CJEU.  Although that case is referred to in  Reyes
    at [30] in the paragraph which I have set out at [11] above (taken from
    the Decision), the judgment itself is not in the  bundle  before  Judge
    Lawrence and was not in the bundle before me.  However,  Mr  Saeed  was
    content to deal with it.  Before  I  record  his  submissions  in  this
    regard, I deal with the relevant parts of the judgment.

18.  The case  concerned  the  half-sibling  and  nephew  of  a  Bangladeshi
    national who had married an  Irish  national.   They  applied  for  EEA
    family permits to obtain the right to reside  as  dependents  of  their
    relative and his EEA national wife.  They were granted  family  permits
    by the Entry Clearance Officer (following a successful appeal) but were
    later refused residence permits whilst within the UK on the basis  that
    they had not shown that they  were  dependent  on  or  members  of  the
    household of the EEA national family member.  It  was  the  refusal  to
    grant the residence permits  which  led  to  the  appeal  which  itself
    generated the reference to the CJEU.  As such,  although  I  accept  Mr
    Saeed's submission that in that case,  unlike  the  present  case,  the
    appellants had not been granted residence permits recognising  them  as
    extended family members of an EEA national whilst within the  UK,  they
    had been granted family permits (also by the UK) in order  to  come  to
    the UK.  The question is whether that is a material distinction.

19.  I begin with the distinction drawn  in  that  judgment  between  family
    members and extended family  members  as  explained  by  the  Court  as
    follows:

         "19.  As  contended  by  the  governments  which   have   submitted
             observations to the Court and by the European  Commission,  it
             follows both from the wording of  Article  3(2)  of  Directive
             2004/38 and from the general system of the directive that  the
             European legislature has drawn a distinction between  a  Union
             citizen's  family  member  as  defined  in  Article  2(2)   of
             Directive 2004/38, who enjoy, as provided for in the directive
             a right of entry into and residence  in  that  citizen's  host
             Member State,  and  the  other  family  members  envisaged  in
             Article 3(2) of the directive, whose entry and  residence  has
             only to be facilitated by that Member State.

         20.  That interpretation is born out by recital 6 in  the  preamble
             to Directive 2004/38, which states that, 'in order to maintain
             the unity of the family in a broader sense ...the situation of
             those persons who are not included in the definition of family
             members under this Directive, and who therefore do  not  enjoy
             an automatic right of entry and residence in the  host  Member
             State, should be examined by the  host  Member  State  on  the
             basis of its own national  legislation,  in  order  to  decide
             whether entry and residence could be granted to such  persons,
             taking into consideration their relationship  with  the  Union
             citizen or any other circumstances, such as their financial or
             physical dependence on the Union citizen.'

         21.  Whilst it is therefore apparent that Article 3(2) of Directive
             2004/38 does not oblige the Member States to accord a right of
             entry and residence to persons who are family members, in  the
             broad sense, dependent on a Union citizen, the  fact  remains,
             as is clear from the use of the words  'shall  facilitate'  in
             Article 3(2), that that provision imposes an obligation on the
             Member States to confer a  certain  advantage,  compared  with
             applications for entry and residence  of  other  nationals  of
             third Sates, on applications submitted by persons who  have  a
             relationship of particular dependence with a Union citizen.

         22.  In order to meet that obligation, the Member States  must,  in
             accordance with the second subparagraph  of  Article  3(2)  of
             Directive 2004/38, make it possible for persons  envisaged  in
             the first subparagraph of Article 3(2) to obtain a decision on
             their application that is founded on an extensive  examination
             of their personal circumstances and, in the event of  refusal,
             is justified by reasons.

         23.  As is clear from  recital  6  in  the  preamble  to  Directive
             2004/38, it is incumbent upon the  competent  authority,  when
             undertaking  that  examination  of  the  applicant's  personal
             circumstances, to take account of the various factors that may
             be relevant in the particular case,  such  as  the  extent  of
             economic or physical dependence and the degree of relationship
             between the family member and the Union citizen whom he wishes
             to accompany or join.

         24.  In the light both of the absence of  more  specific  rules  in
             Directive 2004/38 and of the use of the words  'in  accordance
             with  its  national  legislation'  in  Article  3(2)  of   the
             directive, each Member State has a wide discretion as  regards
             the selection of the factors to be taken into  account.   None
             the  less,  the  host  Member  State  must  ensure  that   its
             legislation contains criteria which are  consistent  with  the
             normal meaning of the  term  'facilitate'  and  of  the  words
             relating to dependence used in Article 3(2) and which  do  not
             deprive that provision of its effectiveness.

         25.  Finally, even though, as the governments which have  submitted
             observations have correctly  observed,  the  wording  used  in
             Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 is not sufficiently  precise
             to enable an applicant for entry or residence to rely directly
             on that provision in order to invoke criteria which should  in
             his view be applied when assessing his application,  the  fact
             remains that such an  applicant  is  entitled  to  a  judicial
             review of whether the national legislation and its application
             have remained within the limits of that discretion...."

20.  Whilst, as Mr Saeed submitted, and I accept, that  passage  is  largely
    concerned with the questions of an application for a  residence  permit
    and not the position once one is granted, it  does  not  follow  as  he
    suggested that what is there said  has  no  relevance  to  that  latter
    situation.  As that passage makes clear, a person who seeks  entry  and
    residence as an extended family member rather than a family member does
    not derive a right of residence directly from EU law generally  or  the
    Directive in particular.  The only right is to have entry and residence
    facilitated in appropriate circumstances, in accordance  with  national
    legislation, to have the application considered  on  the  basis  of  an
    advantage compared with other third state nationals who are not related
    to EEA nationals and in a way which does not deprive Article 3  of  the
    Directive of effectiveness.

21.  Although, as I accept, Rahman  was  not  concerned  directly  with  the
    position of an extended  family  member  once  a  right  to  reside  is
    conferred within the UK and does not deal with permanent  residence  as
    such, the case does still have some relevance to that issue.  Questions
    [5] and [6] posed by the Tribunal in the reference were as follows:

         "17. ...

             (5)  Can a Member State impose particular requirements  as  to
                  the nature  or  duration  of  dependency  referred  to  in
                  Article 3(2) of [Directive 2004/38] by such  other  family
                  member so as to prevent such dependency being contrived or
                  unnecessary to enable a non-national to be admitted to  or
                  continue to reside in its territory?

             (6)  Must the dependency on  which  the  other  family  member
                  relies in  order  to  be  admitted  to  the  Member  State
                  continue for a period or indefinitely in  the  host  State
                  for a residence card to be issued or renewed  pursuant  to
                  Article 10 of [Directive 2004/38] and  if  so  how  should
                  such dependency be demonstrated?"

22.  The Court answered the fifth question as follows:

         "40. Accordingly, the answer to  the  fifth  question  referred  is
             that, on a proper construction of Article  3(2)  of  Directive
             2004/38, the Member States  may,  in  the  exercise  of  their
             discretion, impose particular  requirements  relating  to  the
             nature  and  duration  of  dependence,  provided  that   those
             requirements are consistent with the  normal  meaning  of  the
             words relating to the dependence referred to in  Article  3(2)
             (a) of the directive and do not deprive that provision of  its
             effectiveness."

23.  The sixth question is perhaps the more pertinent to the issue  in  this
    appeal.  As such, I set out the fuller answer to that question which is
    as follows:

         "41. By its sixth question, the national tribunal asks, in essence,
             whether issue of the residence card referred to in Article  10
             of Directive 2004/38 may be  conditional  on  the  requirement
             that the situation of dependence for the purposes  of  Article
             3(2)(a) of that directive  has  endured  in  the  host  Member
             State.

         42.  With regard to the issue of the residence card referred to  by
             Directive 2004/38, the European Union legislature  essentially
             confined itself to listing, in Article 10 of  that  directive,
             the documents to be presented in order to obtain such a  card,
             which is then to be furnished within six months from the  date
             on which the application was submitted.

         43.  So far as concerns the applicants envisaged in Article 3(2)(a)
             of Directive 2004/38, Article 10 of the directive states  that
             those applicants must present inter alia ' a  document  issued
             by the relevant authority in the country of origin or  country
             from  which  they  are  arriving  certifying  that  they   are
             dependents .. of the Union citizen'.

         44.  The legislature did not settle, either in that provision or in
             other provisions of Directive 2004/38,  the  question  whether
             family members of a Union citizen who do not  fall  under  the
             definition in Article 2(2) of the directive and who apply  for
             issue of a residence card by presenting a document, issued  in
             the country from which they  have  arrived,  certifying  their
             dependence on that Union citizen can be  refused  a  residence
             card on the ground that,  after  their  entry  into  the  host
             Member State, they  have  ceased  to  be  dependants  of  that
             citizen.

         45.  The answer  to  the  sixth  question  therefore  is  that  the
             question whether issue of the residence card  referred  to  in
             Article 10 of Directive 2004/38  may  be  conditional  on  the
             requirement that the situation of dependence for the  purposes
             of Article 3(2)(a) of that directive has endured in  the  host
             Member State does not fall within the scope of the directive."

24.  For completeness, I also refer  to  the  recent  Tribunal  decision  in
    Chowdhury (Extended family members: dependency) [2020] UKUT 00188 (IAC)
    ("Chowdhury").  This decision was not and could not  have  been  before
    Judge Lawrence.  It was not included by the Appellant  in  the  updated
    bundle before me.  Again, Mr Saeed was, however, familiar with  it  and
    sought to distinguish it on the basis that it concerned  a  refusal  to
    issue an initial residence permit and not the issue  whether  a  person
    issued one and who remains in the UK, albeit  not  dependent  on  or  a
    member of the household of an EEA national, is  entitled  to  permanent
    residence.  I accept that distinction but, again, on the reasoning, the
    question is whether the distinction is a material one.

25.  The headnote in Chowdhury reads as follows:

         "The words 'and continues to be dependent' in regulation 8(2)(c) of
         the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulation 2006,  properly
         characterised, require an applicant to establish that there has not
         been a break in their dependency on the EEA national sponsor."

    As appears from that headnote, although I accept that the  Tribunal  in
    Chowdhury was concerned with  the  situation  of  a  person  refused  a
    residence permit, what  the  Tribunal  was  required  to  consider  was
    whether  a  break  in  the  continuity  of  dependency  disentitled  an
    applicant from the obtaining of a right to reside in the  UK  under  EU
    law.  As such, it is a not dissimilar situation to that which arises in
    the present appeal.

26.  In that regard,  what  the  Tribunal  said  in  its  discussion  is  of
    relevance as follows:

         "16. Article 3(2) of the Citizens  Directive  makes  provision  for
             applications by a broad category  of  family  members  ('other
             family members') who are  dependants  or  members  of  the  EU
             citizen's household. The rights  given  to  this  category  of
             'other family members' differ from the more  extensive  rights
             for  family  members  within  Article  2(2)  of  the  Citizens
             Directive.  A host Member State is only under an obligation to
             'facilitate entry and residence'"

    Having referred to Rahman and set out [21] to [24], [32]  to  [35]  and
    [37] to [40] of that judgment, the Tribunal continued as follows:

         "20. As Mr De Mello acknowledges, the decision of the Grand Chamber
             of the CJEU does  not  directly  provide  the  answer  to  the
             question that we are  considering.   What  is  clear  is  that
             Article 3(2) of the Citizens Directive does not oblige  Member
             States to accord a right of entry and residence to persons who
             are family members, in the broad sense, dependent on  a  Union
             citizen.  The provision imposes an obligation  on  the  Member
             States  to  confer  a   certain   advantage,   compared   with
             applications for entry and residence  of  other  nationals  of
             third States, on applications submitted by persons who have  a
             relationship of particular dependence with a Union citizen.

         21.  It is uncontroversial that the refusal of a host Member  State
             to authorise 'other family members' of an EU citizen  to  join
             them in the host Member State is likely to  discourage  an  EU
             citizen from continuing to reside there and encourage  him  to
             leave in order to be able  to  lead  family  life  in  another
             Member  State  or  in  a  third  country.   The  purpose   and
             justification of the ancillary rights granted to other  family
             members of union citizens is therefore to support the exercise
             by those union citizens of their own rights, if needs  be,  by
             overriding domestic immigration law.  That is why, to qualify,
             the relatives must be dependent upon the EEA national, or be a
             member of his household.

         22.  It is useful to start with the wording of  regulation  8(2)(c)
             itself. The regulation requires that 'the person satisfied the
             condition in paragraph (a), has joined the EEA national in the
             United Kingdom and continues to be dependent upon him or to be
             a member of his household'.  The first requirement is that the
             applicant 'satisfied the  condition  in  paragraph  (a)'.  The
             applicant must have satisfied the requirement that the  person
             is residing in a country other than the United Kingdom and  is
             dependent upon  the  EEA  national  or  is  a  member  of  his
             household.  The focus is upon the past and prior dependency or
             membership of the household ... The second requirement is that
             the appellant 'has joined  the  EEA  national  in  the  United
             Kingdom'.  In  Metock  and  Others  v  Minister  for  Justice,
             Equality and Law Reform C-127/08, the CJEU  confirmed,  albeit
             in the context of 'family members', nothing  in  the  Citizens
             Directive made its application conditional upon the  applicant
             family member of a Union citizen having previously resided  in
             a Member State.  The CJEU held the Citizens Directive is to be
             interpreted as applying to all nationals of non-Member  States
             who were family members of a Union  citizen,  irrespective  of
             where they had resided prior to their arrival.   It  does  not
             matter whether it is the EU citizen or the relative of the  EU
             citizen who arrives first in the United Kingdom.

         23.  It is the interpretation of the  third  strand  of  regulation
             8(2)(c); 'and continues to be dependent upon him or  to  be  a
             member of his household', that is at the heart of  the  appeal
             before us.  The word 'continues' as an ordinary  word  of  the
             English language is to carry on,  keep  up,  maintain,  go  on
             with, or persist in an action.  We acknowledge that 'to  carry
             on' could also include to 'resume from a point  of  suspension
             or interruption'.

         24.  In our judgement, the context is  important.   In  considering
             the interpretation of the words 'and continues to be dependent
             ...', in this context we must give effect to the  purposes  of
             the Directive  which  the  2006  Regulations  transpose.   The
             material recitals to the Citizens Directive are recitals 1,  5
             and 6.  The first objective is to promote the free movement of
             Union Citizens.  Recital 5 records that the right, if it is to
             be  exercised  under  objective  conditions  of  freedom   and
             dignity, be also granted to their family members, irrespective
             of nationality.

         25.  The obligations on host member states  in  respect  of  'other
             family members' are explained in recital (6) to  the  Citizens
             Directive as follows:

                  'In order to maintain the unity of the family in a broader
                  sense  and  without  prejudice  to  the   prohibition   of
                  discrimination on grounds of nationality, the situation of
                  those persons who are not included in  the  definition  of
                  family members under this Directive, and who therefore  do
                  not enjoy an automatic right of entry and residence in the
                  host Member State, should be examined by the  host  Member
                  State on the basis of its  own  national  legislation,  in
                  order to decide  whether  entry  and  residence  could  be
                  granted to such persons, taking into  consideration  their
                  relationship  with  the  Union  citizen   or   any   other
                  circumstances,  such  as  their  financial   or   physical
                  dependence on the Union citizen.'

         26.  The obligations in respect of  'other  family  members'  under
             Article 3(2) are clearly more restricted than the  obligations
             and rights  conferred  on  family  members  under  Article  2.
             Whereas the Directive requires that the primary and individual
             right enjoyed by EU citizens to move and reside freely  within
             the territory of Member States shall also be granted to family
             members as defined within Article 2(2), by  contrast,  in  the
             case of other family members who  fall  within  the  scope  of
             Article 3(2), the Directive imposes an  obligation  on  Member
             States  to  'facilitate'  their  'entry  and  residence'.   In
             Rahman, the CJEU made clear, at [32], that  the  objective  of
             that provision is to 'maintain the unity of the family in  the
             broader sense' by facilitating entry and residence for persons
             who are not  included  in  the  definition  of  family  member
             contained  in  Article  2(2)  of  Directive  2004/38  but  who
             nevertheless maintain close and  stable  family  ties  with  a
             Union citizen on account of  specific  factual  circumstances,
             such as economic dependence (our emphasis), being a member  of
             the household or serious health grounds.  In our judgment, the
             recognition in Rahman that what Article  3(2)  is  seeking  to
             promote is an ability to maintain close and stable family ties
             with  a  Union  citizen  on  account   of   specific   factual
             circumstances,  such  as  economic  dependence,  is  of   some
             significance.  It suggests that at least one facet  of  stable
             family ties, is economic dependence.

         27.  Member States have a wide discretion as regards the  selection
             of  factors  to  be  taken   into   account   when   examining
             applications for  entry  and  residence  submitted  by  'other
             family members', and in the exercise of that discretion Member
             States may lay down particular requirements as to  the  nature
             and duration of dependence, in  order  to  satisfy  themselves
             that the situation of dependence is genuine and stable.

         28.  Regulation 8(2)(c) of the 2006 Regulations  requires  that  an
             applicant continues to be dependent upon the EEA  national  or
             to be a member of his  household.   Thus,  the  applicant  may
             satisfy the requirement if he either continues to be dependent
             upon the EEA national or continues to be a member of  the  EEA
             national's household.  If, as the appellant contends, all that
             is necessary is for the appellant to establish past dependency
             so that the condition in paragraph 8(2)(a) is  satisfied,  and
             present  dependency  or  membership  of  the  EEA   national's
             household, the Regulations would have used the words  'and  is
             dependent..' rather  than  the  words  'and  continues  to  be
             dependent' in regulation 8(2)(c).

         29.  The language of Article 3(2) of the Citizens Directive and  in
             particular the requirement to 'facilitate' entry and residence
             for any other family members who 'are dependents or members of
             the household of the Union citizen having the primary right of
             residence, establish  a  category  of  person  who  are  given
             privileged treatment in order to  promote  the  objectives  of
             free movement and residence by EU citizens.   The  refusal  to
             grant 'other family members' a right of residence where  there
             has  been  historic,  but  lapsed  or  broken  dependency   or
             membership of a household, does not in our judgment, undermine
             the objective of removing  obstacles  to  the  Union  citizens
             freedom movement and residence rights.  The refusal to grant a
             right of residence in such circumstances does  not  discourage
             or act as a deterrent to the Union citizen from continuing  to
             reside in the host Member State.  It is important to highlight
             that the policy of the 2004 Directive, as Mr De Mello accepts,
             is not one of family reunion.

         30.  In our judgment, the requirement for  there  to  be  continued
             unbroken dependency is consistent with the rationale that  the
             Directive seeks to preserve stable family ties  with  a  Union
             citizen,  where  there  has  been  stable  continued  economic
             dependence.  It follows that in our judgment, in this context,
             the words  'and  continues  to  be  dependent'  in  regulation
             8(2)(c)  of  the  2006  Regulations,  properly  characterised,
             require an applicant to establish has there  has  not  been  a
             break in their dependency on the EEA national sponsor."

27.  The principles which flow from Rahman and Chowdhury read  together  are
    as follows:

      1) A family member within the definition of Article 2 of the Directive
         (including those who qualify as such by reason of their  dependency
         on the EEA national) have a right of entry and residence  under  EU
         law flowing from the Directive.  In other words,  they  have  their
         own right to enter and reside.  That is made clear by Article  3(1)
         of the Directive.  The Directive applies to  those  family  members
         directly.

      2) By contrast, those other family members who, by reason of Article 3
         of the Directive, simply have a  right  to  have  their  entry  and
         residence "facilitated" on an advantageous and effective basis  and
         do not enjoy their own right of entry and  residence  flowing  from
         the Directive itself.  Their right to enter and reside  in  the  UK
         flows from that of the EEA national on whom they are  dependent  or
         with whom they share a household.  The Directive  does  not  confer
         any right of entry or residence on such persons directly.

      3)  The question whether dependency is required to  be  continuous  in
         order to qualify or continue to qualify for entry and/or  residence
         does not therefore fall within the Directive and is not governed by
         the Directive.  It is a matter for national legislation subject  to
         the requirement of effectiveness of that legislation  in  order  to
         comply with the purpose of the Directive.

      4) The purpose of the Directive in the context of other family members
         who fall within Article 3(2) of the Directive is  to  ensure  that,
         where a factual situation of dependency or membership of  household
         exists, the EEA national concerned is not dissuaded from exercising
         his or her right of free movement as might otherwise be the case in
         order to promote family unity.

      5) Although a lapse in dependency does not prevent dependency  arising
         again in the future, it is necessary for an applicant under the EEA
         Regulations to show that he continues to have such dependency or be
         a member of the EEA national's household at the relevant time.   In
         a case such as this, that is at the date  of  the  hearing  of  the
         appeal.

28.  As I have already noted, the Appellant does  not  dispute  the  finding
    that she was not dependent on or a  member  of  the  household  of  the
    Sponsor at the time of the hearing before Judge Lawrence.  As such, she
    could not have  met  the  requirements  of  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.   Although  the  reference  to  the  EEA  Regulations   in
    Chowdhury is to the 2006 version, the 2016 version  is  not  materially
    different.  I do not need to refer to Article 8 of the EEA  Regulations
    as it is not disputed that the Appellant did not meet those criteria at
    the date of the hearing before Judge Lawrence.  Applying the  rationale
    of Chowdhury, itself dependent on what is said in Rahman, the Appellant
    would fail under those provisions of the EEA Regulations.

29.  Mr Saeed's argument is however more nuanced.  As he points out,  before
    Judge Bennett, the Appellant sought to establish a right  of  permanent
    residence under EU law.  That was on the basis that, having been  given
    a right of entry and residence as the extended  family  member  of  the
    Sponsor, she fell to be treated  as  a  family  member  under  the  EEA
    Regulations and/or  the  Directive  and  therefore  her  own  continued
    residence and exercise of Treaty rights  gave  rise  to  the  right  of
    permanent residence.

30.  Judge Bennett rejected that argument.  Judge Lawrence appears  to  have
    accepted it. He was wrong to do so.  As I have already pointed out, the
    Directive does not apply directly to relatives  other  than  those  who
    fall within the definition of "family members" within Article 2 of  the
    Directive.  Cases falling within Article 3(2) of the Directive are  not
    said to be categorised as family members once their entry and residence
    is "facilitated" by the member state.   As  was  said  in  Rahman,  the
    "question whether the issue of the residence card [or  it  follows  the
    renewal of the same] referred to in Article 10 of Directive 2004/38 may
    be conditional on the requirement that the situation of dependence  for
    the purposes of Article 3(2)(a) of that directive has  endured  in  the
    host Member State does not fall within the scope of the directive".

31.  For that reason, the question whether  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
    permanent residence as the  extended  family  member  whose  entry  and
    residence has been facilitated by the UK is one for domestic  law.   It
    is not governed by EU law.  Indeed, as  I  pointed  out  to  Mr  Saeed,
    Article 16  of  the  Directive  does  not  confer  any  entitlement  to
    permanent residence on persons who have resided  in  the  UK  for  five
    years other than where they  fall  within  the  definition  of  "family
    members" under Article 2 of the Directive (or obviously when  they  are
    EEA nationals themselves).

32.  Judge Lawrence refers at [28] of the Decision to Regulation  8  of  the
    EEA Regulations (albeit to the 2006 version).  As I have already noted,
    the Appellant accepts that, if one were  looking  at  the  grant  of  a
    residence permit under the EEA Regulations,  she  was  unable  to  meet
    those provisions at the time of the hearing before Judge Lawrence.  She
    relies however on the recognition of extended family members under  the
    EEA Regulations as family members once  a  residence  permit  has  been
    granted.  Regulation 7 provides as follows (so far as relevant):

         "7(3)    A person ("B") who is an extended family  member  and  has
         been issued with an EEA family permit, a  registration  certificate
         or a residence card must be  treated  as  a  family  member  of  A,
         provided-

             (a)  B continues  to  satisfy  the  conditions  in  regulation
             8(1A), 8(2), (3), (4) or (5); and

             (b)   the  EEA  family  permit,  registration  certificate  or
             residence card remains in force.

         [my emphasis]

33.  That an extended family member in the position of the Appellant is  not
    entitled to permanent residence  in  domestic  law  unless  he  or  she
    continues to satisfy the criteria under Regulation 8 is  reinforced  by
    the requirement under Regulation 15(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations that a
    family member must have continued to reside "in accordance  with  these
    Regulations" for a continuous period of five years.   Regulation  14(2)
    makes clear that, in order to continue to reside under EU law, a family
    member of an EEA national must  remain  as  such.  Once  the  Appellant
    ceased to meet the criteria under Regulation 8 of the EEA  Regulations,
    she was no longer to be treated as a family member under Regulation  14
    or to be residing "in accordance with" the EEA Regulations and was  not
    therefore entitled to permanent  residence  under  Regulation  15  (the
    period of her dependency/membership of household having been  found  by
    the First Appeal Decision to be less than the continuous period of five
    years which was required).

34.  For the reasons I have already  given,  Judge  Lawrence  was  wrong  to
    conclude that the provisions of the EEA Regulations had to be read down
    in order to give effect to EU law and in particular the Directive.   It
    follows that Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations needs to  be  read  as
    drafted.  It requires that the extended family member who is granted  a
    residence card must continue to satisfy the conditions in regulation  8
    in order to fall within the definition of a family  member  within  the
    EEA Regulations.  It also follows that the right to permanent residence
    conferred on family  members  under  Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations (which is itself more generous than the Directive) does not
    apply to the Appellant as she is no longer able to  satisfy  Regulation
    8, and therefore does not fall within the definition of a family member
    within Regulation 7.

35.  The Appellant asks that, if the Tribunal finds that her  submission  as
    to EU law and the interpretation of the Directive is wrong, a reference
    be made to the CJEU to clarify the position.  That is unnecessary.  The
    position in EU law is clear arising from what is said in  Rahman.   The
    Directive does not apply to the situation in this appeal.  The question
    whether continued dependency is  required  is  a  matter  for  national
    legislation.  The issue is therefore "acte claire" and no reference  is
    needed to interpret the Directive.

36.  I should also address a submission made by Mr Saeed that to find  as  I
    have done in relation to  the  Appellant's  rights  would  deprive  the
    Directive of any effectiveness.   Notwithstanding  that  Rahman  states
    that the issue of continued dependency is a  matter  for  domestic  law
    rather than the Directive, there is  of  course  a  principle  that  of
    effectiveness  which  has  to  be  considered.   In  support   of   his
    proposition that EU law does not  regard  the  prospects  of  obtaining
    employment as precluding dependency, Mr Saeed relied on what is said in
    Reyes which, for reasons I have already explained is not on point as it
    concerns a family member within Article 2 of the Directive.  As to  the
    continued effectiveness of the Directive in relation to extended family
    members if I am right in  my  interpretation,  there  are  three  broad
    answers to Mr Saeed's submission.

37.  The first is that simply because  an  extended  family  member  becomes
    entitled to work when granted a residence permit does not mean that  he
    or she will necessarily do so and, in any event, if that person becomes
    no longer dependent on the EEA national by reason of their  employment,
    they may still satisfy Regulation 8 of  the  EEA  Regulations  if  they
    remain a member of the EEA national's household or if their  income  is
    such that dependency continues.

38.  The second is, per Rahman,  that  the  Directive  itself  is  not  what
    confers the right of entry and residence.  The Appellant's  entitlement
    is only to have her entry and  residence  facilitated  in  the  factual
    circumstances provided for under Article 3(2) of  the  Directive.   The
    question of what continued dependency is required is a matter  for  the
    Member State's own legislation, in this case the 2016 Regulations.

39.  Third, the reason why the Directive does  not  govern  the  Appellant's
    continued residence is because the purpose of the Directive in relation
    to extended family members is different to  that  for  family  members.
    The purpose of the Directive in relation to extended (or other)  family
    members is "to support the exercise by [the EEA national] of [his]  own
    rights".  The Appellant is no longer dependent  on  the  Sponsor.   She
    does not live with him.   That  factual  scenario  indicates  that  the
    Sponsor would not be dissuaded from exercising his own Treaty rights if
    the Appellant were to be removed from the UK.

40.  In summary of the above, therefore, Judge Lawrence erred  when  finding
    that the issue he had to determine included whether the  Appellant  was
    "independent due to taking up employment or self-employment".  The only
    issue was whether the Appellant is (or was at that time)  dependent  on
    the Sponsor or a member of his household.

41.  Although I have accepted that the  Decision  contains  errors  of  law,
    section 12(2) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 provides
    that, if an error of law is found, the Tribunal "may (but need not) set
    aside" the Decision.   The issue which then arises therefore is whether
    the errors of law make any difference to the outcome.

42.  I return therefore to where I began with  the  Appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal.  The Appellant's  challenge  to  the  Decision  is  as  to  the
    findings on self-sufficiency. As this was not an issue which the  Judge
    was required to consider at all,  any  error  in  that  regard  is  not
    material.  It could make no difference to the outcome.  I have  already
    recorded more than once that the Appellant accepts that she was not, at
    the date of the hearing, dependent on or a member of the  household  of
    the Sponsor.  It follows that, although the Judge made findings at [29]
    of the Decision which appear to run contrary to what was  said  in  the
    First Appeal Decision (and which are also challenged on that basis), it
    is conceded that the Appellant did not meet Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.   It  is  perhaps  rather  confusingly   stated   in   the
    Appellant's skeleton argument  for  the  hearing  before  me  that  the
    Appellant "demonstrated that she was a dependant by virtue of her being
    'independent due to taking up employment'" ([7]), which submission I do
    not understand, the skeleton argument accepts  in  what  precedes  that
    submission that "the initial FTT had been  satisfied  that  the  income
    evidence shown was such as to mean that the Appellant  and  her  sister
    [sic] had sufficient income to meet their basic needs" ([6(2)(b)]).

43.  On my analysis of the law as above, it follows that the  Appellant  was
    no longer entitled to be treated as a family member under Regulation  7
    once her dependency had ceased and she was no longer a  member  of  her
    Sponsor's household.  It also follows  that  the  conclusion  of  Judge
    Bennett in the  First  Appeal  Decision  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    entitled to permanent residence under the EEA Regulations  was  correct
    in law (and was not challenged on this point or overturned). Any  error
    made by Judge Lawrence in the  findings  on  the  Appellant's  position
    under Regulation 8 is for that reason not material.

44.  It also follows that the Appellant is no longer entitled  to  have  her
    residence in the UK facilitated under EU law as she no longer satisfies
    the conditions for recognition as an extended family member taking into
    account Article 3(2) of the Directive and in compliance with Regulation
    8 of the EEA Regulations.  For that reason, although the  reasoning  of
    Judge Lawrence contains errors of law, in particular in relation to the
    correct interpretation of EU law, the  challenge  to  the  Respondent's
    decision under appeal fails.

45.  Although Mr Saeed submitted that, even if I were not  with  him  as  to
    the law, it was still necessary to set aside the Decision in  order  to
    consider the current position as to dependency, I  decline  to  do  so.
    There is no application under Rule 15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to  adduce  further  evidence.   If  the
    Appellant contends that the position as to dependency has  changed,  it
    is open to her to make a further application for a new  residence  card
    under the EEA Regulations.

CONCLUSION

46.  For the above reasons, I am satisfied that there is an error of law  in
    the Decision but that the error is not material.  I  therefore  decline
    to set aside the Decision.  I uphold the Decision.



DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  T  Lawrence  promulgated  on  24
March 2020 does involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law,  but  I
decline to set aside the  decision  on  that  basis  as  the  error  is  not
material.  I therefore uphold the Decision with  the  consequence  that  the
Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Signed   L K Smith     Dated: 23 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
