
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06474/2016
                                                               EA/06477/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3rd November 2017                |On 8th December 2017                  |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                              JOSEPHINE [A] (1)
                                DORIS [A] (2)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. C Boaitey, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    Judge Nicholls promulgated on 1st August 2017.  The FtT Judge dismissed
    the  appeals  of  the  appellants  against  the   refusals   of   their
    applications for an EEA family permit  as  family  members  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the  UK.   The  applications  were
    refused by the respondent for the reasons that were set out in a Notice
    of Immigration Decision dated 20 April 2016.  The reasons given by  the
    respondent are identical in each case.


 2. The respondent states in the decisions to refuse the  application  that
    "..You have stated that you propose to join your step-mother;  [MP]  in
    the United Kingdom  who  is  a  Dutch  national  and  married  to  your
    purported father; [EA].".  The decisions of the respondent  then  refer
    to a birth certificate relied upon by each appellant, which  appear  to
    show  '[EA]'  as  the  father.   The  respondent  raised  a  number  of
    additional  matters  including  telephone  numbers  not  matching   the
    telephone numbers provided  by  the  appellants  in  their  application
    forms, and a lack of other evidence  of  the  appellants'  relationship
    with their sponsor(s) such  as  photos  or  evidence  of  any  meetings
    between them.  The respondent concluded:


         "In view of your failure to provide satisfactory evidence, I am not
         satisfied that you are the family member  of  an  EEA  national  in
         accordance with Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006."


 3. It is clear from that decision, although not  explicitly  stated,  that
    the relationship between the appellants and their father was in  issue.
    Although the decision maker  refers  to  the  birth  certificates,  the
    respondent noted that the appellants propose to join their step-mother,
    a Dutch national married to the appellants "purported father".


 4. Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 provides that for the purposes of the  Regulations  the  following
    persons shall be treated as the family members of another person:


         (1)  ...


         (b)      direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner
         who are-


             (i) under 21; or


             (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;


 5. The FtT Judge correctly noted that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    appellants  to  show,  on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  that   their
    application complies with  all  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   The  Judge  sets  out  the
    evidence at paragraphs [4] to [8] of the decision.   The  findings  and
    conclusions of the FtT Judge are set out at paragraphs [11] to [14]  of
    the decision.  At paragraph [13] of the decision, the Judge states:


         "The burden of proof rests on the  two  Appellants  to  show  their
         entitlement to a family permit on a balance of probabilities. To do
         so they must show that they are the direct descendants of  the  EEA
         national's spouse and either aged under 21 or dependent. As  it  is
         not clear to me that the ECO accepts the claimed paternity  of  the
         children,  without  any  evidence  of  the  paternity  of  the  two
         Appellants I find that I am not satisfied to the required  standard
         of probability that they are the direct descendants of  the  spouse
         of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK. Although the
         sponsor testified about the identities of the two young women shown
         in two photographs included in the Appellants' bundle of documents,
         I have no evidence to confirm those claims. Reference was  made  in
         the statement of the sponsor  to  a  previous  application  by  the
         Appellants but apart  from  the  information  given  in  answer  to
         question 28  of  the  visa  application  forms,  I  have  no  other
         information.


 6. At paragraph [14], the Judge concluded;


         "Because of those difficulties with the evidence, I must find  that
         the two Appellants have not  shown  to  the  required  standard  of
         probability that they are the direct descendants of the  spouse  of
         an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK  and  that  they
         are, accordingly, entitled to the issue of a family permit to  join
         that EEA national. Accordingly, I must also conclude that there are
         no grounds under article 8  of  the  ECHR  which  would  support  a
         conclusion that the decision of the ECO was in breach of the rights
         protected by article 8 of the ECHR."


 7. The appellant contends that in reaching  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    applications for an EEA residence permit, the respondent must have been
    reasonably satisfied that there was a genuine and  subsisting  marriage
    between the EEA national and [EA].  It is claimed that the Judge  erred
    in dismissing the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  matters  that  were  not
    questioned by the respondent in her decision.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Holmes on 12th  September
    2017.  The matter comes before  me  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
    decision of the FtT Judge involved the making of a  material  error  of
    law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.  At the
    conclusion of the hearing before me, I  informed  the  parties  that  I
    dismiss the appeal.  I informed the parties that I would give  my  full
    decision in writing. This I now do.


 9. Before me, Ms Baoitey submitted that it was not clear to the appellants
    that their paternity was in issue. She submits that the respondent  did
    not expressly state that she is not satisfied that [EA] is  the  father
    of the appellants.  In  those  circumstances,  the  Judge  should  have
    adjourned the matter so that evidence of paternity could be provided by
    the appellants. The fact that proof of paternity had not been provided,
    she submits, is a matter that should not have  been  held  against  the
    appellants.  Miss  Ahmad  accepts  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    applications  did  not  expressly  state  that  the  paternity  of  the
    appellants is the issue. However, the decision maker did use the  words
    "your  purported  father,  [EA]"  in  the  decision   to   refuse   the
    applications.  She submits it was for the  appellants  to  satisfy  the
    Tribunal that the requirements of the  2006  Regulations  were  met  by
    them.


10. I reject the claim that the appellants paternity was not in  issue.  It
    may not have been clear to the appellants that their paternity  was  in
    issue, but carefully read, in my judgement, the decision to refuse  the
    applications shows that the decision maker was not satisfied about  the
    relationship between the appellants and their sponsor(s).


11. It is right to note, as Miss Ahmad accepts, that the respondent had not
    explicitly  challenged  the  paternity  of  the  appellant's  but   the
    respondent had referred to [EA] as  being  the  appellants'  "purported
    father".  The decision maker noted  that  the  appellant  had  provided
    "..no other evidence of your relationship with your sponsor(s) such  as
    photos of the two of you and/or evidence of any meetings between you.".
     The respondent had refused the application because the respondent  was
    not satisfied that the appellants are  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national in accordance with Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations.    It
    was plainly for the appellants, on appeal, to establish that they are a
    'family member' as set out in the Regulations.   Here,  that  they  are
    direct descendants of [EA].


12. The Judge correctly noted, at [14], that the appellants must show  that
    they are the direct descendants  of  the  EEA  national's  spouse,  and
    either aged under 21 or dependent.  In my judgement, the FtT Judge  has
    correctly identified the issue that was before him.  In  my  judgement,
    it was open to the Judge to conclude that without any evidence  of  the
    paternity of the two appellants, the Judge could not  be  satisfied  to
    the  required  standard  of  probability,  that  they  are  the  direct
    descendants of the spouse of an EA national exercising Treaty rights in
    the UK.


13. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  disclose  in  my
    judgment a material error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of FtT  Judge  Nicholls  shall
    stand.


19.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          28th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal before me has been dismissed.  There  can  therefore  be  no  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date          28th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

