
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: EA/06822/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 October 2020                 |On 22 October 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD NASIR

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr J Dhanji of counsel, instructed by SMA Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Pakistani national with date of birth given  as
    19.5.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 21.2.20, dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  27.11.19,
    to refuse his application made on 31.7.19 for an EEA Residence Card  as
    the family member of his sponsoring spouse, a Polish citizen exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK, pursuant to Regulation 7  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 2. The application was refused under Regulation  2,  on  the  basis  of  a
    marriage  interview  conducted  on  7.2.14,  which   highlighted   such
    inconsistencies so that the respondent concluded that the marriage  was
    one of convenience, not covered by the Regulations.

 3. In fact this is  the  appellant's  third  appeal  against  refusal.  He
    previously appealed the respondent's refusal to grant a Residence  Card
    but that appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in 2015 (Judge
    Morris). Further similar applications made in 2015, 2016 and 2017  were
    all refused. A 2018 refused application was again appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal but the appeal dismissed in April 2019  (Judge  Mill).  A
    further application made in June 2019 was also rejected.

 4. In consideration of his most recent application, made in July 2019, the
    respondent again concluded that the marriage was entered into  for  the
    predominant purpose of securing  an  immigration  advantage  (residence
    rights) and, therefore, declined to issue the requested Residence Card.
    It is this last refusal decision which was the subject of the appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Louveaux) and now to the Upper Tribunal.



 5. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the submissions made to me and the grounds of  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. In summary, the grounds assert that the  sole  issue  was  whether  the
    marriage was one of convenience but that the judge failed  to  properly
    resolve the issue of cohabitation and the involvement of the  appellant
    in the life of the sponsor's child.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 13.6.20.
    However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Pitt  granted  permission  on  7.8.20,  considering  it
    arguable that "the acceptance that  there  was  extensive  evidence  of
    cohabitation including  school  documents  showing  the  appellant  was
    considered to be a de facto parent to the sponsor's child  should  have
    led the First-tier Tribunal to  assess  whether  there  was  a  current
    genuine relationship  that  met  the  EEA  Regulations  notwithstanding
    earlier findings by the Tribunal that the couple were in a marriage  of
    convenience."

 8. In his submissions to me, Mr Dhaji argued  that  having  made  positive
    findings in the appellant's favour at [27] to [29] of the decision, the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have  reconsidered  all   of   the
    documentary evidence including that which was before the previous First-
    tier Tribunal Judges, and that his failure to  do  so  was  a  material
    error of law.

 9. In response, Mr Tan submitted that from looking at [24] to [26] of  the
    decision it was evidently difficult for Judge Louveaux  to  distinguish
    what documents had been put before the previous judges  and  which  was
    new. Mr Tan pointed out that [27] and [28] did not comprise findings in
    the appellant's favour, merely  recitation  of  the  evidence.  Mr  Tan
    accepted that at [29] the judge did  make  finding  favourable  to  the
    appellant that he and the sponsor may be cohabiting  and  that  he  had
    some involvement in taking and bringing the  sponsor's  son  to  school
    each day. However, Mr Tan submitted that the issue of cohabitation does
    not establish a subsisting relationship, or that the marriage  was  not
    entered into for an immigration advantage. He  conceded  that  it  "may
    shine reflective light"  on  the  intentions  of  the  parties  to  the
    marriage at its inception but the judge took that into  account  before
    concluding that it was a marriage of convenience.

10. Looking at the impugned decision for myself, I can see that at [29]  of
    the decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was prepared to accept from
    the evidence that the appellant and his  sponsor  were  cohabiting  and
    that there was some evidence which lent support to the claim that  they
    are in a genuine and subsisting relationship. However, the judge  found
    the evidence insufficient to demonstrate that they were in  fact  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, and, observing that even now  they
    were unable  to  give  a  consistent  account  of  their  relationship,
    concluded that the marriage was one of convenience.

11. There is no burden on the appellant at the outset to  demonstrate  that
    the marriage is one  of  convenience;  that  legal  burden  is  on  the
    respondent. However, where  there  is  reasonable  suspicion  that  the
    marriage is one of convenience, the evidential  burden  shifts  to  the
    appellant to demonstrate that it is not one of convenience.  It  should
    be borne in mind that  the  legal  burden  remains  throughout  on  the
    respondent. I am satisfied that the marriage interview  inconsistencies
    were sufficient to  give  rise  to  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  the
    marriage is one of convenience.

12. In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ it was held that the focus  in  relation  to  a
    marriage of convenience ought to be on the intention of the parties  at
    the time the marriage was entered into, whereas the question of whether
    a marriage was subsisting looked to whether  the  marital  relationship
    was a continuing one. Nonetheless, the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been
    correct to look at the evidence concerning the relationship between the
    Claimant and the Sponsor after the  marriage  itself,  since  that  was
    capable of casting light on their intention at the time of marriage.

13. In Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54, the  Supreme  Court  held  that  the
    objective to obtain the right  of  entry  and  residence  must  be  the
    predominant purpose for the marriage to be one  of  convenience  and  a
    marriage could not be considered to be a marriage of convenience simply
    because it brought an  immigration  advantage.   "Should  the  tribunal
    conclude that Mr Malik was delighted to find an EU national  with  whom
    he could form a relationship and who was willing  to  marry  him,  that
    does not necessarily mean  that  their  marriage  was  a  "marriage  of
    convenience" still less that Ms Sadovska  was  abusing  her  rights  in
    entering into it".

14. Pursuant to the Devaseelan principle, the judge was required to take as
    the starting point the findings of the  two  previous  Tribunal  appeal
    decisions from 2015 and 2018, both of which found the  marriage  to  be
    one of convenience. The judge acknowledged that further  evidence,  not
    put before the previous  Tribunal  hearings,  was  now  available,  and
    confirmed that this had been taken into account.

15. I agree with Mr Tan's submission that it was difficult for the judge to
    work out what was the new evidence. The greater relevance of this point
    is that it is clear that the judge had read the previous decisions  and
    gave as careful consideration to the evidence as he  could.  I  do  not
    accept the implication of Mr Dhanji's submission that the judge ignored
    any part of the evidence, and I am satisfied that it was all taken into
    account. However, the judge gave reasons for  not  departing  from  the
    findings of the previous judges. I  do  not  accept  the  premise  that
    having found that the appellant and the sponsor were now cohabiting and
    that he was involved in taking the child to school opened the  door  to
    setting aside the previous findings of two independent judges that  the
    marriage entered into was one of convenience. What the judge had to  do
    was to consider whether the evidence now available justified  departing
    from those previous findings. In this regard evidence  of  cohabitation
    is not equivalent to the marriage being genuine and not a  marriage  of
    convenience when entered into.

16. Judge Louveaux noted at [31] that not only had a previous  judge  found
    that the appellant and the sponsor had given inconsistent  evidence  in
    the marriage interview as to when they began to cohabit, but that  they
    also gave inconsistent evidence on  that  same  issue  in  this  latest
    appeal hearing. They were inconsistent as to  when  their  relationship
    had begun that they began to cohabit. At [32] the judge made  allowance
    for the fact that they were being asked to recall  dates  from  several
    years ago but concluded it was reasonable to expect them to recall when
    the  moved  in  together.  The  judge  pointed  out  that   they   were
    inconsistent at the hearing even though they had  both  signed  witness
    statements as recently as 12.2.20, about a week before the hearing,  in
    which statements they provided the  date  as  to  when  they  began  to
    cohabit. The judge concluded that it should not have been difficult for
    the sponsor to place in time when they began to cohabit by reference to
    when their relationship began and when they married.

17. At [33] of the decision the judge  was  unconvinced  by  the  sponsor's
    vagueness as to what the appellant was studying when he moved  in  with
    her. Ultimately, at [34] of the decision, the judge concluded that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were unable to provide a  consistent  account
    of their relationship.

18. Considering the decision as a whole, I am satisfied  that  the  finding
    made were open to the judge  on  the  evidence  and  for  which  cogent
    reasoning has been provided. It is clear  that  whilst  the  judge  was
    obliged to start  with  the  findings  from  the  two  previous  appeal
    decisions, the more  recent  evidence  was  also  taken  into  account,
    including positive  findings  in  the  appellant's  favour.  The  judge
    correctly took into account the evidence  of  continuing  cohabitation,
    which tends to support the claim that the relationship  was  subsisting
    and that the marriage was not one of  convenience.  However,  the  real
    issue was the  intention  of  the  parties  at  the  inception  of  the
    marriage.  The  judge  was   unable   to   reconcile   the   continuing
    discrepancies between the appellant and the respondent, concluding that
    this was a marriage of convenience.

19. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.



Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.

    I make no anonymity direction.




Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       14 October 2020



