
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06519/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 December 2018                           |On 10 January 2019                 |
|                                              |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                               KHEIRA BENNADJI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms D. Taiwo of Justice & Rights Law Firm
For the respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is an Algerian national who is said to have entered  the
    UK in 2008 as a visitor with her father. She was 15 years  old  at  the
    time. It is said that her father abandoned her here because  he  wanted
    to return to Algeria to  remarry.  She  lived  with  her  sister,  Amel
    Bennadji, from 2008 to 2011. She has two other sisters in the UK,  Sara
    and Karima. In 2011 the appellant went to live with her sister Sara. At
    the time, her sister was  married  to  an  Italian  national,  Giuseppe
    Fiorita. On 18 August 2011 she was issued with  a  five-year  residence
    card recognising a right of residence as an 'extended family member' of
    an EEA national.

2.    Her sister Sara separated from her husband in 2012. The appellant  and
    her sister continued to live together. Her sister  was  issued  with  a
    permanent residence card as a 'family member' who  retained  rights  of
    residence on 11 June 2015. On 22 June 2016 the appellant applied for  a
    permanent residence card as the 'family member' of an EEA national. The
    application was refused in a decision dated  09  January  2017.  On  25
    January 2017 the  appellant  submitted  a  further  application  for  a
    permanent residence card.

3.    The respondent refused the second application in a decision  dated  07
    July 2017. The Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016
    ("the  EEA  Regulations  2016")  did  not  make  provision  for  former
    'extended family member' of an EEA national  to  be  granted  permanent
    residence on the ground of retained rights of residence  following  the
    divorce. Nor did the regulations make provision for a  person  who  has
    retained a right of residence as a former 'family member' to act  as  a
    sponsor for their 'extended family member'.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Young ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 20 July 2018. The judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not show that she was  a  'family  member'  of  an  EEA
    national for the purpose of regulation 15(1)(b) of the EEA  Regulations
    2016 because she had not been living with the  EEA  national  (Giuseppe
    Fiorita) as an 'extended family member' for a continuous period of five
    years. She was not a dependent of the EEA sponsor or a  member  of  his
    household from 2012. She did not meet the requirements for  a  retained
    right of residence under regulation 10. He noted the terms  of  a  Home
    Office policy, which stated that a person who was issued  with  an  EEA
    residence permit as relative of an EEA national's spouse  prior  to  01
    February 2017 could continue to rely  on  the  relationship  after  the
    changes made in the EEA Regulations 2016.

5.     The  grounds  of  appeal  drafted   by   the   appellant's   previous
    representatives, Bhogal Partners Solicitors, submit that the  appellant
    was protected by unparticularised 'transitional arrangements'  relating
    to those who had been issued with a residence card before  01  February
    2017. It was asserted that the appellant had a  legitimate  expectation
    that she would be granted a further residence card.

6.     First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  granted  permission  to  appeal
    because  he  thought  that  it  was  at  least  arguable  that   "those
    transitional  arrangements"  might   have   covered   the   appellant's
    circumstances.

Decision and reasons

7.    The grounds of appeal  are  misconceived,  poorly  particularised  and
    disclose a fundamental misunderstanding of basic principles of European
    law. The submissions made by her current representative at the  hearing
    were equally general in nature and  amounted  to  little  more  than  a
    general assertion that the appellant had a  right  of  residence  under
    European law solely because her sister had been issued with a permanent
    residence card.

8.    At the hearing, I attempted to explain to the appellant in a way  that
    she might understand why the First-tier Tribunal judge's  decision  did
    not contain an error of law. The judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
    she could not acquire a right of permanent residence.

Rights of European citizens

9.    The fundamental right of residence under European law  arises  from  a
    person's status as a  European  citizen.  As  an  Italian  citizen  the
    appellant's brother in law, Mr Fiorita, has the right of free  movement
    within the European Union (Article 20 Treaty on the Functioning of  the
    European Union).

Rights of 'family members' of a European citizen

10.   As a European citizen, Mr Fiorita also has the right to  have  'family
    members' with him while he exercises his rights  of  free  movement.  A
    'family member' is (i)  a  spouse  or  civil  partner;  (ii)  a  direct
    descendant of the EEA citizen or his spouse or  civil  partner  who  is
    under 21 years old or is dependent on the EEA citizen i.e. children  or
    grandchildren. In this way a 'family member' is defined by  a  specific
    relationship to the European citizen. 'Family members'  of  a  European
    citizen have rights  of  residence  with  the  European  citizen  under
    European law (regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations 2016) as long as  the
    relationship is genuine and of the kind defined in the regulations.  In
    this case, the appellant's sister was a 'family member' of  a  European
    citizen because she was married to Mr Fiorita.

11.   European law recognises that a marriage might break down  and  that  a
    'family member' may have established ties to  the  country  where  they
    live with the European citizen. For this reason,  the  EEA  Regulations
    2016 provides for the spouse of a European citizen to retain a right of
    residence under European law if various conditions  are  satisfied.  In
    this case, the appellant's sister was able to show  that  the  marriage
    lasted for at least three years prior  to  the  initiation  of  divorce
    proceedings and that she resided with her husband in the United Kingdom
    for at least one year during the marriage (regulation 10(5) of the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 or 2016). Only a 'family member' can retain a right of
    residence. There is no provision for an  'extended  family  member'  to
    retain a right of residence.

Rights of 'extended family members' of a European citizen

12.   The appellant was not Mr Fiorita's 'family member' within the  meaning
    outlined in European law. She was issued with a residence card  as  his
    'extended family member' in 2011.

13.   'Extended  family  members'  of  European  citizens  do  not  have  an
    automatic right of  residence.  They  must  show  that  they  meet  the
    conditions giving rise to a right of residence as an  'extended  family
    member'. When the appellant was issued with a residence  card  in  2011
    the Secretary of State must have been satisfied that she was a relative
    of an EEA national's spouse and that she had  been  dependent  upon  Mr
    Fiorita before she came to the UK and continued to  be  dependent  upon
    him or was a member of his household in the UK (regulation 8 of the EEA
    Regulations 2006).

14.   Even if a person meets  the  conditions  to  show  that  they  are  an
    'extended family member' of a European citizen, they  do  not  have  an
    automatic entitlement to a residence card. The Secretary of State  must
    issue a residence card to a person who  meets  the  requirements  as  a
    'family  member'  (regulation  17(1)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016).
    However, the position is different for 'extended family  members'.  The
    Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  'extended  family
    member' if in all the circumstances it appears that it  is  appropriate
    to issue a residence card (regulation  17(4)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    2016).

15.   In this way we can see that European  law  distinguishes  between  the
    automatic right of 'family member' to be issued with a  residence  card
    and the discretion to issue a residence card  to  an  'extended  family
    member' of a European citizen.

Effect of being issued with a residence card

16.   If a person applies for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  British
    immigration law (as opposed to rights of residence under European law),
    the effect of being issued with a visa is to grant the person  a  right
    to remain in the UK that they did not have before.

17.   The position under European law is different. A European  citizen  has
    an inherent right of free movement and to have family members with  him
    or her whether a residence card is issued or  not.  The  issuing  of  a
    residence card recognises the right of residence but does not  grant  a
    right of residence. A person might meet the conditions giving rise to a
    right of residence even if they have not been issued with  a  residence
    card. Conversely, a person might have a valid  residence  card  but  no
    longer meets the conditions giving rise to a right of  residence  under
    European law.

Right of permanent residence

18.   A European citizen can acquire a right of permanent residence  in  the
    UK if he or she has exercised their  rights  of  free  movement  for  a
    continuous period  of  five  years  (regulation  15(1)(a)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016).

19.   Only 'family members' of European citizens  can  acquire  a  right  of
    permanent residence if they have also been residing in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period  of  five  years  in  accordance  with  European  law
    (regulation 15(1)(b)). In the case of the appellant's sister,  she  was
    the 'family member' of an Italian citizen and then retained a right  of
    residence as the former spouse of a European citizen. She was  able  to
    show a continuous period of five years residence as a  'family  member'
    in accordance with European law.

20.   It is possible for an 'extended family member' to acquire a  right  of
    residence under regulation 15 but only if they can show that they  have
    become a 'family member' as defined  by  regulation  7(3)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016. An 'extended family member' will only be treated as a
    'family member' for the purpose of regulation 15(1)(b) if:

      i) they were issued with a  residence  card  as  an  'extended  family
         member'; and


     ii) they continue to be dependent or a member  of  the  EAA  national's
         household under regulation 8; and


    iii) the residence card remains in force.

21.    In  this  case  the  appellant  was  issued  with  a  residence  card
    recognising a right of residence as an 'extended family member' in 2011
    because, at that time, she was a dependent of Mr Fiorita and was living
    in his household. However, she only continued to be  dependent  on  him
    for around  one  year  before  the  circumstances  changed.  After  her
    sister's marriage broke down in 2012, and Mr Fiorita  left  the  family
    home, the appellant was no longer residing in the UK  as  Mr  Fiorita's
    dependent and was no longer a member of  his  household.  Although  she
    still had a valid residence card, her  underlying  right  of  residence
    under European law, which could only be  derived  from  her  dependency
    upon Mr Fiorita, ceased in 2012.

22.   In order to acquire a  right  of  permanent  residence  the  appellant
    needed to be the dependent  of  Mr  Fiorita  throughout  the  five-year
    period of the residence card. In fact, she was only dependent upon  him
    for a period of one year.  For  this  reason,  she  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of regulation 7(3) of the EEA Regulations 2016 to become a
    'family member' and fell far short of being able to show that  she  had
    resided in accordance with European law as Mr Fiorita's dependent for a
    continuous period of five years for the purpose of regulation 15(1)(b).



Relationship with her sister

23.   It is not arguable that the appellant has any  rights  under  European
    law merely because she is dependent on her sister.  Her  sister  has  a
    right of residence under European law through her relationship with  Mr
    Fiorita. The appellant only had a right of residence as long as she was
    a dependent on Mr Fiorita or was a member of his household. The  rights
    of  'extended  family  members'  are  derived  solely   through   their
    relationship with the European citizen. Her sister is  not  a  European
    citizen, so the appellant  can  derive  no  right  of  residence  under
    European law through her sister.

"Transitional arrangements"

24.    The  vague  and   unparticularised   argument   about   "transitional
    arrangements", in fact, has no relevance to this case. The transitional
    arrangements outlined  in  the  respondent's  policy  "Extended  Family
    Members of EEA Nationals" issued in August 2017 recognises  that  there
    was a change in the definition of 'extended family  members'  when  the
    EEA  Regulations  2016  came  into  force.  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 included relatives of the EEA national and of  his  or
    her spouse. Regulation 8 of the EEA  Regulations  2016  restricted  the
    definition to relatives of the EEA national. The relatives of  the  EEA
    national's spouse are no longer included in the definition.

25.   The transitional provisions in the respondent's policy recognise  that
    it might be unfair for a person who has  already  been  issued  with  a
    residence card as an 'extended family member' who is  the  relative  of
    the EEA national's spouse to  be  required  to  leave  because  of  the
    changes. However, the transitional arrangements do not  impact  on  the
    conditions that the appellant still had to meet in order to  acquire  a
    right of permanent residence under European law. In order to show  that
    she had become a 'family member' for the purpose of regulation 15(1)(b)
    of the EEA Regulations 2016 the appellant still needed to show that she
    had been dependent upon Mr Fiorita or was a  member  of  his  household
    throughout the five-year period of the residence  card.  She  fell  far
    short of meeting that requirement because her rights  of  residence  as
    the 'extended family member' of  a  European  citizen  ended  when  she
    ceased to be dependent  upon  Mr  Fiorita.  Although  her  sister,  for
    different reasons, has a right of permanent  residence,  the  appellant
    cannot derive any right of residence through her because her sister  is
    not a European citizen.

26.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error of law.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 20 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








