
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06006/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st November 2018                     |On 13th November 2018              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                            MR PIOUS NANA NORNOO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Siaw, Solicitor, R.Spio &co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana said to have been born on  6th  May
    1976.

2.   On 7th January 2017 he applied for a  residence  card  further  to  the
    European Economic Area Regulations 2006.  That application was  refused
    on 19th June 2017.

3.   The nature of the refusal is of some importance in this matter.   In  a
    previous application for a residence card dated  5th  April  2013,  the
    appellant applied as the spouse of Ms Conceicao.  This was  refused  on
    30th November 2013 on the basis that the Ghanaian  proxy  marriage  was
    not accepted and that there was insufficient evidence of the  appellant
    being in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her.

4.   In the current application, which was the subject of the decision,  the
    appellant submitted the same documents as he had done so in  2013.   He
    had  not  provided  any  further  evidence  to   establish   that   his
    relationship was genuine or subsisting.  There was no further  evidence
    that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights at the point of divorce.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones for hearing on 13th June
    2018.

6.   What the Judge noted was that no evidence had  been  submitted  on  the
    relevant issues, notwithstanding the comments made by the respondent in
    the decision. The appellant had the year since the decision in which he
    could have obtained the necessary evidence as to the  relationship  and
    to the exercise of  treaty  rights.   There  was  not  even  a  witness
    statement.

7.   The appellant claimed that he had married Ms Conceicao in the  Registry
    Office at Stratford, also he could not remember the date  and  produced
    no evidence to support that contention.  He  did  not  know  where  his
    former wife resides, indeed from which African country  she  originated
    from.  He said that he lived with her in Tottenham at an  address  that
    he was unable to specify.  Thereafter therein  2014  they  moved  to  a
    different address where they lived together for a year.

8.   It was the conclusion of the Judge that the appellant had come  nowhere
    near satisfying the conditions for the issue  of  the  residence  card.
    There was no reliable detailed information about the appellant's wife's
    employment or income, indeed that the evidence was vague and uncertain.



9.   The appellant complains that he was not given a  fair  hearing  because
    he was indeed very unwell at the hearing.  No formal application for an
    adjournment had been made.  It is his contention  that  it  would  have
    been apparent to the Judge that he was unwell and the Judge should  not
    have continued with the hearing.  The brief grounds of appeal  seem  to
    also be based on the contention that certain of the  matters  noted  by
    the Judge, particularly the marriage at the Stratford  Registry  Office
    was not said by the  appellant  and  therefore  had  been  misrecorded.
    Alternatively that the appellant had been so confused and befuddled  by
    being unwell that he may have given inaccurate answers.

10.  The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision  and  leave  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis it was  arguable,
    in the light of the description given by the appellant of his condition
    at the hearing, that such might have affected the  appellant's  ability
    to give evidence.

11.  The appellant attended the hearing before me and was  represented.   He
    said that he had for six years suffered from a bad leg and had  brought
    to court medical evidence relating to that,  but  it  had  subsequently
    become mislaid.  He had an appointment in October for that matter to be
    looked at.

12.  He said that he had not obtained a doctor's certificate in relation  to
    his illness.  He had seen a doctor by an appointment a week  later  but
    that was again in relation mainly to his leg which had  been  infected.
    He said that was on 24th April.  That document to  had  seemingly  been
    mislaid from the time that he came into the court  building  until  the
    hearing.

13.  The  fundamental  concern  of  the  respondent  was  the  lack  of  any
    documentation to support the application that was made.  The  appellant
    had a year from the decision until the hearing to obtain the  requisite
    evidence or to submit a witness statement, nothing was forthcoming.

14.  I find that it was entirely open to the Judge to conclude on  the  lack
    of evidence the appellant failed to make out his claim.

15.  In terms of the illness no details have been  given  as  to  what  that
    might have been.  Certainly no indication was given to the Judge by the
    appellant that he was unwell.  It remains unclear from the way in which
    matters were presented on behalf of the appellant  before  me,  whether
    there was a suggestion that the  Judge  had  misrecorded  the  evidence
    given or whether the appellant was so confused that he may  have  given
    the incorrect evidence in any event.  The omissions in recollection are
    significant, surprising indeed. Even  if  the  appellant  were  feeling
    unwell that he would not have had the basic details that were requested
    of him.

16.  This essentially is a matter of fairness  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had been given the opportunity for  a  fair  hearing.   I  am
    satisfied that he had been. It was his lack of preparation and the lack
    of documentation which were such that the Judge properly  recorded  the
    dismissal of his appeal.   I do  not  find  that  the  illness  of  the
    appellant, even if it arose, was of such nature or magnitude as to have
    confused his evidence.

17.  I do not find any error of law.  Accordingly the appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    shall stand.   It is of course always open to the appellant to  make  a
    new application with the relevant evidence.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        [pic]                          Date 7th Nov 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
