
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06064/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                           Mr zardasht qadiri ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Ali of Aaron & Ace Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 24 April  2019  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Eldridge  which  refused  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of an EEA residence card  showing  him  to  be  the
    extended family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

 2. The issue before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  a  narrow  one.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal indicates in paragraph 11 that  the
    respondent accepted that the appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with his EEA national partner and that the partner  was  a
    qualified person for the purposes of the  EEA  Regulations  2016.   The
    judge goes in paragraph 11  to  specify  the  limited  issue  still  in
    dispute before him:

         "The whole of the appeal  turned  upon  the  circumstances  of  the
         agreed non-production of a passport or an identity  card  that  was
         valid within the terms of the Regulations".

 3. In order to address this question reference was made to  Regulation  42
    of the EEA Regulations 2016 which states as follows:

         "Where a provision of these Regulations requires a person  to  hold
         or produce a valid national identity card issued by an EEA State or
         a valid passport, the Secretary of  State  may  accept  alternative
         evidence of identity and nationality where the person is unable  to
         obtain or produce the required document due to circumstances beyond
         the person's control".

 4. In paragraph 26 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge found:

         "I accept that the Appellant may well  not  be  in  a  position  to
         produce any of the other documents that are said will suffice - his
         birth certificate, military service card, Iranian national card  or
         an expired Iranian passport but there is no evidence  that  he  has
         tendered any document issued from within the UK and, in particular,
         any refusal letter from the Home Office.  In these circumstances  I
         am not satisfied that he has been unable to obtain  and  provide  a
         passport for reasons beyond his control".

 5. The judge therefore concluded that the applicant had not shown that the
    respondent should have accepted  alternative  documentary  evidence  in
    line with Regulation 42 and refused the appeal.

 6. The appellant's  evidence,  accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    paragraphs 24 and 25 of the decision, was that he  had  approached  the
    Iranian authorities at the Embassy in London but was not provided  with
    the documents that he sought.  His solicitors then wrote to the Iranian
    authorities requesting clarification  of  what  was  required  for  the
    appellant to obtain an Iranian identity document that would satisfy the
    respondent for the purposes of the application  for  an  EEA  residence
    card.  The response from the Iranian authorities is set out on page  17
    of the respondent's bundle.  It comprises a  letter  "To  Whom  It  May
    Concern" and is stated to address "Passport or ETD requirement for  any
    Iranian national at the embassy".  The  letter  goes  on  to  state  as
    follows:

         "The following documents is necessary to obtain passport or  Travel
         document from Iranian Embassy.

         Original Iranian Birth Certificate.

         Original military service card.

         Original Iranian national card.

         Original expired Iranian passport.

         Original residency status in  the  UK  (any  visa  or  Home  Office
         refusal letter).

         Certified copies of the abovementioned documents via Iran  Ministry
         of Foreign Affairs is acceptable.

         In  order  to  issue  an  emergency  ETD  at  least  one   of   the
         abovementioned Iranian documents is required".

 7. The appellant challenged the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as  he
    maintains that the judge misunderstood  the  letter  from  the  Iranian
    authorities.  He argues that the letter  indicates  that  in  order  to
    obtain a passport, all of the documents listed had to be provided.   It
    was not sufficient for him to present  only  a  refusal  letter  of  an
    application from the Home Office to obtain a passport.  The  judge  had
    accepted that he could not provide all of the  required  documents  for
    reasons outside his control so he should have been given the benefit of
    Regulation 42 by the respondent.

 8. At the hearing before me, Mr Bramble conceded for the  respondent  that
    the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in his reading  of  the  letter
    from the Iranian Embassy and that the decision had to be set aside  for
    this reason. He also conceded that the Home  Office  had  accepted  the
    appellant to be an Iranian national in his asylum claim  and  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal which heard his asylum appeal had also found him to
    be Iranian. Following the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Eldridge  in
    paragraph 26, it was accepted that the appellant's inability to provide
    an identity document showing this to be so  was  due  to  circumstances
    beyond his control. In those circumstances, the appeal  should  be  re-
    made as allowed where the respondent  had  not  applied  Regulation  42
    correctly.

 9. Mr Bramble's concessions confirmed my own view of the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the grounds of appeal and the disposal of the  re-
    making of the appeal. For the reasons set out above, I found  an  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, set it aside, and re-
    made the appeal as allowed  as  the  respondent  should  have  accepted
    alternative  evidence  of  the  appellant's  identity  and  nationality
    following Regulation 42.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be re-made.

11. The appeal is re-made as allowed.


Signed   [pic]                                   Date: 9 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


