
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06522/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 19 December 2016                  |On 20 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves a child. I find that it is appropriate to continue the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:           Ms V. Anzaite, Sponsor
For the respondent:          Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant is a  citizen  of  Lithuania  who  applied  for  an  EEA
    residence card recognising a right of permanent residence  in  the  UK.
    The respondent refused the application on 17 May  2016  on  the  ground
    that she failed to produce an original birth certificate or  sufficient
    evidence to show that she had been residing in  the  UK  in  accordance
    with the EEA regulations for a continuous period of five years.

3.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dearden  considered  the  appeal  on  the
    papers. He allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 August 2016. The judge was satisfied that the further
    evidence produced by the appellant, including her birth certificate and
    various  evidence  showing  continuous  attendance   at   school,   was
    sufficient to show that she had addressed the areas of concerns  raised
    by the respondent. He concluded as follows:

            "13. I am therefore satisfied that the appeal of  the  Appellant
           under the European Economic Area Regulations should be allowed.


            14. All appeals after 6th April 2015 in  matters  of  this  sort
           have to be under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Act.  I  am  to
           decide whether the appeal under  Article  8  should  be  allowed
           looking at the application through the lens or prism of the  EEA
           Regulations.


             15.   The  fact  that  the  Appellant  complies  with  the  EEA
           Regulations  is  powerful  evidence  that  the  appeal  of   the
           Appellant under Article 8 should be allowed.


            16. Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations indicates that  once  a
           person has resided in accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
           continuous period of five years she shall acquire the  right  to
           reside in the United Kingdom permanently. This  is  not  a  case
           where the Secretary of State retains an inherent discretion  and
           so I do not need to respectfully invite the Secretary  of  state
           to make a new decision. I therefore simply allow the Appellant's
           appeal."

4.    The Secretary of State appeals the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following limited grounds.

       i) The respondent makes  clear  that  she  does  not  challenge  the
          substantive findings relating to the EEA  Regulations  2006  i.e.
          the respondent accepts that the appellant meets the  requirements
          for permanent residence.


      ii) However, the judge erred in failing to appreciate that  this  was
          an appeal under the  EEA  Regulations  2006  and  in  failing  to
          determine the appeal under those regulations.


     iii) In light of the decision in TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
          1233 the judge erred in proceeding to consider and determine  the
          appeal on human rights grounds.

      iv) The respondent suggests that the decision in respect of the human
          rights findings should be set aside and that the appeal should be
          allowed under the EEA Regulations 2006.

5.    I have no hesitation in  agreeing  with  the  arguments  made  by  the
    Secretary  of  State.  It  appears   that   the   judge   fundamentally
    misunderstood the new appeals regime introduced after  06  April  2015.
    Although amended section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") now restricts the number of appeals  within  the
    statutory appeal regime to decisions to refuse a  protection  or  human
    rights claim, the EEA Regulations 2006  have  always  been  a  separate
    appeal regime and this continued after 06 April 2015. Having found that
    the appellant  met  the  requirements  for  permanent  residence  under
    regulation 15 the judge should have gone on to allow the  appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations 2006.

6.    The decision also discloses an error in the judge's  understanding  of
    the role of human rights issues in an appeal under the EEA  Regulations
    2006. Firstly, his reference to Article 8 "of the Human Rights Act"  is
    incorrect.  The  relevant  provision  is  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights. Secondly, there is now a line of clear  and
    binding authority in TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD and Amirteymour  and  Others
    (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 465 to say  that  human  rights
    issues cannot be determined in an EEA appeal where no  one-stop  notice
    has been issued under section 120 of the NIAA 2002.

7.    For these reasons I set aside the decision in so far  as  it  purports
    to make findings relating to human rights. The respondent accepts  that
    the appellant meets the  requirements  of  regulation  15  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006. Accordingly, the decision is remade  and  the  appeal
    allowed under the EEA Regulations 2006.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remade and ALLOWED under the EEA Regulations 2006


Signed   [pic]   Date   19 December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
