
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06288/2019
                                                               EA/06289/2019
                                                               EA/06290/2019
                                                           EA/06291/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 April 2021                   |On 28 April 2021                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             SHABANA KOUSAR + 3
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     None received
For the respondent:    None received


    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the respondent by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin sitting  as
         Judge of the  First-tier Tribunal on 3 February  2021  against  the
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro, promulgated  on
         12 January 2021 following a CVP  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  on  16
         December 2020. For convenience, I shall continue to  refer  to  the
         parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The main appellant is the mother of the three minor appellants  and
         they are all nationals of Pakistan. They seek  to  join  their  EEA
         sponsor, Abdul Rauf. The husband/father of the appellants is  Abdul
         Sani Nasir and he is also in the UK.  He  is  the  brother  of  the
         sponsor and obtained a family permit as an extended family member.

      3. The application was refused  on  26  October  2019  under  the  EEA
         Regulations 2016.

      4. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor who maintained  that
         he continued to support the appellants after his  brother  (husband
         and father of the appellants)  came  to  the  UK.  She  found  that
         despite the fact that the  latter  was  employed  in  the  UK,  the
         appellants were still dependent upon the sponsor because it was not
         known whether Mr Nasir's contributions met their  essential  living
         needs. She concluded that they,  therefore,  qualified  for  family
         permits under reg. 8(2).

      5. The respondent successfully sought permission to appeal. She argued
         that the judge had  failed  to  establish  whether  the  appellants
         retained dependency as a necessity rather than out of  choice.  She
         argued that there was  no  clarification  as  to  why  the  sponsor
         continued to send funds and that no assessment  was  undertaken  of
         the expenses of either Mr Nasir or the appellants. As such it could
         not be determined that the sponsor's funds were essential.

      6. The matter would ordinarily have then been listed for a hearing but
         due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take  precautions  against
         its spread, this did not happen and directions  were  sent  to  the
         parties on  9  February  2021.  They  were  asked  to  present  any
         objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers and to make
         any further submissions on the error of law  issue  within  certain
         time limits.

      7. Neither party has of today's date responded to the directions. I am
         satisfied that they were properly served  on  the  respondent,  the
         appellant c/o her sponsor's address in the  UK  and  on  her  legal
         representatives.

      8. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules) and the judgment  of  Osborn  v
         The Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61. I have regard  to  the  overriding
         objective which is defined in rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper  Tribunal
         to deal  with  cases  fairly  and  justly".  To  this  end  I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      9. I have had careful regard to all the evidence. I  consider  that  a
         full account of the arguments are set out in the papers before  the
         Tribunal and that the issues to be decided are uncomplicated. There
         are no  matters  arising  from  the  grounds  which  would  require
         clarification and so an oral hearing would not be needed  for  that
         purpose. I have regard to the  importance  of  the  matter  to  the
         appellants and consider that a speedy  but  fair  determination  of
         this matter is in their best interests. Neither  party  has  raised
         any objections to a paper determination. I am satisfied that  I  am
         able to fairly and justly deal with this matter without  a  hearing
         and now proceed to do so.

    Discussion and conclusions

     10. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission  and
         the judge's determination.

     11. The respondent complains that the  judge  failed  to  undertake  an
         assessment of the needs of the appellants and that without that she
         could not properly determine  whether  or  not  they  required  the
         sponsor's contributions as well as those  from  Mr  Nasir  to  meet
         their essential needs. The respondent is  right  to  criticise  the
         judge for that failing. In her determination  the  judge  correctly
         sets out the test as  being  whether  the  appellants  require  the
         material support of the EEA sponsor to meet their essential  living
         needs (at 27). However, she also states that the  sponsor  did  not
         explain why he continued to send money to the appellants  once  his
         brother started working (at 26) and notes the absence  of  evidence
         before her of the appellants' living  expenses   and  whether  they
         were met by Mr Nasir's contributions (at 28) or of Mr Nasir's   own
         costs (at 29). Without an assessment of such matters,  it  was  not
         possible to reach a positive decision under reg. 8(2) and the judge
         erred in so doing.

     12. Evidence will be required  of  the  appellants'  living  costs  and
         whether they can be met by Mr Nasir alone or whether the  sponsor's
         help is needed before  the  matter  of  dependency  can  be  fairly
         determined.




    Decision

     13. The decision to allow the  appeal  under  the  Regulations  is  set
         aside.

     14. A fresh decision shall be made by another judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal at a date to be arranged.

    Anonymity

     15. No request for an anonymity order has been made at any stage and  I
         see no reason to make one.

    Directions

     16. The First-tier Tribunal shall issue directions in due course.




    Signed


    R. Keki?
    Upper Tribunal Judge
    Date: 19 April 2021
