
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06930/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2019                  |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     JK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G. Davison, Counsel instructed by Pioneer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                              REMAKING DECISION

 1. The appellant, JK is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  1  August  1988.  He
    appeals against a decision of the respondent dated 10 October  2018  to
    refuse his application for a residence card as the family member of  an
    EEA national, submitted on 21st of May 2018. The basis of  the  refusal
    was that the marriage of the appellant  to  his  Romanian  husband,  AM
    ("the sponsor"), was one of convenience.   The  respondent's  decision,
    and the reasons for it, were set out in a reasons for refusal letter of
    the same date ("the RFRL").

 2. The appellant initially appealed against that decision  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision  promulgated  on  15  March  2019,  Judge
    Devitte dismissed the appellant's appeal.  In an error of law  decision
    promulgated on 1 July 2019,  a  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch, Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen  Smith)  found  that
    Judge Devitte had erred in law, such that his decision needed to be set
    aside.  We directed that the appeal be reheard in the  Upper  Tribunal.
    No findings of fact of Judge Devitte were preserved.

Immigration history

 3. The appellant was granted leave to remain from 29  August  2013  to  10
    April 2015 as a student.  He  overstayed  and  was  later  issued  with
    removal papers, before  claiming  asylum  on  23  October  2015.   That
    application was refused, and on 8 January 2016  Judge  Moxon  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against that refusal.

 4. On 10 May 2018, the appellant married AM, whose date  of  birth  is  17
    April 1996.  On 21 May 2018, the  appellant  applied  for  a  residence
    card.  He and his husband were invited to  marriage  interviews  on  27
    September 2018.  On 10 October 2018, the appellant's application for  a
    residence card was refused, and it is that refusal decision  which  the
    appellant now appeals against in these proceedings.

Appellant's case and Reasons for Refusal Letter

 5. The appellant applied  for  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016  Regulations")  as
    the spouse of AM. He contended that AM enjoyed a right to reside  under
    the 2016 Regulations and, as such, he was entitled to a right to reside
    in his own capacity.

 6. Before taking the decision to refuse  the  appellant's  residence  card
    application, the respondent invited the appellant and  the  sponsor  to
    marriage interviews. She was concerned that the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

 7. The RFRL considers there to be a number of discrepancies in the answers
    that the appellant and sponsor gave in their marriage  interviews.  The
    sponsor had not been  able  to  name  any  of  the  appellant's  family
    members, attributing this to  an  unwillingness  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant to discuss matters involving his family, due to the difficult
    relationship he had with them. The applicant did not know the  name  of
    the sponsor's mother,  and  although  the  sponsor  claimed  to  be  in
    frequent contact with his sister and  mother,  the  applicant  had  not
    spoken to either. The respondent rejected the sponsor's explanation for
    this, namely that  neither  his  mother  nor  his  sister  could  speak
    English, as she considered that the sponsor would  have  been  able  to
    translate for the appellant.

 8. "Most significantly", considers the RFRL, "both the applicant  and  the
    sponsor new nothing of the applicants [sic] life between his entry into
    the UK in 2012 on a student visa and when they first met in 2017." Both
    the appellant and sponsor maintained that this was a period about which
    they had little discussion. Neither knew anything  about  the  previous
    relationship history of  the  other,  which  was  "notable"  given  the
    appellant's previously failed asylum claim on the basis of his  claimed
    homosexuality. Details the  appellant  had  provided  in  the  marriage
    interview  concerning  his  previous  relationship  with  one  FJ  were
    inconsistent with his account that he provided as part  of  his  asylum
    claim.  Neither  party  could  remember  the  date  of  their  marriage
    proposal, and the sponsor could not remember where it had taken place.

 9. The appellant and sponsor claimed  to  share  the  same  accommodation.
    Whereas the appellant said that the sponsor would  regularly  speak  to
    their housemates concerning practical matters of household maintenance,
    the sponsor himself said that he did not know the names  of  the  other
    people in their shared house and had no real interest in them.  Neither
    party recognised the name Hugo Moguel Lopes when it  was  put  to  them
    during their interviews; this was significant, as Mr Lopes  was  listed
    on the tenancy agreement as both a witness to their signing it, and  as
    a fellow resident at the shared address.

10. The letter noted that  there  were  some  credible  answers  concerning
    matters such as the sponsor's work and healthcare but  considered  that
    those were "areas that can be easily prepared in advance." Accordingly,
    based on those discrepancies, the RFRL concluded that the  relationship
    between the appellant and sponsor was one of convenience.

11. Against that background, it is the appellant's case that  there  are  a
    remarkable  number  of  consistent   answers   across   both   marriage
    interviews. He contends that many of the answers  seized  upon  by  the
    respondent have been taken out of context, and  that  the  interviewing
    officer appeared to have in mind his or her questions being answered in
    a certain way, appearing to be dissatisfied when the  closed  questions
    he or she put to each interviewee  were  not  answered  in  the  manner
    envisaged.

Legal framework

  12. Regulation 18(1) of the  2016  Regulations  governs  the  issue  of  a
      residence card.  It provides, where relevant:

           "(1) The Secretary of State must issue a  residence  card  to  a
           person who is not an EEA national and is the family member of  a
           qualified person or of an EEA national with a right of permanent
           residence under regulation 15 on application and production of-

                 (a) a valid passport; and

                 (b) proof that the applicant is such a family member."

  13. "Family member" is defined by regulation 7(1)(a) to include the spouse
      of an EEA national.   A  "spouse"  does  not  include  a  party  to  a
      "marriage of convenience" (see regulation 2(1)).  Regulation 2(1) also
      states:

           "'marriage of convenience' includes a marriage entered into  for
           the purpose of using  these  Regulations,  or  any  other  right
           conferred by the EU Treaties, as a means to circumvent-

                 (a)  immigration rules applying to non-EEA nationals  (such
                 as any applicable requirement under the 1971  Act  to  have
                 leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or

                 (b)  any other criteria that the party to the  marriage  of
                 convenience would otherwise have to meet in order to  enjoy
                 a right  to  reside  under  these  Regulations  or  the  EU
                 Treaties..."

     The key issue to be identified when considering whether a  marriage  is
      one of convenience is the purpose for which the marriage was  entered,
      at the time it was contracted.   Was  the  sole  purpose  (as  in  the
      predominant purpose, rather than the unique or exclusive purpose:  see
      the European Commission's Handbook on addressing the issues of alleged
      marriages of convenience, 24 September 2014, (COM (2014)  604  final),
      at page 9; see also Recital (28) to Directive 2004/38/EC) in order  to
      enjoy free movement rights to which the individual would not otherwise
      be entitled? The intention of the parties at the time of the  marriage
      is the key issue.  Their knowledge about each other, or the extent  to
      which the marriage is genuine and subsisting at the date of assessment
      are not determinative, although are likely to be  relevant  evidential
      factors to consider when looking back to ascertain  the  purposes  for
      which the marriage was entered into.

Burden and standard of proof

  14. It is for the appellant to demonstrate that he meets the  criteria  in
      regulation 18 to the balance of probabilities standard.  In the  first
      instance, he does not have to demonstrate that the marriage is not one
      of convenience.

  15. Where the respondent alleges that a marriage is  one  of  convenience,
      the legal burden rests on him to demonstrate that the  marriage  falls
      into  that  category:  see  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage   of
      convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038(IAC), Agho v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  1198  at,  e.g.,  [13],  and
      Sadovska v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC  54
      at, e.g., [28].  That burden is not discharged merely by demonstrating
      there to be a "reasonable suspicion" that the marriage is not genuine,
      although if he does so, the appellant will be expected to  respond  to
      the allegation: see Rosa v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      [2016] EWCA Civ 14 at [24] to [27]  .   In  those  circumstances,  the
      evidential burden shifts to the appellant.  The basic  rule  is  this:
      "he who asserts must prove" (Sadovska at [28], per Lady Hale).   There
      is only one standard of proof, and that is the civil standard.

Evidence and documents

16. The appellant relied on  his  bundle  from  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Devitte.  Mr Davison provided a helpful skeleton argument, which I have
    considered.

17. The appellant and sponsor adopted  their  statements  and  were  cross-
    examined.  A full record of their evidence can be found in  the  Record
    of Proceedings on the Tribunal's file; I will outline the salient parts
    of their evidence, to the extent necessary to do so to give reasons for
    my findings.

Findings

18. I reached the following findings having considered the all the evidence
    in the case in the round, in accordance with the burden and standard of
    proof set out above.

19. At the outset, I acknowledge that there is a degree of  consistency  in
    the answers to many of the questions put to the sponsor  and  appellant
    in their interviews.  The RFRL itself accepts that the couple  provided
    credible answers to questions concerning their recent  lives  together.
    For example, both gave consistent answers  concerning  the  appellant's
    kidney stone problems and related  medication,  working  patterns,  and
    photographs provided in  support  of  the  application.   Mr  Davison's
    skeleton argument sets out some of the areas of consistency, and I will
    return to them later.

20. However, for the  purposes  of  the  initial  evidential  burden  being
    discharged by the Secretary of State, I accept that the respondent  has
    demonstrated that there is a reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage
    between the appellant and sponsor is one of convenience.  I set out  my
    reasons for this below.

21.  The  presenting  officer  highlighted  the  findings  of  Judge  Moxon
    concerning the appellant's  homosexuality  in  the  appellant's  asylum
    appeal.  Judge Moxon's findings included  a  robust  rejection  of  the
    appellant's claimed homosexuality in these terms:

         "I do not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness...  Having
         balanced the evidence in the case, I do not find the  appellant  to
         be credible and I find it far more likely than not that he  is  not
         homosexual. I do not accept the factual background that he as [sic]
         presented." (Paragraph 49)

    Significantly for present purposes, Judge Moxon expressed her  findings
    in terms  which  went  beyond  the  lower  standard  of  proof  usually
    applicable to establishing a protection claim. By finding that  it  was
    "far more likely than not" that the appellant was not gay, judge made a
    finding which is, in principle, a sound basis  for  the  respondent  to
    have concerns that claims by the appellant to now be in a gay  marriage
    may be  questionable.   The  findings  of  Judge  Moxon  represent  the
    starting point for my analysis: Devaseelan (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -
    Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka *  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.   For  the
    purposes  of  establishing  the  presence  of  a  reasonable  suspicion
    concerning the (gay)  marriage  of  convenience  issue,  this  judicial
    finding of fact that the appellant is not gay is a relevant factor.

22. I set out below the basis upon which I accept that some of the concerns
    outlined in the RFRL based on the marriage interviews are sufficient to
    establish  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is   one   of
    convenience.

23. In principle, it is reasonable to expect one party  of  a  marriage  to
    know the names of the family  members  of  their  spouse,  or  to  have
    consistent explanations of why they do not. At questions 117 to 136  of
    the sponsor's interview, the sponsor was unable to name family  members
    of the appellant and stated that he, the  sponsor,  had  not  told  the
    appellant the names of his own family members (questions 118, 119).  He
    said the appellant could not speak to the sponsor's mother and  sister,
    the only members  of  his  family  the  sponsor  was  in  contact  with
    (question 132), due to the language barrier (question  135).   They  do
    not speak English, and the appellant does not speak Romanian.

24. By contrast, in his interview, the appellant said that  the  reason  he
    was unsure of the names was because "Romanian names  are  difficult  to
    remember" (question 128), rather than because he had not been  told  by
    the sponsor.  At question 132, the appellant said  that  the  sponsor's
    sister did speak English, but that neither his father  nor  his  mother
    could do so.  Accordingly, the reasons  given  for  the  appellant  not
    speaking  to  the  sponsor's  family  differed.   In  fairness  to  the
    appellant, he did provide  what  he  thought  were  the  names  of  the
    appellant's parents and sister (question  129).   What  is  of  greater
    concern, however, is the inconsistencies across  the  answers  of  each
    concerning why the appellant did not speak to the sponsor's family.

25. The appellant had "no idea" (question 132)  if  the  sponsor's  parents
    knew about their relationship, as he had never asked, "because he  [the
    sponsor] is obviously 22 years old and he said whatever I  am  doing  I
    can take the decision..." I have some credibility  concerns  with  this
    answer, as it is not indicative of the  depth  of  knowledge  that  one
    party to a marriage could reasonably be expected to know about how much
    the other party's wider family know about the marriage.  That is not to
    say that the sponsor's parents had to know about the marriage; it could
    quite legitimately have been kept from them.  But, even  if  that  were
    the case, the appellant could reasonably be expected to know if it had,
    or if it had not.  It is  his  ambivalence  that  presents  credibility
    concerns, rather than the fact the sponsor's family may or may not have
    been told.

26. I agree with the RFRL that the fact that the appellant said that he had
    not discussed his life in the United Kingdom from 2012 until  they  met
    in 2017 with the sponsor (question 153) also gives rise to a reasonable
    suspicion.  The parties to the marriage are each from  countries  other
    than the United Kingdom and have sought to make their home here.   They
    will share in common the experience of seeking to establish  themselves
    in countries other than those of their nationality and  are  from  very
    different cultural backgrounds.  It is reasonable for a married  couple
    to have at least some knowledge of what the  other  was  doing  in  the
    years while resident in their host country before they met, and  to  at
    least have  discussed  their  respective  experiences  in  establishing
    themselves here.

27. The couple also purport not to have discussed past relationships during
    this time.  At question 204 of the appellant's interview, the appellant
    said he had never asked the sponsor.  At question 205, he said that  he
    could not imagine the sponsor with anyone else, and that was why he had
    never asked him.  Similarly, the sponsor had not asked  him  about  his
    own past relationships (question 207).

28. For the couple not to have even addressed  in  conversation  what  took
    place during the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom  prior  to
    their marriage contributes to  the  reasonable  grounds  for  suspicion
    relied upon by the Secretary of State.

29. At questions 299 to 305 of the appellant's interview, he did  not  know
    about Hugo Moguel Lopes, who, according to the RFRL (and  not  disputed
    by the appellant) was a fellow tenant at the house he claimed to  share
    with the sponsor and had  witnessed  his  signature  to  their  tenancy
    agreement.  At questions 340 to 347 of the sponsor's interview, he  did
    not know the names of any of the other people who shared  the  multiple
    occupancy house they lived in.   I  accept  that  this  gives  rise  to
    suspicion that the living arrangements were not as  claimed,  which  in
    turn contributes to the reasonable suspicion that the marriage  may  be
    one of convenience.

30. I consider the account each provided in interview of  the  proposal  to
    have been vague and lacking in detail, to the point of  being  evasive.
    In the appellant's interview, the following  exchange  is  recorded  at
    question 405.   It is necessary to repeat it in full:

         "Q:  Talk to me about the proposal. When did it happen,  where  did
         it happen, who proposed to who?

         A:   Obviously, he proposed me and when  we  moved  in  the  house,
         obviously we were in a relationship, and then we  were  going  like
         that, going like that, going like that, so many times when it comes
         to if he can... He had the holidays, obviously, I was staying home.
         So if we can travel, for example, obviously we can't."

    As may be seen from this extract, the answer provided by the  appellant
    - who has a strong command of English - does not address  the  question
    and lacks coherence. Of course, he may have misunderstood the question.
    The interviewing officer was clearly live that possibility too, and  so
    put the question to the appellant on a number of further occasions.  At
    questions 406, 411, 412, and 413 the appellant was repeatedly asked  as
    to when they got engaged. I consider the answers to these questions  to
    be similarly evasive, with the appellant eventually  stating  that  the
    got engaged in 2017, with no specificity as to the date, not  even  the
    month or season.   I  agree  with  the  respondent  that  the  lack  of
    specificity concerning when they got engaged, combined with the general
    evasiveness of the answers provided by the  appellant,  contributes  to
    their being reasonable grounds for  suspicion  concerning  whether  the
    marriage is one of convenience.

31. At questions 425 and following of the sponsor's interview, the  sponsor
    said that he had proposed marriage to  the  appellant.   He  could  not
    remember where, nor when, nor what time it was.  All the sponsor  could
    remember was that he had made the proposal, and that it had taken place
    inside, rather than outside.  The appellant could not remember when the
    proposal had taken place either, but was able to say that he thought it
    was in their bedroom, rather than being as part of a  formal  occasion.
    There were some significant differences in the detail that  they  could
    remember in the accounts of their engagement:

         Sponsor       Proposed with an engagement ring (question 434)

         Appellant         The sponsor did not propose  with  an  engagement
                      ring (question 426), and  provided  only  a  marriage
                      ring (question 425)

    Clearly, these are significantly different answers.  The  presence  and
    role of an engagement ring is an important and significant feature of a
    marriage proposal. There need not  be  one  involved;  but,  given  the
    significance of an engagement ring, if the parties are inconsistent  on
    this key point, it raises credibility  concerns.   Those  concerns  are
    compounded where, as  here,  the  parties  cannot  remember  the  basic
    details of the event itself.

32. Balancing the above consistencies against the inconsistencies  outlined
    above, I find that the respondent has discharged the initial evidential
    burden of demonstrating that there are reasonable  grounds  to  suspect
    that  this  marriage  is  one  of  convenience.  The  presence  of  the
    consistencies as outlined above do not, at this stage in the  analysis,
    sufficiently mitigate against the presence of the reasonable  suspicion
    revealed by the inconsistencies outlined above.

Appellant's  response  to  the  respondent's  case  against  him:   shifting
evidential burden

33. In cases where the  respondent  alleges  there  to  be  a  marriage  of
    convenience, an evidential pendulum is engaged. The initial  evidential
    burden  rests  upon  the  respondent  to  demonstrate  that  there  are
    reasonable  grounds  for  suspecting  the  marriage  to   be   one   of
    convenience. Where the respondent establishes such  reasonable  grounds
    for suspicion, the pendulum swings, and it will  be  for  appellant  to
    provide an answer to those allegations.  That  is  the  effect  of  the
    findings I have outlined above.  I find the respondent has  established
    the allegations she makes against the appellant  for  the  purposes  of
    calling for an explanation.

34. The response the appellant provides to the allegations  raised  by  the
    respondent is to point to the consistencies in the marriage interviews,
    their documentary evidence of cohabitation, and their written and  oral
    evidence before me.  Their banking details are registered to  the  same
    address, some of their utilities are in joint names, and they now  have
    a tenancy agreement together on a property in Woking, a copy  of  which
    is in the bundle.

35. I agree that there was a degree of  consistency  across  other  answers
    provided by the sponsor and the appellant.  At  [13]  of  his  skeleton
    argument,  Mr  Davison  summarises  the  similarities  in  the  answers
    provided by each party to  the  marriage  across  their  two  extensive
    interviews. These areas include the  employment  of  the  sponsor,  his
    wages, his working pattern, the appearance of his uniform, the  way  he
    travels to work, where he worked previously, the reasons he  left  that
    employment. There was also consistency concerning the appellant's work,
    and visits made by the sponsor to it. There was some consistency across
    the reasons given for why neither party knew  details  of  the  other's
    family, the dates of arrival  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the  religious
    beliefs of each party, medical conditions, the last movie they went  to
    see together, and the type of utilities the couple  consumed  in  their
    shared accommodation.

36. The question for my  consideration  is  whether  the  response  to  the
    allegations made  by  the  respondent  provided  by  the  appellant  is
    sufficient to provide an innocent explanation for the case against him.
    In addressing this question, it is necessary to recall  that,  although
    there is only  one  standard  of  proof,  namely  the  civil  standard,
    stronger evidence is likely to be necessary to establish  a  charge  of
    this gravity,  given  the  inherent  improbability  of  the  underlying
    deception which is inherent to  the  respondent's  case.   However  the
    evidential pendulum may swing, the respondent bears the legal burden of
    establishing a marriage of convenience at all times.

37. In their oral evidence before me, the appellant and sponsor were  asked
    whether they had been to the cinema recently. They both said  that  the
    most recent film they had seen had been Fast and Furious, and that they
    viewed it at the Odeon in the Westfield  at  Stratford.  The  appellant
    said that it had been "last month", and the sponsor said  that  it  had
    been "2 to 3 weeks ago". They are now residing at a  different  address
    to the one in Woking, but still live together.

38. I agree with the submissions of Mr Davison that there is  a  degree  of
    consistency between the answers the appellant and the sponsor  gave  in
    their interviews. In  addition,  there  evidence  before  me  was  also
    consistent.  Both appellant and sponsor were able accurately to  recall
    their most recent cinema trip together.

39. The difficulty with the consistency demonstrated by both parties to the
    marriage is that it all relates to relatively recent  events  in  their
    history. A phenomenon of those who enter into marriages of  convenience
    is that they are able to prepare consistent answers across a  range  of
    everyday, recent, matters. Indeed, cases where there is no  consistency
    are  relatively  rare.  Those  in  marriages  of  convenience  who  are
    expecting to face a challenge concerning the purposes  for  which  they
    entered into their marriage are likely to be  able  to  learn  a  large
    degree  of  information  about  the  other  party.   Although   details
    concerning the past can be learnt, the further back such attempts  seek
    to go, the harder  it  gets.  Recent  consistency  is  much  easier  to
    establish.  The question for my analysis is  whether  the  contemporary
    consistency provided by the appellant and sponsor in  relation  to  the
    matters  outlined  in  Mr  Davison's  skeleton  argument,  outlined  at
    paragraph 38, above, is sufficient to outweigh the  reasonable  grounds
    for suspicion established by the respondent.

40. I consider that it is possible, in broad terms, to categorise the areas
    of consistency between  the  answers  provided  by  the  appellant  and
    sponsor  as  relating  to  recent  developments  and  events  in  their
    relationship. By contrast, the areas in the interviews in  relation  to
    which their answers were less impressive and gave  rise  to  reasonable
    suspicion, as outlined above, related to the earlier -  foundational  -
    stages of their relationship, and the absence of knowledge on the  part
    of each other about events which  preceded  their  relationship.    For
    example, the contemporaneous evidence appears to suggest  a  degree  of
    cohabitation.  However, during  their  interviews,  the  appellant  and
    sponsor had difficulty recognising the name of Mr  Lopes,  despite  the
    fact he was listed as a  fellow  tenant  in  their  then  shared  home.
    Similarly, the knowledge of each concerning the remaining housemates in
    that house was limited.

41. That both parties have struggled to provide a coherent  and  consistent
    account of the events surrounding, and preceding, their engagement,  or
    their then living arrangements, are indications that the respondent has
    discharged the burden of demonstrating  that  this  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

42. The appellant and sponsor provided different answers concerning why the
    appellant does not speak to family members of the sponsor; the  sponsor
    claimed it was because  his  family  members  did  not  speak  English,
    whereas the appellant said that the sponsor's sister did speak English.



43. In their statements, the appellant and sponsor say that  they  did  not
    know about their respective pasts because, "we had both made  it  clear
    to the Respondent that we had decided not to know of each other's past"
    (appellant's statement, paragraph 12; sponsor's statement, paragraph 8,
    third unnumbered bullet point).  That is not what they  said  in  their
    interviews:

          a. The sponsor responded to questions on this  point  by  saying,
             for example, "...why should I care about the past when we  are
             on the present?" (question 140) and, "We are focussed  on  the
             future and on the present, not  on  what  happen  back  [sic]"
             (question 141) and, "It's all past,  why  should  I  bring  it
             up..." (question 141).

          b. The appellant said that they had never discussed matters about
             their pasts (question 205), and that the reason he  had  never
             asked the sponsor  was,  "I  know  it  is  very  difficult  to
             believe, but I don't imagine him  with  someone  else  in  the
             past" (question 206).

    There was no suggestion in their interview answers that there had  been
    any form of mutual decision not to address their  pasts.   The  sponsor
    simply stated that there had been a natural focus on  the  present  and
    the future, and the appellant said  he  had  not  addressed  the  issue
    because he could  not  imagine  the  sponsor  with  anyone  else.   The
    explanations given in the statements do not  accord  with  the  answers
    provided in interview.  They appear to  be  retrospective  attempts  to
    rationalise what they  each  said  in  their  interviews,  rather  than
    explanations that were consistent  with  what  they  each  said.   This
    presents credibility concerns.

44. It is concerning that the appellant had "no  idea"  concerning  whether
    the sponsor's family had any awareness of their marriage.  As  outlined
    at paragraph 25, above, the ambivalence is what is  concerning,  rather
    than the simple fact that the sponsor may not have told his parents  of
    their marriage.  I also have concerns that they each had  only  minimal
    knowledge of the other's family.  I accept that the appellant  provided
    three names, for the sponsor's mother, father  and  sister.   But  even
    then, he was unsure.  The sponsor and appellant gave different  reasons
    for why the appellant did not know  the  sponsor's  family.   In  their
    statements, the appellant and sponsor suggested that they had "mutually
    decided"  not  to  get  to  know  each  other's  families  (appellant's
    statement, page 13, sponsor's statement, page  20,  subheading  "Reason
    Four").  That is not what they said during their interviews, where  the
    reasons given for the appellant not knowing the sponsor's parents  were
    that  Romanian  names   were   difficult   to   remember   (appellant's
    explanation) and the sponsor's parents did not speak English (sponsor's
    explanation): see the analysis in paragraphs 24 and 42, above.

45. I do not accept that it is credible that the appellant had not revealed
    to the sponsor his previous immigration difficulties, and  the  attempt
    he had made in order to claim asylum based upon his sexual orientation.
     These were significant events in the relatively  recent  life  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant  stood  to  gain  a  significant  immigration
    advantage from the marriage, making it all the more concerning that  he
    had not even remarked or otherwise observed to the sponsor that he  had
    previously encountered such difficulties.

46. Of  course,  the  mere  fact  that  a  marriage  would  bring  with  it
    immigration advantages does not necessarily render  it  to  be  one  of
    convenience; the question for my consideration is whether the  sole  or
    predominant purpose of the marriage was  for  the  appellant  to  avoid
    being subject to the requirements of immigration  control  which  would
    otherwise apply. For the purposes of this analysis, however, the notion
    that the appellant and sponsor had never  considered  such  matters  is
    concerning and lacks credibility. It suggests either  that  the  couple
    have not been entirely open about their knowledge of each other  (which
    presents credibility concerns when assessing  their  evidence  claiming
    the marriage is not one of convenience), or that they do not  have  the
    depth of knowledge and insight which would reasonably be expected in  a
    marriage situation (thereby contributing to concerns that the  marriage
    may be one of convenience).  Of course, marriages come in  many  forms.
    It is with hesitation that I conclude that all married couples would be
    likely to reveal certain  matters  to  each  other.   All  couples  are
    different.  As such, this is not a factor which,  in  isolation,  would
    support a  finding  that  the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience;  but
    considered  in  the  round,  along  with  the  other  evidence,  is   a
    contributing factor.

47. I agree with the respondent that it is concerning  that  the  appellant
    and sponsor could not recall when they got engaged, nor any  detail  as
    to the circumstances of the proposal.   Whereas  the  sponsor  said  no
    engagement ring was involved, the appellant  said  that  there  was  an
    engagement ring.  I have credibility concerns with the  notion  that  a
    married couple would not  be  able  to  remember  the  dates  of  their
    engagement, and those concerns  are  compounded  by  the  significantly
    different accounts each gave concerning the presence of  an  engagement
    ring.  Again, I recall that all couples are  different.   I  should  be
    slow to impose my subjective expectations about how  a  married  couple
    would behave.  However, when viewed alongside the  remaining  evidence,
    in the round, this is a factor.  I also recall  that  the  answers  the
    appellant gave in his interview on this point were vague  and  evasive,
    as outlined above.

48. These concerns are all set against the earlier findings of Judge  Moxon
    that the appellant is not gay.  As stated above, I am not bound by that
    decision.  I would have no hesitation in departing from it, if it  were
    the case that the evidence in the case -  which  all  post-dates  Judge
    Moxon's findings - required me to do so.  However, for the reasons  set
    out above, I have significant credibility concerns with many aspects of
    the account provided by the appellant and the sponsor.  There has  been
    no evidence which post-dates Judge Moxon's findings that either enables
    or requires me to adopt a different approach.  Judge  Moxon's  findings
    therefore form a significant part of my analysis.

49. Having considered the entirety of the evidence in the round, therefore,
    I do not accept that the appellant has provided a  sufficient  response
    to the allegations properly raised against him by the  respondent.   He
    has failed to discharge the evidential burden that transferred to  him.
    Many of the answers that he and the sponsor provided had the effect  of
    augmenting the  case  against  him,  for  example  the  inconsistencies
    surrounding the engagement ring, or the answers that lacked credibility
    surrounding the proposal, or the sponsor's lack  of  knowledge  of  the
    appellant's prior history in the United  Kingdom.   What  consistencies
    there were in the  accounts  provided  by  the  appellant  and  sponsor
    related  to  events  that  were  relatively  recent  to  the   marriage
    interviews and the remaking hearing before me, and  did  not  have  the
    effect of confirming the history  or  depth  of  the  relationship,  in
    response  to   the   respondent's   properly-made   allegations.    The
    consistency is in relation to recent events  which  would  be  easy  to
    orchestrate.

50. The overall effect of the inconsistencies and  the  answers  that  lack
    credibility is that I am satisfied that the respondent  has  discharged
    her overall legal burden of demonstrating that the marriage is  one  of
    convenience.  The findings outlined above provide a lens through  which
    the intention of the parties at the  time  of  their  marriage  may  be
    viewed.  The appellant was, and has been, without leave for some  time.
    He claimed asylum on the basis of his homosexuality once  he  had  been
    served with removal papers, but was found by Judge Moxon not to be  gay
    and to lack credibility.  In the face of removal, in need of a basis to
    regularise his stay, he entered into a marriage of convenience with the
    sponsor.   Both  he  and  the  sponsor  know  little  of  each  other's
    backgrounds or families and were unable to  illuminate  their  marriage
    with anything getting close to the detail which  would  characterise  a
    genuine  marriage.   While  some  aspects  of  their  interviews   were
    consistent, as was their evidence  concerning  recent  developments  in
    their relationship, the crucial early stages of  the  relationship,  or
    basic details about their respective backgrounds  and  histories,  were
    not substantiated in their interviews.  Their answers undermined  their
    case to be in a genuine marriage, for the reasons outlined above.   The
    chronology demonstrates that the appellant applied  for  the  residence
    card very shortly after getting married.  He  did  so  because  he  had
    married the sponsor for the predominant purpose  of  circumventing  the
    requirements of immigration control, to which he was subject.   He  had
    every reason to do so and has not been able to provide  a  satisfactory
    innocent explanation to the  allegations  against  him  raised  by  the
    respondent.  I am satisfied to the balance  of  probabilities  standard
    that the respondent's allegations have been established.

Conclusion

51. As the appellant is a party to a marriage of convenience, he  does  not
    meet the  definition  of  "spouse"  in  regulation  2(1)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.  He is not, therefore, entitled to  a  residence  card  to
    attest to his status as a "family member" of an EEA national,  and  his
    appeal against the respondent's refusal to issue him with  a  residence
    card is dismissed.

52. The anonymity order made by Judge Moxon remains in force.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed on EU law grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                  Date 6 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal, there can be no fee award.

Signed   [pic]                  Date 6 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




