
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06693/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 April 2019                     |On 09 May 2019                       |
|Extempore                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                          ms Rahemat Natasha Davies
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Adojutelegan
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on  19  July  2018  dismissing  her
    appeal  against  a  decision  made  on  27  June  2017  to  refuse  her
    application for a document confirming her right  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016.

 2. The appellant's case is primarily that she was married for a number  of
    years to an EU national and that he was employed during the  tax  years
    2003/4 to 2008/9 when she was divorced,  his  employment  being  for  a
    continuous a period of five years.

 3. The judge did not accept the evidence produced to him which is  in  the
    form of a series of letters from HM Revenue & Customs  setting  out  in
    significant detail her former husband's history of employment.

 4. There has been a long history to this case,  in  that  the  appellant's
    divorce  was  in  2008  and  there  had  been   numerous   unsuccessful
    applications subsequent to that.  It is necessary to record that  those
    decisions were reached on the basis of considerably less evidence  than
    has now been made available.  No issue has been taken to  that  by  the
    respondent.

 5. The judge reached his conclusions for the reasons set out at paragraphs
    [23] to [25] of his decision.  In  summary,  he  found  that  the  only
    evidence  in  support  of  the  application  was   National   Insurance
    contributions said to have been made by the former spouse.  Although he
    does refer to the documents which appear at pages 111  to  119  of  the
    bundle which are the letters form HM  Revenue  &  Customs  referred  to
    previously, he refers to them as not covering  the  tax  year  2003  to
    2004.  He also noted that there was no evidence to demonstrate that the
    former EEA national husband was in any  meaningful  economic  activity,
    stating even were he to accept that the appellant's husband  was  self-
    employed, the evidence in the form of National Insurance  contributions
    and tax allowance is solely for a limited period and the  divorce  took
    place on 18 February 2008.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal against  these  decisions  on
    the grounds that the judge had erred:

      a)  in his approach to evidence, specifically that he had not properly
         assessed it both in terms as to the period covered  which  extended
         from 2003/4 tax year; and,

      b) in that he  had  wrongly  stated  that  there  is  no  evidence  to
         demonstrate that the former  husband  was  in  meaningful  economic
         activity and made factual errors which contributed to these errors.
          It is also submitted that the documentary evidence provided showed
         that the former husband  had  been  exercising  treaty  rights  and
         earning at a level such that it  was  above  the  minimum  earnings
         threshold for national insurance and that he  erred  in  concluding
         that these were marginal and ancillary and insufficient  to  amount
         to proper work or employment.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on  11  December
    2008, Judge Grubb noting that the documents from HM Revenue  &  Customs
    at pages 111 to 129 of the bundle appeared to disclose income  and  tax
    liability accepted by HM Revenue  &  Customs  for  the  spouse  at  the
    relevant period.

 8. I am satisfied that the judge did err as is set out in the grounds.  He
    failed to note that the documents in  question  covered  the  tax  year
    2003/4, and he failed to explain why he did not  accept  the  evidence,
    given that it came from HM Revenue & Customs.  He  improperly  required
    there to have been documentary evidence, such as  the  bank  statements
    which would not have been available at this period  nor  is  it  likely
    they would be available to the appellant.

 9. The judge also failed to note that National Insurance contributions are
    indicative of certain levels of income as was clear from the  documents
    and failed to engage with the  level  of  income  in  relation  to  the
    relevant National Insurance and income tax thresholds  in  reaching  is
    conclusion in the alternative that there was insufficient  evidence  of
    genuine and sufficient economic activity.

10. Accordingly for those reasons the decision was set aside.  When  I  did
    so on 31 August 2018 I gave directions for the appellant to provide any
    additional evidence if it existed and also to provide a  table  setting
    out in each of the relevant tax years in separate columns how the level
    of national insurance contributions and income tax  with  relevance  to
    the relevant thresholds at the time. I am grateful to  the  appellant's
    solicitors for producing that table within a short period of  time  and
    it is on that basis that I remake the decision.

11. I am satisfied from the documents provided that the appellant's  former
    husband  was  economically  active  through  employment  and/or   self-
    employment for the five year period prior to the date  of  divorce.  Mr
    Tarlow  made  no  submission  to  the  contrary  I  the  light  of  the
    documentary evidence. It is not in dispute that the  appellant  was  in
    employment  at  the  date  of  divorce  or  thereafter   and   in   the
    circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  all  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations are met.

12. Accordingly I am satisfied that the appeal should  be  allowed  on  the
    basis that the appellant has shown on the balance of probabilities that
    she has acquired a permanent right of residence.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside

 2. I remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016


Signed                                  Date 2 May 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
