
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ea/06176/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on    16 January 2019                             |On 29 January 2019             |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                             Afua Mantebea BOADU
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Olumuyiwa Jibowu (counsel instructed by MJ Solomon &
Partners)
For the respondent: Mr Tom Wilding


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Derrick Pears), sitting at Hatton Cross on 24 May 2018,
    to  an EEA appeal by a citizen of Ghana, born 1971. The appellant  came
    here in 2005, married the sponsor (a  citizen  of  Spain,  as  well  as
    Ghana) on 14 March 2010, and  got  a  residence  card,  valid  till  29
    November 2015. On 26 November she applied  for  a  permanent  residence
    card, which was refused on 11 May 2016.

 2. Meanwhile the appellant had fallen out with her husband, and  presented
    a petition for divorce on 20 August 2015: decree nisi was pronounced on
    18 January 2016, with decree absolute following on 9  March.  Permanent
    residence was refused for a number of reasons, the main  and  only  one
    now in issue being that the appellant  had  failed  to  show  that  her
    sponsor had been a 'qualified person' for a period ending on 1 December
    2013.

 3. In a clear and fully-reasoned decision on the facts, the judge accepted
    a number of points made by Mr Jibowu for the appellant;  but  he  found
    that the sponsor was not a 'qualified person' for the period from April
    2011 to April 2013. The basis for this was a letter from HM Revenue and
    Customs [HMRC], giving the sponsor's work history, dated 14  May  2015,
    and filed by the appellant's solicitors. This showed that the sponsor's
    earlier employment ended in fact on 27 June  2010,  so  the  judge  was
    generous in regarding  it  as  continuing  till  he  received  a  small
    redundancy payment on 5 April  2011.  The  sponsor's  later  period  of
    employment did not start till 1 December 2013; so once again the  judge
    was generous in taking it as starting in April that year.

 4. The judge went on to conclude on that evidence that  the  sponsor  "...
    was not a qualified person for the period between April 2013 and  April
    2013 and therefore the requirements of regulation 10 (5) are not  met".
    This was the point where the case set off on a wrong track. While  reg.
    10 dealt with the requirements  for  a  retained  right  of  residence,
    permanent right of residence was governed by reg. 15 of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, in force at the date of  the
    decision.

 5.  The  judge's  decision  was  appealed  on  the  basis  that   he   had
    misunderstood the requirements of reg. 15:  the  first-tier  permission
    judge refused it, on the basis of the judge's finding of fact about the
    sponsor not having been a 'qualified  person'  for  the  whole  of  the
    necessary five  years.  However  permission  was  given  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on the basis that the appellant  qualified  by  reason  of  a
    retained right of residence.

 6. Reg. 15 provides a permanent right of residence for

       (f)    a person who-

             (i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
             Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and

             (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family member  who  has
             retained the right of residence.

 7. The  important  word  there  is  'and':  to  be  qualified  under  that
    paragraph, as she claimed, the appellant had to show a period  of  five
    years,  during  which  she  had  been  here  in  accordance  with   the
    Regulations, and at the end of  which  she  had  a  retained  right  of
    residence. No question of a retained right  of  residence  could  arise
    till she presented her petition for divorce (see Baigazieva [2018] EWCA
    Civ 1088): while Mr Jibowu argued that she  had  already  acquired  one
    after three years of marriage (see reg. 10 (5) (d) (i)),  the  contrary
    is perfectly clear, as  explained  in  OA  (EEA  -  retained  right  of
    residence) Nigeria [2010] UKAIT 1088, at paragraph 31 onwards.

 8. OA's position was discussed by Judge Storey in characteristically lucid
    terms, as follows:

         33.  The appellant fails to surmount the first test.  She  does  so
         for the same reasons as she was unable to surmount the reg 15(1)(b)
         test, namely that she is unable to  establish  that  her  residence
         with her husband was "in accordance  with  these  Regulations".  To
         accord with the Regulations, her status as a family member  had  to
         be based on his continuing to exercise Treaty rights, but there was
         insufficient  evidence  to  show  her  husband  was  continuing  to
         exercise Treaty rights  during  the  relevant  period.  Unlike  reg
         15(1)(b),  reg  15(f)(i)  does  not  of  course  require  that  the
         appellant  has  "resided  with"  the  spouse,  but  otherwise   its
         conditions are the same as  under  reg  15(1)(b).  Accordingly  the
         appellant cannot succeed under reg 15(1)(f).

         34.  Even if I  am  wrong  in  my  assessment  of  the  appellant's
         position under reg 15(1)(f)(i), I would still not have  found  that
         the IJ was right to have regarded the appellant as someone who  had
         acquired a retained right of residence. The fact of the matter  was
         that during the relevant period her marriage  continued  in  being,
         albeit the relationship between the couple had broken down. It  had
         never terminated. There was still not as yet a point in  time  from
         which one could look back and calculate whether there  had  been  a
         qualifying period of residence.

         35.  The  relevant  provision  for  deciding  whether  there  is  a
         retained right of residence in the first place is, of  course,  reg
         10(5)(a) which states that a person  satisfies  the  conditions  in
         this paragraph if "he ceased to be a family member of  a  qualified
         person on the termination of the marriage or civil  partnership  of
         the  qualified  person".  The  IJ's  opinion  was  that  the   term
         "terminated" meant effective breakdown of  a  marriage.  There  are
         several  reasons  why  I  consider  this   to   be   an   erroneous
         construction.

 9. Much, equally characteristic, learning followed; but there is  no  need
    to go into it here. There is no material  difference,  so  far  as  the
    argument before me is involved, between the facts of OA  and  those  of
    the present case. This appellant was entitled to a permanent  right  of
    residence, so far as reg. 15 (f) (i) goes,  if  she  had  reached  five
    years' stay here  under  the  Regulations  at  any  stage  between  her
    marriage on 14 March 2010, and the date of the hearing on 24 May  2018.
    The difficulty with that is that, either counting from  the  beginning,
    or to the end of that period, she had to include some  or  all  of  the
    period between April 2011 and  April  2013  for  which  (as  the  judge
    accepted) she was unable to show that her husband had been a 'qualified
    person'.

10. While the appellant would have retained whatever right of residence she
    had when she put in her petition on 20  August  2015,  she  was  not  a
    person with a retained right of residence until then (see  OA  at  34).
    While a retained right of residence, once it  came  into  being,  would
    have made it unnecessary for  her  to  show  that  her  sponsor  was  a
    'qualified person' at any time after that, it could not enable  her  to
    re-write history by dispensing with any such requirement for  the  time
    they were together.

11. It follows that there was no continuous period  of  five  years  during
    which the appellant had lived here in accordance with the  Regulations,
    so that she cannot make her case under reg. 15  (f)  (i).  As  she  was
    unable to do that, there was no five-year period, for the  purposes  of
    15 (f) (ii), at the end of which it was open to her to  show  that  she
    had a retained right of residence, even if, which is not the case,  she
    were able to succeed under 15 (f) (ii), without also satisfying 15  (f)
    (i).

Appeal
                               [pic] 16/1/2019               (a judge of
                                   the Upper Tribunal)


