






Upper tier Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06611/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 February 2018                  |On 16 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                            Mr Aktheruzzaman Soni
                        anonymity direction not made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  on  29  May  1984.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  15  June  2017
      dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  to
      grant him an EEA residence card as an extended family member.


   2. In dismissing his appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the
      Tribunal did not have jurisdiction following the decision of the Upper
      Tribunal in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  010411  (IAC).
      The Tribunal found that there was no statutory right of appeal against
      the decision of the respondent not to grant  a  residence  card  to  a
      person claiming to be an extended family member.


   3. Mr Jarvis acknowledged that in the light of the  recent  decisions  of
      the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court, that the Tribunal did  have
      jurisdiction to hear such appeals,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Judge should be set aside.


   4. In the circumstances he accepted that the  appeal  would  have  to  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.


   5. I am satisfied that the extent of judicial fact finding which will  be
      necessary for a decision to be re-made is extensive. I have had regard
      to the overriding objective and conclude that it  would  be  just  and
      fair to remit the case.


      Notice of decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.


      The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Bradford) for a fresh
      decision to be made.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed  Date 15 March 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

