
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06260/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 November 2018                      |On 28 November 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                         mrs sairan salman sulaiman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mupara (instructed by Immigration Advisory
                    Services (UK) Ltd (Derby))
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith who heard  her  appeal
    at Taylor House on 21 May 2018.  In a Decision and Reasons  promulgated
    on 25 June 2018 she dismissed the appeal.

 2. The appeal was by an Iraqi national claiming a right  of  residence  as
    the family member (spouse) of a British citizen under Regulation  9  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.  The Appellant and her  husband
    have two children together, one born in 2016 in Eire, who has a British
    passport, and a second, born in the UK in February 2018.

 3. In  her  Decision  and  Reasons  the  Judge  set  out  requirements  of
    Regulation 9 and then set out the evidence.  The evidence was that  the
    British national came from Iraq to the UK in 1999 and obtained  British
    nationality in 2007.  He had been working in the UK as a  waiter,  then
    as a taxi driver and then as a barber in Margate.  Thereafter,  several
    of his friends moved to Ireland where they found well  paid  employment
    or started their own businesses. He decided that he would  do  likewise
    and left the UK for Ireland on 1 April 2014. Whilst there he  rented  a
    chair in a barber's shop and worked as a barber.

 4. The Sponsor then travelled to Iraq and married his  wife  on  21  April
    2014.  His wife then joined him in  Ireland  and  they  lived  together
    there where she gave birth to their first child.  It is their case that
    the sponsor continued working in Ireland until the barber's shop, where
    he rented a chair, was  sold  late  in  2015.   Then,  unable  to  find
    alternative employment, the family decided to come to the UK.

 5. It was also claimed before the First-tier Tribunal that a factor in the
    decision to come to the UK was the Brexit situation.  That was found by
    the First-tier Tribunal to be lacking credibility as they  returned  to
    the UK before the Brexit referendum.  However, it is entirely  credible
    that, having lost his chair at the  barber's  shop,  the  family  would
    decide to come to the UK.  Since they returned they  have  had  another
    child.

 6. The first issue the Judge looked at was  whether  the  Sponsor  was  in
    truth working in Eire.  She found that there was a paucity of  evidence
    to establish that.  She said that there was no evidence  of  tax  being
    paid and found as a result that  he  had  not  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights in Ireland.

 7. I have been taken to documents in the Appellant's bundle, the first  of
    which is  a  letter  from  the  Irish  Naturalisation  and  Immigration
    Services dated 7 August 2015.  That document related to an  application
    by the Sponsor, submitted on 22 June 2015, for a residence card.   That
    residence card was  subsequently  issued  and  it  is  clear  from  the
    document that one of the documents submitted with that application  was
    a "Tax Return and Payment 2014" dated 18 May 2015.  That related to the
    tax year ending December 2014.  I was then taken to a tax document  for
    the year ending December  2015;  the  Irish  tax  year  runs  with  the
    calendar year.  That document,  a  letter  dated  25th  February  2016,
    showed the Sponsor's self-assessment for the tax year  ending  December
    2015.  It is clear therefore that, for the tax  years  ending  December
    2014 and  December  2015,  the  sponsor  was  working  in  Ireland  and
    therefore exercising Treaty rights.  A mere three months after that the
    family moved to the UK and during that time the  sponsor  was  actively
    seeking another  chair  in  another  barber's  shop.   I  therefore  am
    satisfied that the conditions of Regulation 9(2)(a) were  met  in  that
    the British citizen was residing in an EEA state, in this case  Ireland
    as a worker  or  self-employed  person  or  self-sufficient  person  or
    student immediately before returning to the United Kingdom.  The Judge,
    in failing to take account of the  tax  documents  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle, made an error of law and her findings  are  not  based  on  the
    evidence.

 8. The second issue that the Judge had to  consider  was  whether  genuine
    family life was created or strengthened during their joint residence in
    the EEA state.  The Judge indicated  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    needed to show that they had moved the centre of their life to Ireland.
     In that she was wrong. The requirement is that the  residence  in  the
    EEA state (Ireland) was genuine.  Whether they have moved the centre of
    their life there is a factor that is capable of establishing  that;  it
    is not a free-standing requirement.

 9. This is not a case of a family moving  to  Ireland  for  a  very  short
    period carrying out some minimal employment and then returning  to  the
    UK.  This sponsor was in Ireland for a period  before  he  married  his
    wife and before she joined him.  He was  working  there,  their  family
    life was certainly consolidated whilst there and I have  no  reason  to
    doubt that their residence there was genuine. I find therefore that the
    Judge's finding in relation to the requirement for the centre  of  life
    to have transferred is wrong in law and the finding  that  the  Sponsor
    was not exercising Treaty rights was  unsustainable  on  the  evidence.
    That means that the decision must be set aside.  For the reasons I have
    already given about the evidence, his exercise of Treaty rights and the
    genuineness of their residence in Ireland I  find  that  the  Appellant
    does meet the requirements of Regulation 9  and  therefore  having  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision, I re-decide it and allow  the
    appeal.

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and  I  see
    no reason to make one now.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.


                    [pic]

Signed                              Date 21st November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has  been  paid  or  for  the
following reason.
I have allowed the appeal on the basis of evidence that was not  before  the
Secretary of State.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 21st November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin













