
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06328/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st January 2019                 |On 4th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                              RAJA TAHIR MAZHAR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Jegede, legal representative from Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 30th January 1983.  He
       applied for an EEA residence card as an extended family member of  an
       EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK. His  father's  first
       cousin, Mr Farooq Ahmed, is a Spanish citizen. His first  application
       was made in October  2014,  and  was  refused  in  January  2015.  He
       appealed that decision but his appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor under the EEA Regulations in a  decision
       promulgated on 13th January 2016. He became appeal  rights  exhausted
       in July 2016 with the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  being
       upheld by the Upper Tribunal.

    2. He re-applied for a residence card on 30th August 2016, and it is the
       refusal of this application dated 11th May  2017  which  led  to  the
       decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Cohen  promulgated  on
       25th June 2018 dismissing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

    3. Permission to appeal against the decision of Judge Cohen was  granted
       by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 29th November 2018  on  the  basis
       that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in
       failing to give  sufficient  reasons  for  finding  the  sponsor  was
       currently residing in Pakistan, and in not following the  conclusions
       on the evidence reached by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Norton-
       Taylor whilst adopting in full his previous findings.

    4. Law Lane Solicitors applied to adjourn the hearing before me  on  the
       basis that the appellant was unwell and not fit to attend the hearing
       on 21st January 2019, however this  was  refused  by  Sukhi  Bakhshi,
       lawyer to the Upper Tribunal, on 9th January 2019 as the appellant is
       represented and the error of law hearing could therefore  take  place
       in his absence.

    5. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    6. In the grounds of appeal it is firstly  argued  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law in not finding that the appellant is  currently
       part of the sponsor's  household,  at  paragraphs20  and  22  of  the
       decision, when new evidence (not before  the  previous  judge,  Judge
       Norton-Taylor) showed that he was placed on the tenancy agreement  in
       2015 and there was other correspondence to support this fact.

    7. Secondly, it is argued that at paragraph 23 the  First-tier  Tribunal
       errs in concluding the sponsor is  currently  residing  in  Pakistan,
       when in fact the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  was  that  he  was
       currently only sorting  out  an  inheritance  in  Pakistan  and  then
       planning to return, and court  documents  were  submitted  supporting
       this fact.

    8. Thirdly, it  is  argued  that  it  was  wrong  to  hold  against  the
       credibility of the appellant at paragraph 29 of the decision that  he
       contended  that  his  bank  account  had  been  closed  due  to   his
       immigration status, and that new evidence shows  that  this  was  not
       something within his control. It  is  argued  that  this  credibility
       finding was therefore not properly reasoned.

    9. Fourthly, it is argued, that it was against the weight of evidence to
       find that the appellant and sponsor do not currently  live  together,
       and that the sponsor does not currently support him  as  is  done  at
       paragraph 30 of the decision. It is quite possible that  the  sponsor
       can afford to pay his rent and support the appellant as he has  other
       tenants to assist him paying his rent.

   10. I put to Mr Jegede that none of the grounds of appeal  challenge  the
       finding of the First-tier Tribunal that there was no prior dependency
       of the appellant on the sponsor when the appellant lived in Pakistan,
       and therefore none of the errors set out in the  grounds  could  make
       any material impact on the outcome of the appeal as prior  dependency
       is an essential element of meeting Regulation 8(2) of  the  2016  EEA
       Regulations. On examination of the bundle there was also no  evidence
       before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  could   have   changed   the
       conclusions reached by Judge Norton-Taylor on this point,  which  are
       set out at paragraph 19 to 21 of his decision, as the  only  evidence
       is of financial transfers and Judge Norton-Taylor accepted that money
       was sent to the appellant's family but found that this  was  not  for
       the appellant's essential  living  needs  as  it  was  kept  for  the
       appellant's overseas studies.

   11. There was no Rule 24 notice from the respondent. I did  not  need  to
       call upon Mr Kotas.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   12. The key conclusions of Judge Norton-Taylor in  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal promulgated  in  January  2016,  which  were  the
       starting point for the current  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  were
       that the sponsor was at all material times a Spanish citizen and  was
       exercising Treaty rights in the UK. Judge  Norton-Taylor  also  found
       that the appellant had shown that he was currently  living  with  the
       sponsor, and the sponsor was providing  for  part  of  his  essential
       living needs. However, Judge Norton-Taylor was not  satisfied  for  a
       number of reasons that the sponsor had lived with  the  appellant  in
       Pakistan or provided for his essential living needs in that  country.
       The appeal was therefore dismissed as the appellant  could  not  meet
       the requirements of Regulation 8(2)(a) of the 2006  EEA  Regulations.
       This decision  is  summarised  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal under challenge at paragraph 3.

   13. At paragraph 24 of the current decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Cohen deals with whether there is evidence of past  dependency,
       before the appellant entered the UK in May 2011, and  concludes  that
       there is not. This is not  a  finding  which  is  challenged  in  the
       grounds, or indeed one that could be challenged as there  is  no  new
       evidence that the money sent to  Pakistan  was  for  the  appellant's
       essential living needs, which is what would be needed to  lead  to  a
       different outcome from that reached by Judge Norton-Taylor.

   14. It follows that any errors of law by Judge Cohen with respect to  the
       position of the appellant and his dependency on the  sponsor  in  the
       UK; the credibility of the appellant and his ability to hold  a  bank
       account; or whether the sponsor was wrongly found to be currently  in
       Pakistan permanently are immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.

   15. It is not therefore appropriate to set aside the decision.

       Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of a material error on a point of law.

    2. I uphold the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
       appeal under the 2016 EEA Regulations.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 21st January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
