
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06902/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                             UMESH BHARAT AHUJA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Harris, instructed by Thompson and Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 4 June 1989 and is a male citizen  of  India.
    On 1 March 2017, he applied for a permanent residence card as a  family
    member of an EEA national who had been a qualified person in the United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of five  years.  Appellant  claimed  to
    have  been  dependent  upon  his  father,  a  citizen  of  Spain.   The
    appellant's application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  in  a
    decision dated 25 July 2017. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  21
    February 2019. The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The notice of refusal records that the appellant had 'provided evidence
    to show that your sponsor has been exercising treaty rights as a  self-
    employed person for five years in the form of SA302s dated 2012 to 2016
    and an HMRC letter.' The decision of  the  judge  addresses  only  that
    period 2012 - 2016. The appellant now claims that  there  was  evidence
    before the judge which showed that the appellant had been the dependent
    of his father,  who  had  been  exercising  Treaty  Rights,  during  an
    additional earlier period between 2006 - 2011.  The  appellant  submits
    that the judge erred in law by completely ignoring this earlier period.
    Irrespective of any failure on the part  of  the  appellant  to  adduce
    evidence to show dependency in the later period, the judge  should,  at
    the least, have determined whether she  had  jurisdiction  to  consider
    this earlier period.

 3. Mr Melvin, who appeared for the Secretary of State, had  not  seen  the
    skeleton argument of the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal so  I
    provided him with a copy. The skeleton argument at [14] refers  to  the
    earlier period and evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle  of  documents
    which the appellant claims shows that the  sponsor/father  was  working
    and exercising Treaty Rights at least from May 2006;  at  [16],  it  is
    asserted  that  'the  appellant  EEA  sponsor  has  been   continuously
    exercising treaty rights from 30 May 2006 to date.' Mr Melvin submitted
    that the earlier period amounted  a  'new  matter'  which  fell  to  be
    considered under section  85(6)  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. By section 85(5) a new matter may only  be  considered
    by the Tribunal if the Secretary of State  has  given  his  consent  to
    consider it. Ms Harris, who appeared for the appellant, submitted  that
    the earlier period did not constitute a new matter; the  basis  of  the
    appellant's application and appeal had always been that he  resided  in
    the United Kingdom in accordance with the regulations for a  continuous
    period of five years; it made no difference  whether  this  requirement
    was met by the earlier or later period.

 4. Sections 85 and 86 of the 2002 Act provide:

         85. Matters to be considered

         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against the  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).

         (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes  a  statement  under
             section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised  in
             a statement which constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a  kind
             listed in section 84 the decision appealed against.

         (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under  section  120
             whether the statement was made before or after the appeal  was
             commenced.

         (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1) ... against  a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider... any matter which it  thinks  relevant
             to the  substance  of  the  decision,  including...  a  matter
             arising after the date of decision.

         (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a  new  matter  unless  the
             Secretary of Status has given the Tribunal consent to do so.

         (6)  A matter is a "new matter" if -

             (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind  listed  in
                  section 84, and

             (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered  the
                  matter in the context of -

                  (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or

                  (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120.

         86. Determination of appeal

         (1)  This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1).

         (2)  The Tribunal must determine -

             (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal..., and

             (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.

 5. Schedule 2 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016
    provides that the sections shall also  apply  to  appeals  under  those
    Regulations.

 6. I was referred to the Upper Tribunal reported decision in Mahmud (S. 85
    NIAA 2002 - 'new matters') [2017] UKUT 488 (IAC):

         "1.  Whether something is or is not a  'new  matter'  goes  to  the
         jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and the First-
         tier Tribunal must therefore determine for itself the issue.

         2.   A 'new matter' is a  matter  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
         appeal of a kind listed in  section  84,  as  required  by  section
         85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting a ground  of  appeal  means
         that it must contain a matter which  could  raise  or  establish  a
         listed ground of appeal.  A matter is the factual  substance  of  a
         claim.  A ground of appeal is the legal basis on which the facts in
         any given matter could  form  the  basis  of  a  challenge  to  the
         decision under appeal.

         3.   In practice, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not
         previously been considered by the Secretary of State in the context
         of the decision in  section  82(1)  or  a  statement  made  by  the
         appellant under section  120.   This  requires  the  matter  to  be
         factually distinct from that previously raised by an appellant,  as
         opposed to further or better evidence of an existing  matter.   The
         assessment will always be fact sensitive."

 7. As Mahmud shows, a new matter may consist of a factual matrix; it  need
    not be wholly distinct and new legal basis  or  ground  of  appeal.  In
    Mahmud, the appellant had advanced an Article 8 appeal by reference  to
    a different relationship from that which the  Secretary  of  State  had
    been notified in the  claim.  The  Tribunal  concluded  that  this  new
    relationship did amount  to  a  new  matter  and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal been right to dismiss the appeal on that  ground  because  the
    Secretary of State had not been notified of the changed factual  matrix
    and had, in any event, not given consent for the tribunal  to  consider
    it. In present appeal, the respondent considered the  later  period  of
    2012 - 2016, which is the only period referred to by the  appellant  in
    his application to  the  Secretary  of  State.  Before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the record of proceedings does not indicate  that  the  later
    period of 2012 - 2016 was raised at all  in  examination  in  chief  or
    cross-examination nor is it referred to in the judge's  record  of  the
    submissions made by both parties. The later period is  referred  to  in
    those parts of the skeleton argument which I have quoted  above.  Given
    that the later period was referred  to  in  the  skeleton  argument,  I
    accept the appellant's submission that the judge should have determined
    whether she had jurisdiction to consider the later period. Given  that,
    other than in the skeleton argument, no reference has been made to  the
    later period at all, this may also seem a little harsh  on  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge.

 8. Having decided that the judge should have addressed the earlier period,
    would she have been compelled to refuse to consider the  later  period?
    Miss Harris submitted that it would have been  open  to  the  judge  to
    decide that she should consider the later period and, as a consequence,
    the Upper Tribunal should remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for it to make that judgement. I disagree with that submission.  In  my
    view, the later period of dependency now claimed by the appellant falls
    very firmly into the definition of  a  'new  matter'  as  clarified  in
    Mahmud.  The  appellant  in  Mahmud  appealed  on  the  basis  of   his
    private/family  life  but  was  prevented  from  relying  upon  a   new
    relationship; in the present appeal, the appellant has appealed on  the
    basis that he has resided for 5  years  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependant of a family member exercising Treaty  Rights  but  he  cannot
    succeed in that appeal by relying upon the wholly different period from
    that considered by the Secretary of State in the original  application.
    It  follows  that,  had  the  judge  considered  whether  she  had  the
    jurisdiction to consider the new matter, then, in the  absence  of  the
    consent of the Secretary of State, she would have been bound to  decide
    that she  did  not  have  jurisdiction.  Notwithstanding  the  failure,
    therefore, of the judge to address an issue which had  been  raised  in
    the appellant's skeleton argument, I exercise my discretion and decline
    to set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision. If the appellant  wishes
    to rely upon the earlier period of dependency, he will have to  make  a
    fresh application to the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date13 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

