
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06061/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2018                     |On 25 October 2018                   |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Waseem Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, counsel instructed by E2W Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make any order restricting the publication
    of details of this case.

 2. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  12
    March 2018 dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State refusing him a residence card on  the  basis  of
    his retaining rights of residence as  the  former  husband  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 3. In order for him to succeed in his appeal it was necessary for  him  to
    establish two things.  He had to establish that  his  former  wife  had
    continued to exercise treaty rights and he had to establish that he was
    continuing to work and had worked for a period of at least five years.

 4. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in two respects.  The
    First-tier Tribunal  appears  not  to  have  considered  some  evidence
    clearly in the bundle which was highly pertinent.  Clearly  it  was  an
    error of law not to  consider  evidence  which,  if  considered  to  be
    reliable, supported the appellant's case on a point of controversy.

 5. Secondly the First-tier Tribunal refused to admit evidence produced  at
    the last minute which related to  the  recent  employment  or  economic
    activity on the part of the appellant.  The  judge  was  understandably
    displeased at the late production although it is right to note that the
    documents were dealing with very recent events. Significantly there was
    no objection from the respondent about  the  documents  being  produced
    late, nor about them being admitted as evidence nor did the  respondent
    request for an adjournment.

 6. In those circumstances it is hard to see why the judge thought  it  was
    right to exclude the evidence.  It was not right, and I  find  that  by
    reason of these two errors the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in
    law and I set aside its decision.

 7. I have had the benefit of a full  bundle  today.   Mr  Bazini  took  me
    through the bundle with care and Ms Everett for the Secretary of  State
    was given every opportunity to consider the evidence  that  was  there.
    In the circumstances Ms Everett indicated she did not wish the  witness
    to be called.

 8. The documents clearly show a sustained pattern of the appellant working
    as a taxi driver for a period of at least five years and  clearly  show
    his former wife earning  money  for  the  requisite  time.   Given  the
    realistic and helpful attitude Ms Everett has taken I do  not  find  it
    necessary or helpful to set out in more detail the  reasons  behind  my
    findings and I note Ms Everett expressly agrees with this approach.

Decision

 9. In the circumstances I find the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.   I
    set aside this decision  and  I  substitute  a  decision  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 October 2018                |







