
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number EA/06513/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 March 2021                     |On 22 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                ASIF KHURSHID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Marks & Marks,
                    Solicitors, Harrow
For the Respondent:    Mr C Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 7 April  1988.   On  14
    November 2019 the respondent refused him admission to the UK under  the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016   and   revoked   his   residence
    documentation on the grounds that he had ceased to be dependent on  his
    cousin and was not the dependent  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national with the right to reside in the UK.

 2. FtT Judge  Conway  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 April 2020.

 3. The appellant argued in the FtT that it was irrelevant, in terms of the
    regulations, whether  dependency  ceased  once  a  residence  card  was
    issued.

 4. The FtT Judge at [20 - 26] set out relevant parts of  the  regulations.
    He referred to Lim v ECO [2015] EWCA Civ 1383 and to Flora Mar Reyes C-
    423/12.    At [30-36] he found it "patently clear" that  there  was  no
    longer any dependency.  He saw no support in Reyes for the  proposition
    that extended family members did not need to continue to be  dependent.
     He concluded that the evidence for the appellant  lacked  credibility,
    and that the decision to revoke was proportionate.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  UT,  on  the  grounds
    that there is no requirement for financial dependency to continue,  and
    alternatively that the FtT gave "little  or  no  reason"  for  doubting
    credibility.

 6. Designated FtT Judge McClure refused permission on 11 June 2020, on the
    view that the dependency issue was settled  by  Chowdhury  [2020]  UKUT
    00188, and the FtT's reasoning was not shown arguably to be flawed.

 7. The appellant applied to the UT for permission, adding to  the  grounds
    that Chowdhury is a distinct case,  and  that  Reyes  established  that
    there is no need for dependency to continue.

 8. UT Judge  Kebede  granted  permission  on  19  August  2020,  and  gave
    directions enabling submissions to be made.

 9. Written submissions for the appellant, dated 1 September 2020,  do  not
    add to the grounds.  The appellant asks for  the  decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade in the UT as "there is  no  dispute  on  the  material
    facts."

10. A submission and rule 24 response for the SSHD, dated 29 October  2020,
    notes that "the underlying facts are  not  challenged",  including  the
    lack of continuing dependency and the finding that neither appellant or
    sponsor presented as impressive witnesses, and says that  Chowdhury  is
    "largely dispositive of this appeal".

11. Mr Forrest submitted along the lines of  both  sets  of  grounds.   His
    principal further points were:

      i) While Lim and Chowdhury were at first sight against the  appellant,
         on closer inspection both cases were about initial  not  continuing
         dependency, and not in point.

     ii) Alternatively, the FtT was wrong to hold that dependency came to an
         end, or should have accepted that dependency  resumed  through  the
         appellant becoming a member of the sponsor's household.

    iii) The outcome should be reversed.

     iv) If remitted to the FtT, the case should be listed  for  preliminary
         consideration of the  impact  of  repeal  and  replacement  of  the
         regulations following withdrawal from the EU.

12. Mr Tan submitted thus:

      i) The crucial point was settled by regulation 8  (2);  the  beginning
         and end of the case was that the appellant ceased to be dependent.

     ii) Chowdhury confirmed that reading of the regulations.

    iii) Reyes says nothing to the contrary.

     iv) Further support for the respondent is  to  be  found  in  HS  (EEA:
         revocation and retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 (IAC)  and
         in Sannie and another v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1638.

      v) On the alternative case, the grounds made no coherent challenge  to
         the adverse credibility findings.

13. In response, Mr Forrest sought to distinguish HS and Sannie.

14. I reserved my decision.

15. Reading the regulations as far as they apply to this case:


         under regulation 7 an extended family member is to be treated as  a
         family member of an EEA national, provided  that  he  continues  to
         satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2);


         regulation 8 (2) (b) (ii) defines an extended family member as  one
         who "has  joined  the  EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
         continues to be dependent upon the EEA national, or to be a  member
         of the EEA national's household"; and


         regulation 24 (5) (a) provides that an immigration officer may,  at
         the time of a person's arrival in the United Kingdom,  revoke  that
         person's residence card if the person  is  not  at  that  time  the
         family member of the EEA national.


16. The regulations support the FtT's decision, without clarification  from
    case law.  They require dependency of  an  extended  family  member  to
    continue, and to exist at the time of a person's  arrival  in  the  UK.
    There is nothing in the regulations to limit that  requirement  to  the
    time of first application, or of first arrival.


17. Chowdhury arose under the 2006 not the 2016 regulations, and the  facts
    were not the same.  Its crux was that the words "and  continues  to  be
    dependent" required an applicant to establish that there had not been a
    break in their dependency on the EEA national sponsor.


18. I have not been referred to anything  in  Reyes,  or  elsewhere,  which
    requires the regulations  to  be  interpreted  in  anything  but  their
    obvious sense.

19. While preparing this decision, I notice a hint  in  the  first  set  of
    grounds that the FtT should have declined to uphold the decision of the
    Immigration Officer and should not have applied the regulations because
    they are not in accordance with EU Directive  2004/38.   This  line  of
    argument appears again, referring to general recitals in the Directive,
    in the second set of grounds.  It was not put to Judge Conway, and  was
    not mentioned by either representative before me, so  I  take  that  no
    further.

20. The alternative  case,  challenging  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings, is confused.  The appellant has not begun to  show  that  the
    judge's factual conclusions were not open to him  for  the  reasons  he
    gave.

21. The state of the evidence was such that it is difficult to see that any
    judge might have found differently on the facts.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




        Hugh Macleman

      13 April 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

