
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06189/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 26 APRIL 2019                     |On 28 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                            DAVID OLAUNJI AYODEJI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Adam, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 17  July  1975  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Nigeria. He applied for permanent residence under regulation 15 of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 for  a  residence
    card as confirmation of a right to reside in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Secretary of State, by a decision taken on 4  September  2018,  refused
    the appellant's application. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  21  November  2018,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed that he had retained rights of residence  as  the
    family member (former spouse) of an EEA  national  (hereafter  referred
    to, as in the First-tier Tribunal decision, as LT). Divorce proceedings
    had been commenced on 14 April 2014 and  the  decree  absolute  in  the
    divorce granted on 12 September 2014. Both parties now agree  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred at [21] by finding that the relevant date was
    that of the decree absolute and not the commencement of the proceedings
    for divorce  by  petition.  The  Secretary  of  State  maintains  that,
    notwithstanding the  error,  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  would  have
    remained the same.

 3. The appellant had  failed  in  a  previous  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in December 2016. The judge in the  instant  appeal  discusses
    that previous dismissal at [14-17] and sought  to  determine  what  new
    evidence had been produced since that date. The previous  tribunal  had
    concluded that the appellant had not proved that his  former  wife  had
    been exercising Treaty Rights at  the  relevant  date.  In  the  latest
    appeal, the appellant has provided evidence from the DWP (Department of
    Work and Pensions) concerning guidance on the payment  of  Job  Seekers
    Allowance (JSA).

 4. It is agreed that LT found  work  in  March  2015.  Both  parties  also
    acknowledge that, at some time in 2014, LT was in receipt of  JSA.  The
    previous tribunal found that LT had been working up to April  2012  but
    there was no evidence that she had worked in the period  2012  -  2015.
    That tribunal had, however, not accepted that  LT  had  been  either  a
    worker or a jobseeker after April 2012. Although LT had found  work  in
    March 2015, that  work  and  ceased  in  June  2015  and  LT  had  been
    unemployed for much of 2016. The  2016  Regulations  provide  that  the
    permitted time for a person to exercise Treaty Rights as a jobseeker is
    91 days. There  is  an  exception  to  that  provision  which  requires
    providing 'compelling evidence' of continuing to  seek  employment  and
    having a genuine chance of being engaged.

 5. Mr Bates, who appeared for the  Secretary  of  State,  submitted  that,
    because it was impossible to determine exactly when  LT  had  begun  to
    claim JSA, the application was bound to fail. The previous tribunal and
    indicated that JSA may have commenced January 2014  but  that  had  not
    been a firm finding of fact based on compelling evidence  but  only  an
    inference drawn from a single bank statement. Mr Bates submitted  that,
    because JSA is paid in arrears, then the benefit may have been paid  in
    December 2013 but, on the evidence obtained by the  appellant,  it  was
    impossible to prove that the claim had begun at  the  end  of  2013  or
    beginning of 2014 or, indeed, on any other date; it  remained  possible
    that LT had been unemployed for a much longer period.  Without  knowing
    the date of commencement of payment of JSA, Mr Bates submitted that the
    appellant was in no position to prove that his  former  wife  had  been
    continuing to seek employment and had enjoyed a genuine chance of being
    engaged.

 6. I agree with Mr Bates.  In  cases  such  as  this,  it  is  often  very
    difficult, if not  impossible,  for  appellants  to  gather  sufficient
    evidence to discharge the burden of proof. I agree with Mr  Bates  that
    the previous tribunal's guess that JSA had commenced in January 2014 is
    no more than that; it is not a firm finding and there was  no  evidence
    in the instant appeal which improves  upon  that  before  the  previous
    tribunal. I agree also that, whilst the possibility remains that LT may
    have been out of work for  several  years,  it  is  difficult,  if  not
    impossible, for the appellant to prove to the  required  standard  that
    she had been seeking employment and  had  a  genuine  chance  of  being
    engaged. At [24], the judge found  that  the  fact  that  LT  may  have
    cooperated with the DWP did not necessarily mean that she was genuinely
    seeking employment. That finding appears a little tenuous but,  in  the
    light of what I say above, the outcome of the appeal was not in  doubt.
    I am aware that there is a tax return for LT but  this  does  not  show
    where or for how long during the relevant period she had been employed.
    Moreover, the fact that LT did obtain  work  in  March  2015  does  not
    assist the appellant. I reject the submission  that  the  judge  should
    have found that LT was genuinely seeking work simply because,  possibly
    some considerable period after she had first claimed JSA, she  found  a
    job. Finally, it is also the case that the judge's error as regards the
    material date (see [2] above) did not, in the  light  of  the  analysis
    above, affect the outcome of the appeal.

 7. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 2 JUNE 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

