
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06151/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at a remote hearing via Skype  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 21 April 2021                    |On 29 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               ISHMAEL KELLIE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Ms Georget, Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Ms Everett conceded, and I accept that the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)
    acted procedurally unfairly in  proceeding  with  the  hearing  on  the
    papers on 14 September 2020.  This is because the sponsor only received
    the respondent's bundle on 7 September 2020 and was reasonably entitled
    to take 14 days to provide his written response and evidence, which  he
    did but after the decision had been made.

 2. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade  by  the
    FTT.  I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant Senior  President's
    Practice Statement and the nature and extent of  the  factual  findings
    required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this  is  an
    appropriate case to remit to the FTT.

 3. The appeal proceeded on the papers before the FTT but those now  acting
    on behalf of the appellant have indicated that they wish for the matter
    to be listed as an oral hearing.  The appellant shall file and serve  a
    consolidated bundle contained all evidence to be relied upon before the
    FTT within 28 days of the date this decision is sent.



Decision

 4. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error of law.
     Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

 5. The appeal shall be remade by FTT by  a  judge  other  than  FTT  Judge
    Andrew, on a de novo basis.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 21 April 2021
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
