
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06416/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th March 2019                   |On 21st March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             Mr Matee Ur REHMAN
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner instructed by Diplock Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a  national  of  Pakistan  born  on  12th  January  1984
    appealed the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Monson,  promulgated
    on 20th December 2018 which dismissed his appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision refusing his application for a Residence Card as an
    Extended Family Member ('OFM') of an EEA national under the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 2. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom on 16th September 2011 and
    applied on 18th November 2015 for a residence  card.   His  application
    was refused on 13th December 2016. It was  asserted  that  he  had  not
    shown sufficient evidence of dependency on the sponsor  (or  membership
    of a household) prior to entering the United  Kingdom  as  required  by
    Regulation  8(2)  (a)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016.  Initially the matter was rejected by the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the grounds the appellant had no right of appeal.  That was
    challenged and the matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson.



 3. The appellant sought permission on two grounds

 i) The judge stated at [32]

             'I find the sponsor joined the appellant in the United Kingdom
             three years after the appellant had entered the United Kingdom
             as a student.  I find that the reverse is not true: it is  not
             true that the appellant 'has joined the EEA  national  in  the
             United Kingdom' as required by Regulation 8(2)(c)' ...

         At [34] the judge determined

             'since the appellant had come  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
             student, rather  than  joining  the  sponsor  in  Spain  as  a
             dependent family member,  the  objective  of  maintaining  the
             unity  of  the  family  in  a  broader  sense'  has  not  been
             triggered.  Put another way, it is no accident that Regulation
             8(2) requires the OFM to accompany the  sponsor  to  the  host
             state, or to join the sponsor in the host state,  rather  than
             the sponsor being able  to  generate  a  right  of  residence,
             because the latter scenario is inconsistent  with  the  notion
             that the OFM and the sponsor are part of a family  unit  which
             needs to  be  maintained  in  order  not  [to]  frustrate  the
             sponsor's exercise of free movement right'

         The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal argued that  the  judge
         had erred in law and reliance was placed on  Aladeselu  and  others
         (2006 Regs-reg 8) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00253 (IAC) which held

             '1.  For  the  purposes  of  establishing  whether  a   person
             qualifies as an  Other  Family  Member  (OFM)/extended  family
             member  under  regulation  8  of  the  Immigration   (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  the  requirement  that  they
             accompany or join the Union  citizen/EEA  national  exercising
             Treaty rights must be read as encompassing both those who have
             arrived before and those who  have  arrived  after  the  Union
             citizen/EEA national sponsor'.

         The judge erred in  holding  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet
         regulation 8 because he arrived in the United  Kingdom  before  the
         sponsor.

    (ii)   Although the  judge  made  the  findings  at  [32]  to  [34]  he
    nonetheless made further findings which were inconsistent

 4. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms

         'It was arguable that  the  judge  erred  in  the  construction  of
         Regulation 8 in view of the above case law.  It  is  also  arguable
         that the point is not resolved (Rahman [2012] CJEU Case -83/11'.

 5. At the hearing before me  Mr  Turner  submitted  that  it  was  a  'red
    herring' as to which party entered the United Kingdom  first  and  that
    the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   He  further
    argued that the judge should have granted an adjournment on  the  point
    of when the EU national obtained his EEA status.    It  was  not  clear
    when the sponsor had obtained Spanish nationality.

 6. Mr Jarvis agreed that the judge's  approach  was  not  consistent  with
    Aladeselu but there was no interplay between  that  direction  and  the
    later findings of the judge that there was no consistent evidence as to
    when the EU national acquired Spanish nationality. At paragraph 35  the
    judge  assessed  the  evidence.  It  was  not   open   to   the   legal
    representative to argue outside the terms of the permission  grant  and
    in relation to the adjournment point. There was no  substance  to  that
    complaint. The appellant needed to adduce  evidence  by  way  of  legal
    submission and that was not addressed. There was no  indication  as  to
    how the law in Spain worked  on  the  acquisition  of  nationality.  At
    paragraph 38 there was a clearly lawful disposal of the appeal.

 7. Mr Turner advanced that the findings were unclear  and  that  the  last
    sentence of paragraph 38 did  not  undermine  the  sponsor's  evidence.
    The paragraph should be read backwards.   The judge conflated the  date
    of issue with the acquisition of the right  and  misinterpreted  a  key
    piece of evidence and much of the law.  There was a fundamental mistake
    and the findings unsafe.

    Analysis and conclusion

 8. Judge Monson found that 'it is not true that the appellant 'has  joined
    the EEA national in the  United  Kingdom'  as  required  by  Regulation
    8(2)(c).  That analysis did not take into  account  Aladeselu  which  I
    have cited above, in other words the  requirement  that  the  appellant
    accompany or join the  Union  citizen/EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights must be read as encompassing both those who have arrived  before
    and those  who  have  arrived  after  the  Union  citizen/EEA  national
    sponsor'.   That  held  that   the   appellant   could   enter   first.
    Nonetheless, the EU national must be exercising treaty  rights  at  the
    relevant time.

 9. That, however, was not the end of the analysis.  The judge went  on  to
    state at [34] that the appellant had come to the United  Kingdom  as  a
    student and at [36]

         'the difficulty for the appellant is that  he  did  not  enter  the
         United Kingdom  as  the  dependant  of  his  sponsor.   Accordingly
         following Ihemedu the appellant cannot expect any relaxation in the
         burden of proof that applies to him when seeking  to  establish  an
         EEA right'.

    The critical passage is this at [37]

         'The appellant has wholly failed to bring forward  cogent  evidence
         that is in part documented to show that at the  time  of  entry  in
         September 2011 his sponsor had acquired  Spanish  nationality,  let
         alone that he was an extended  family  member  of  the  sponsor  by
         virtue of a background of continuing financial  dependency  on  the
         sponsor stretching back many years' [my underlining]

10. As submitted by Ms Jarvis, the sponsor did not give consistent evidence
    on the topic of when he acquired his  Spanish  nationality.  The  judge
    recorded at [38]

         'He initially stated that he became a  Spanish  national  in  2012,
         which accords with the information given in his  Spanish  passport.
         It also accords with his oral evidence that it took 3.5  years  for
         his citizenship  application  to  be  processed.   Three-and-a-half
         years from 2009 accords with the  date  of  issue  of  the  Spanish
         passport.  His subsequent claim that he received an acknowledgement
         letter in 2011 which confirmed that his citizenship application had
         been approved is clearly inconsistent with  his  initial  evidence.
         It is also undermined by the fact that his passport was  not  issue
         to him until 11 May 2012'.

11. The difficulty for the appellant is that the judge clearly  found  that
    there was inconsistent evidence as to  when  the  Sponsor  acquired  EU
    citizenship.  The judge  directed  himself  correctly  with  regard  to
    Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340(IAC) and Moneke (EEA
    - OFMs) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00341(IAC)  which  held  that  a  person
    claiming to be an 'other  family  member/extended  family  member'  may
    either be a dependant or a member of the household of the EEA national:
    and in either case the prior dependency or membership of the  household
    must be on a person who is an EEA national at the material time.  There
    must be prior dependency or  member  of  the  household  prior  to  the
    appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom although it is open to the EU
    national to join him later.

12. Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC)

         'Under the scheme set out in reg 8 (2) of the Immigration (European
         Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  a  person   can   succeed   in
         establishing that he or she is an "extended family member"  in  any
         one of four different  ways,  each  of  which  requires  proving  a
         relevant connection both prior to arrival in  the  UK  and  in  the
         United Kingdom'

    Rahman [2012] CJEU Case-83/11 held that

         'the situation of dependence must exist in the country  from  which
         the family member concerned comes, at the very least  at  the  time
         when he applies to join the Union citizen on whom he is dependent'.

13. The appellant in this instance came to the United Kingdom in  September
    2011 and could not have been  dependent  on  an  EEA  national  if  the
    sponsor at that time did not have Spanish citizenship.  The question of
    when his citizenship became 'effective' was  asked  and  the  sponsor's
    passport was issued in May 2012.  The appellant arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom as a student, without mention of the sponsor, on 16th September
    2011. The sponsor gave evidence that he supported the  appellant  until
    2011 and the letter referring to 'approval' of the Spanish  citizenship
    was not produced.  As to the citizenship, the only documentary evidence
    was the passport and that post-dated the relevant time for  dependency.
    That is the point  the  judge  is  making  when  identifying  that  the
    examination of the evidence will not be relaxed.   In effect it was not
    made out that  the  dependency,  if  any,  was  prior  to  the  Sponsor
    demonstrating that he had acquired Spanish citizenship  and  exercising
    treaty rights. It was also open to the judge to find  that  the  'prior
    dependency in Pakistan' was not made out.

14.  Permission  to  appeal  was  limited  to  grounds  as  pleaded  -  and
    concentrated on ground (i).  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  findings
    related  to  ground  (i)  have  influenced  the  findings  with  regard
    dependency and as I have discussed above.  Although the judge stated it
    was not strictly necessary to consider the point of dependency, he  did
    so and in manner open to him on the evidence.  The  judge  stated  that
    the letter confirming the approval  of  his  citizenship  in  2011  was
    inconsistent with his previous evidence.  That letter was  not  however
    produced, and Mr Turner confirmed that the letter was not available. It
    was not only this point on the inconsistency of the Sponsor's  evidence
    which attracted the judge's attention.  The sponsor's and Mr  Butt  the
    witness's evidence was at variance  over  where  the  sponsor  actually
    resided in Spain or the United Kingdom. He also was found to contradict
    himself as to the method of funding of the appellant between  2005  and
    2011 [41].

15. The judge was entitled to find that the appellant  had  not  discharged
    the burden of proof with regards dependency and the challenge does  not
    disclose a material error of law.

16. Mr Turner also attempted to argue that the judge should have  adjourned
    the proceedings to allow the sponsor to produce evidence of the date of
    his acquisition of citizenship.  That was not a ground of appeal before
    me and I did not permit Mr Turner to pursue that  ground  of  argument.
    The appellant was legally represented, the  respondent's  decision  had
    been given on 13th May 2016.  There had  been  ample  time  to  collate
    evidence.

17. For the reasons given above I find there is no  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal determination and that decision will stand.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 11th March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
