
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06513/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2018                            |On 23 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                       Carlos Elias Valdiviezo-Burgos
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr C U Ikegwuruka of Almond Legals
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal MacDonald who in a determination promulgated on
    31 October 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse him  a  permanent  residence  card  in
    accordance with Regulation 15  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.

2.   It was accepted that the appellant was in a durable  relationship  with
    Yolanda  Luis  Gutierrez,  a  Spanish  national  who  claimed  to  have
    exercised Treaty rights in Britain for a period of five years or  more.
    The couple have a child who was born in 2010 who is also Spanish.   The
    judge, who was not assisted by a Presenting Officer at the appeal heard
    evidence from the appellant and  submissions  made  by  Dr  Ikegwuruka.
    There was before him a lengthy bundle of documents.

3.   The judge considered as best he  could  the  documentary  evidence  and
    concluded that that did not show that the sponsor had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights for the relevant 5 year period.  He  therefore  dismissed
    the appeal.  With regard to the appellant's private and family life  he
    stated that that should be subject to a separate application.

4.   The grounds of appeal  asserted  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence
    before the judge to show the sponsor had been exercising Treaty  rights
    for the  relevant  period  and  furthermore  argued  that  the  judge's
    decision on the issue of the right of the appellant under Article 8  of
    the ECHR was flawed.

5.     The documentary evidence was difficult to follow.  I therefore  asked
    Dr Ikegwuruka at the beginning of the hearing to  take  the  bundle  of
    documents and prepare a list of  the  evidence  showing  the  sponsor's
    earnings for each year of the relevant five years, cross references  to
    the document in the appellant's bundle.   This he did.

6.   Ms Pal, having  seen  the  list  conceded  that  there  was  sufficient
    evidence to show that the sponsor had been exercising Treaty rights for
    the relevant five year period and therefore accepted that I should  set
    aside the decision and allow the appeal.

7.   I have considerable sympathy for the judge as I note that not only  was
    he not assisted by a Presenting Officer at the hearing  but  also  that
    the documentary evidence was extremely  difficult  to  follow.   Having
    said that, I agree with Ms  Pal  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence
    before the judge to show that the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights.
     I therefore find that there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge and I  set  aside  his  decision.
    For the same reason I now allow this appeal under the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

Decision.

This appeal is allowed.

8.   No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                      Date: 18 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
